Abstracts / Chemistry and Physics of Lipids 149S (2007) S1­S10

S9

which specific cells are responsible for changes in metabolites is lost when tissues are homogenized and extracted for analysis. However, recent developments in tissue imaging by MALDI mass spectrometry and related techniques are filling this gap, as will be illustrated by images of the localization of sulfatides and other complex sphingolipids in tissue slices. Supported by the NIH "glue" grant for the LIPID MAPS Consortium. doi:10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2007.06.019 PL 19

ical altered membrane structure in Acb1p depleted yeast may point to a function of ACBP in membrane trafficking. This notion is supported by results from Microinjection injection of BMG-cells with fluorescentlabeled L-ACBP, which shows that ACBP associate with ER and especially Golgi in a ligand dependent manner. doi:10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2007.06.020 PL 20

Regulation and structure of type II fatty acid synthase
Charles O. Rock Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, USA The bacterial type II fatty acid synthase consists of individual enzymes that each catalyze a separate reaction in the pathway. The common feature is their interaction with acyl carrier protein (ACP), an acyl group carrier that shuttles the acyl intermediates between the individual reaction centers. FabG (3-ketoacyl-ACP reductase) is an essential step in the elongation cycle and only a single isoform of the enzyme is universally expressed in the bacterial kingdom. This presentation will focus on the structure and mechanism of FabG and the details of FabG­ACP interactions. The crystal structures of FabG in both the free and NADP-bound states reveal that the kinetic cooperativity arises from a large conformational change. The FabG active site residues are located in a catalytically unfavorable orientation in the absence of cofactor binding, but upon binding of NADP(H), there is a conformational change that reorganizes the active site and creates a proton wire conductor that supplies the second proton in the reaction mechanism. Following the binding of ACP substrate the "lid" domain closes over the active site. This closed conformation is reflected in our crystal structure of RhlG, a FabG homolog. RhlG-NADP crystals were in the "closed" conformation held in place by a conserved methionine residue the stapes the protein domains together. Direct experimental evidence for this conformation change in FabG was obtained by NMR spectroscopy using spin-labeled FabG and 15N-labeled ACP to map the intradomain distance changes that occur upon ACP binding. NMR spectroscopy was also used to determine the changes in ACP conformation that occur upon binding to FabG and map the ACP­FabG interaction surface. These structures provide a comprehensive description of the significant conformational changes that occur in the protein following the binding of NADPH and acyl-ACP substrate.

Differential function of acyl-CoA binding protein isoforms in D. melanogaster and yeast S. cereviciae
Majken Wadum, Niels Færgeman, Jens Knudsen Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark ACBP is a highly conserved 86­92 residue protein with high binding affinity for C14­C24 acyl-CoA. In addition ACBP also occurs as sub domain in acyl-CoA metabolizing enzymes, transcription factors and signal proteins. It has been shown that L-ACBP is essential for Hela and HepG2 cell growth, however L-ACBP depleted mice breed normally although they show altered skin morphology and hair lipid profile. Depletion of Acb1p in yeast S. cereviciae results in strongly reduced VLCFA and sphingolipid content, deteriorated membrane organization and accumulation of large amounts of cytosolic vesicles. The vacuoles appear multi-lobed and were unable to fuse in vitro and contain reduced levels of the SNAREs Nyv1p, Vam3p, and Vti1p. Higher eukaryotes express at least three ACBP isoforms L-, B- and T-ACBP except primates which does not express TACBP. The Fruit Fly and closely related insect species have developed six ACBP isofoms. Recombinant Fruit Fly ACBP1-6 all bind acyl-CoA in vitro. ACBP1 is expressed at a constant level at all stages of developments, whereas the ACBP2 gene appears to be silenced. ACBP2-6 is highly expressed in the gut, only, during larval stage and in adults. Depletion of ACBP1 results in reduced flight capacity and reduced number of muscle fibres. Insertion of transposons in the promoter region of ACBP1 result in 4­500-fold upregulation of expression of ACBP2 and ACBP3 and results in a massive accumulation of TG without affecting the expression of ACBP1. Together, the reduced number and morphological altered muscle fibres in ACBP1 depleted flies, the altered skin morphology in L-ACBP depleted mice and the gross morpholog-

S10

Abstracts / Chemistry and Physics of Lipids 149S (2007) S1­S10

Supported by NIH and ALSAC. doi:10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2007.06.021 PL 21

Acyl-CoA thioesterases: new players in peroxisomal lipid metabolism
Stefan E.H. Alexson, Maria A.K. Westin, Mary C. Hunt Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden Peroxisomes are cellular organelles with main functions in lipid metabolism and synthesis. Peroxisomes were originally shown to catalyze partial degradation of straight chain fatty acids, but more recent work has demonstrated important functions in degradation of a wide variety of lipids such as very long chain and methyl branched fatty acids, dicarboxylic acids, bile acid intermediates and xenobiotic carboxylic acids. Peroxisomes are also involved in synthesis of etherphospholipids, docosahexanoic acid and possibly cholesterol. The importance of peroxisomes is underscored by the identification of a number of peroxisomal disorders that manifest in severe disturbances in lipid metabolism. It appears that prior to beta-oxidation in

peroxisomes most carboxylic acids are activated to the corresponding CoA ester outside the peroxisome and subsequently transported across the membrane. Following chain shortening the metabolites are transported out of the peroxisome. Our recent characterization of an acyl-CoA thioesterase gene family, enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of acyl-CoAs to their corresponding free acids and CoASH, identified four putative peroxisomal acyl-CoA thioesterases and three acyltransferases, which we hypothesized were involved in regulation of lipid metabolism in peroxisomes and transport of metabolites out of the organelle. Characterization of these genes showed that the acyl-CoA thioesterase enzymes have distinct substrate specificities and tissue expression, demonstrating that they have specific roles in peroxisomal lipid metabolism. Peroxisomes contain two further acyl-CoA thioesterases, of which one enzyme is proposed to regulate also intraperoxisomal levels of CoASH. Together with previously characterized carnitine acyltransferases, the acyl-CoA thioesterases/acyltransferases provide peroxisomes with a set of auxiliary enzymes that have the potential to regulate beta-oxidation and modify metabolites for transport out of the organelle. doi:10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2007.06.022

