670

Radiolabeled Monoclonal Antibodies INIEHACTION OF THB HDNAN NIGH IlOLl3ClJLAN NNIGHT-NNLANO&ASSOCIATEDANTIGNN WITH TNN INTACT IgG AND Pab FItAGMgNB OF MONOGLONAL ANIIDODINS. A. M. Gold, M. Temponi, M. Kusama, and Soldano Ferrone. Columbia University, New York, NY, and New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA. Because of its expression in a high percentage of melanoma lesions and its restricted distribution in normal tissues, the human high molecular weight melanoma-associated antigen (HMW-MAA) has been successfully applied as a marker to radioimage malignant lesions in patients with melanoma. The major limitations of these investigations are represented by the non specific accumulation of radioactivity in bone marrow, liver and spleen and by the sensitivity of the procedure which requires lesions with a diameter of at least 2 cm for successful detection. Since characterization of the interaction of HMW-MAA with monoclonal antibodies can help to optimize the conditions for radioimaging malignant lesions in patients with melanoma, we have compared the percent maximum binding and the affinity of the intact IgG, F(ab')2 and Fab' fragments of monoclonal antibodies (MoAb) 149.53, 225.28 and 763.74. These three antibodies bind to distinct determinants of HMN-MAA. The percent maximum binding of the whole Ig and of F(ab')2 fragments of MoAb 763.74 is markedly higher than that of its Fab' fragments and of those of the other two antibodies. The affinity of the F(ab')2 fragments of the three antibodies is not significantly different from that of the whole Ig. The affinity of the Fab' fragments of MoAb 149.53 and 225.28 is lower than that of F(ab')2 fragments. In-vitro binding of radioactivity by melanoma cells is increased upon incubation with anti-HMN-MAA monoclonal antibodies and monoclonal antiidiotypic antibodies to idiotopes which do not interfere with the antigen-antibodyreaction. Furthermore, we have investigated the effects of the incubation temperature and of saturating the antigen with a monoclonal antibody directed to a different determinant upon the affinities of anti-HMH-MAA monoclonal antibodies and their fragments. The implications of these in-vitro findings for the application of anti-HMW-MAA monoclonal antibodies for radioimaging malignant lesions in patients with melanoma will be discussed. STATJI-OF-TIN+ART INSTRIJNKNTATION FOR THE SCINTIGNAPNIC DETECIION OF TUNONS WITH LASNLND IK1NOCLONAL ANIINODIES. Peter Paras. Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, USA. The imaging techniques and instrumentationused with labeled monoclonal antibodies are generally not different from the state-of-the-art imaging in nuclear medicine. The Anger-type cameras and especially the rotating camera tomographic techniques are routinely used. For the management of cancer, of particular interest are the optimum localization and quantification of the labeled antibodies. ECT techniques have been developed for volume determination of lesions permitting more accurate dosimetry in the use of antitumor antibodies for therapy. A survey of modern nuclear medicine equipment will be presented. Acceptance testing, quality control and relative economics will be discussed. Although dramatic new developments in instrumentation are not expected in the next few years, the application of existing and of new and more specific antibodies with single photon agents and quantitative tomographic techniques will have a significant impact in the diagnosis and therapy of cancer.

IMGJZ SUKfBACTION TEGIiNIQveSIN IWlDNOSCINTIGBAPET. Jean-Claude Liehn. Institut Jean Godinot, Reims, France. A major limitation of immunoscintigraphyis the low contrast due to the presence of non-target activity. In order to increase this contrast, image subtraction techniques are widely used; however, no agreement exists on the methodology to be used. This paper reviews the proposed methods and describes a new algorithm which solves some of the problems raised by this approach. Image subtraction techniques consist of four steps: 1) acquisition of a Non-Target Image (NTI) with the same non-target activity distribution as the Monoclonal Antibody Image (MAI); 2) geometric registration (if necessary) of the images; 3) normalization of the images; and 4) synthesis of an image which shows where the MA1 activity is significantly higher than the NT1 activity. There are difficulties in combining these steps successfully.

