ABB
Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 433 (2005) 279≠287 www.elsevier.com/locate/yabbi

Minireview

Reaction specificity in pyridoxal phosphate enzymesq
Michael D. Toney*
Department of Chemistry, University of California--Davis, One Shields Ave, Davis, CA 95616, USA Received 3 August 2004, and in revised form 15 September 2004

Abstract Pyridoxal phosphate enzymes catalyze a wide variety of reaction types on amines and amino acids, generally by stabilizing carbanionic intermediates. This makes them very useful in cellular metabolism, but it also creates problems in controlling the reaction pathway that a given enzyme follows, i.e., in controlling reaction specificity. Stereoelectronic effects have been proposed to play a major role in determining the bond to Ca that gets broken in the external aldimine intermediate that is common to all PLP enzymes. Here, we discuss our work on dialkylglycine decarboxylase aimed at providing direct evidence for stereoelectronic control of external aldimine reactivity. Once a bond to Ca has been broken to form the carbanionic intermediate, enzymes must also carefully control the fate of this reactive species. Our studies with alanine racemase suggest that the enzyme selectively destabilizes the carbanionic quinonoid intermediate to promote higher racemization specificity by avoiding transamination side reactions. ” 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Reaction specificity; Pyridoxal phosphate; Dialkylglycine decarboxylase; Alanine racemase

Vitamin B6 was first identified as pyridoxine, a catalytically inactive form, in 1938 while the catalytically active aldehyde (pyridoxal) and amine (pyridoxamine) forms and their phosphorylated derivatives (pyridoxal 5 0 -phosphate and pyridoxamine 5 0 -phosphate) were discovered in the early 1940s [1]. Snell discovered that heating pyridoxal and amino acids yielded the amino form of the coenzyme and proposed based on these observations that pyridoxal, or a derivative thereof, was the mediator of transamination reactions [1]. The following three decades saw the demonstration of the involvement of pyridoxal 5 0 -phosphate (PLP)1 and pyridoxamine 5 0 phosphate (PMP) in a wide variety of both nonenzymatic and enzymatic reactions. The enzyme-catalyzed reactions corresponding to the nonenzymatic ones were
q This work was supported by Grant GM54779 from the National Institutes of Health. * Fax: +1 530 752 8995. E-mail address: mdtoney@ucdavis.edu. 1 Abbreviations used: PLP, pyridoxal 5 0 -phosphate; PMP, pyridoxamine 5 0 -phosphate; DGD, dialkylglycine decarboxylase.

shown to follow the same basic chemical mechanisms, with the enzymes enforcing substrate and reaction specificity as well as enhancing catalytic power. Fig. 1 illustrates the breadth of reaction specificity enabled by PLP, using serine as an example substrate. The first and common step for all PLP-dependent enzymecatalyzed reactions is a Schiff base exchange reaction (transimination). All known PLP enzymes exist in their resting state as a Schiff base (internal aldimine) with an active site lysine residue. The incoming, amine-containing substrate displaces the lysine e-amino group from the internal aldimine, in the process forming a new aldimine with the substrate (external aldimine). This is a multistep process that includes several facile steps and is frequently very rapid compared to the central steps in the reaction mechanism (e.g., deprotonation of Ca). The external aldimine is the common central intermediate for all PLP-catalyzed reactions, enzymatic and nonenzymatic. Divergence in reaction specificity occurs from this point. The great majority of pyridoxal phosphate-catalyzed reactions depend on the formation of

0003-9861/$ - see front matter ” 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.abb.2004.09.037

280

M.D. Toney / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 433 (2005) 279≠287

a carbanionic intermediate, while the 1,2-aminomutases largely explored by Frey’s group employ PLP in radicalbased reactions [2,3]. From the external aldimine intermediate, carbanions formed by heterolytic cleavage of any one of the bonds to Ca (except for the C≠N bond) can be stabilized. Loss of CO2 gives a carbanion that is commonly reprotonated on Ca to give the corresponding amine as the product. Less commonly, for example with dialkylglycine decarboxylase (discussed below), the resulting carbanion is reprotonated on C4 0 of the coenzyme to give oxidized substrate and the reduced, amino form (PMP) of the coenzyme. Proton abstraction is the most common forward step that external aldimines undergo since racemization, transamination, and b-elimination, three common reaction types, all require it. Retro-aldol cleavage of serine, central to one-carbon metabolism, is initiated by abstraction of a proton from the b-hydroxyl group followed by Ca≠Cb cleavage. Other known reaction types include b-decarboxylation of aspartate, b-elimination and replacement, c-elimination and replacement, a/c-elimination, cyclopropyl ring opening, radical-based 1,2-amino migrations, and others. This extraordinarily wide range of reaction types makes PLP enzymes extraordinarily useful to cells. The enzyme commission has more than 140 EC numbers assigned to PLP enzymes, and free living prokaryotes devote $1.5% of their open reading frames to them [4]. The commonly accepted mechanism for stabilization of the resulting carbanion is resonance delocalization within the extended conjugated p system. This is illustrated in Fig. 2 where the three most significant resonance forms are shown. The rightmost resonance structure is referred to as the ``quinonoid'' since its structure resembles that of a quinone. It has strong absorption at $500 nm (e500$40,000 M¿1 cm¿1) and is sometimes but not always spectroscopically observable in enzyme-catalyzed reactions. This quinonoid resonance structure is commonly considered the major species responsible for the catalytic power of PLP since the electrons from Ca are neutralized by the protonated pyridine nitrogen. This simple view of PLP-catalyzed reactions may not be wholly accurate, as discussed below.

Model studies The degree to which the Schiff base vs. the pyridine ring contributes to the stabilization of Ca carbanions has been debated recently. Computational studies performed by our group [5] and that of Bach [6] both predict that the pyridine ring does not play the largest role in carbanion stabilization as is commonly accepted in the literature [1,7,8]. Our studies used semi-empirical molecular orbital methods (PM3) to study both model aldimines and the intermediates formed in the active site

of dialkylglycine decarboxylase (DGD). The four model aldimines studied are shown in Fig. 3. We demonstrated that the stereoelectronic (i.e., resonance) stabilization of the decarboxylation transition state could be separated energetically into the Schiff base and pyridine ring contributions. For example, the stereoelectronic contribution of the Schiff base in B is 11 kcal/mol while the pyridine ring contributes only $2 kcal/mol. On the other hand, in D the Schiff base contributes 18 kcal/ mol stereoelectronically while the pyridine ring contributes only 10 kcal/mol. The much larger total stereoelectronic effect for D vs. B is readily explained by the protonated Schiff base in B, which provides a large amount of ylide-type electrostatic stabilization of the developing negative charge on Ca, which is not dependent on p≠p orbital interaction angles as are stereoelectronic effects. These remarkable results, and those of Bach, challenge the prevailing view among biochemists that the delocalization of an electron pair onto the protonated pyridine nitrogen is the major source of the catalytic power of PLP. Rather, they suggest that the Schiff base makes the greatest contribution to transition state stabilization, even when the pyridine ring is protonated. The major role of the Schiff base receives circumstantial support from the very existence of a class of amino acid decarboxylases that employs a simple pyruvoyl group in the active site [9], which condenses with the substrate to form a Schiff base intermediate. Additionally, the lysinedependent aldolases [10] provide further demonstration of the ability of enzyme-bound Schiff bases to stabilize carbanions readily. Our semi-empirical calculations [5] suggest that protonation of the pyridine ring has a small effect (2≠ 3 kcal/mol) on the activation energy either in the gas phase or the SM3 water model. This is remarkably consistent with experimental results from Bruice’s [11] and our [12] laboratory, which show that protonation of the pyridine nitrogen increases reactivity by $75-fold and quaternization of the pyridine nitrogen with a methyl group increases reactivity by $20-fold. Dixon and Bruice [13] estimated the pKa values of Ca for three protonation states of the 3-hydroxypyridine-4-aldehyde Schiff base with alanine. Their estimate is that pyridine nitrogen protonation decreases the pKa of the Ca≠H bond from 14 to 12, a similar factor of $100-fold. Considering the pKa value of $29 estimated for glycine [14], pyridine ring protonation would appear to make a small contribution even to the thermodynamic stability of a carbanion formed on Ca. This small rate enhancement is a far cry from the total effect of $1010-fold for PLP in amino acid decarboxylation [12]. We discuss below our idea that pyridine nitrogen protonation is a means of fine-tuning the reaction energetics, possibly for the purpose of selectively stabilizing the carbanionic intermediate in reaction

M.D. Toney / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 433 (2005) 279≠287

281

Fig. 1. Breadth of reactions enabled by PLP. The first step of all PLP dependent reactions is the formation of an aldimine intermediate with the amine-containing substrate. Thereafter, the reactions diverge, as shown.

mechanisms that require its lifetime to be significant (although not necessarily long-lived enough to be spectroscopically detectable), such as in nonoxidative decarboxylation reactions catalyzed by typical decarboxylases. The location of the proton shared between the phenolic hydroxyl group and the Schiff base apparently has a

large effect on the stability of the transition state, and one predicts from the calculations [5,6] that enzymes can enhance reactivity by promoting the prototropic tautomer in which the proton is formally bonded to the Schiff base nitrogen (``ketoenamine'' tautomer). This is consistent with experimental observations where external aldimine intermediates uniformly display an absorption band at $410 nm, which is indicative of a nitrogen-protonated aldimine [15]. It has not been shown definitively that this is the catalytically active species, but a report that $330 nm UV radiation enhances the reactivity of a decarboxylase [16] suggests that it is, since this wavelength would promote the conversion of the oxygen-protonated (``enolimine'' tautomer) to the nitrogen-protonated tautomer [17]. The structure of the catalytically active prototropic isomer has direct bearing on the control of reaction specificity. Clearly, protonation of the Schiff base nitrogen enhances reactivity but it does so largely by an electrostatic ylide-type stabilization of negative charge that does not depend on the alignment of p orbitals as does resonance stabilization. Dunathan [18] was the first to point out that PLP enzymes have available to them a simple means to control which bond to Ca is preferentially broken in the first, carbanion-generating step after formation of the external aldimine intermediate. He

Fig. 2. Principal resonance forms obtained from deprotonation of an aldimine intermediate. The quinonoid resonance form is labeled.

Fig. 3. Prototropic isomers considered in our semi-empirical studies on PLP-catalyzed decarboxylation.

282

M.D. Toney / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 433 (2005) 279≠287

suggested that stereoelectronic effects play a major role because enzymes can very specifically orient one bond such that the nascent p orbital is aligned with those of the conjugated Schiff base/pyridine ring p system. The bond so oriented would be selectively labilized (Fig. 4). Our work to provide evidence for stereoelectronic effects with dialkylglycine decarboxylase will be discussed below. In regard to the model studies, the important point to make is that if the Schiff base nitrogen-protonated species is catalytically active then the maximum discrimination between bonds that can be achieved simply by stereoelectronic enforcement (i.e., specific binding interactions) is only $108-fold since electrostatic effects are dominant in stabilization of the developing negative charge. This is indeed a large factor and probably suffices for cellular needs, but it is much smaller than the $1018-fold estimated for the oxygen-protonated species.

Dialkylglycine decarboxylase This unusual and interesting PLP enzyme catalyzes the two half-reactions shown in Fig. 5A. The first is a decarboxylation reaction where 2,2-dialkylglycines lose CO2 to give a carbanion that is subsequently protonated on C4 0 of the coenzyme instead of the proton replacing the CO2 on Ca of the amino acid substrate, as typical decarboxylases do. This leads to the ketone product and the PMP form of the coenzyme, as occurs in aminotransferase mechanisms. The second half-reaction is a classical transamination reaction in which the PMP enzyme and pyruvate react to give L -alanine and to regenerate the PLP enzyme. DGD therefore catalyzes Ca≠CO¿ bond scission in the first half-reaction while 2 the second half-reaction entails C≠H bond breaking and making. DGD presents two important and interesting questions regarding reaction specificity: (1) how does it enforce decarboxylation in one half-reaction and only transamination in the next?, and (2) how does it strictly enforce protonation of the coenzyme C4 0 in the decarboxylation half-reaction? We envisioned a major role for stereoelectronic effects in the control of reaction specificity in DGD. The X-ray structure of DGD was solved by multiple isomorphous replacement techniques and revealed the active site shown in Fig. 5B [19,20]. Model building of isovaline and alanine external aldimine intermediates into the active site allowed us to propose the functional model described by the blue annotations in Fig. 5B. In this model, all bond breaking/making occurs from the stereoelectronically activated position labeled ``A.'' The crux of this model is that two carboxylate binding sites exist, the A site where bond breaking can occur, and the B site where the carboxylate would bind in the transamination half-reaction. The C site is sterically restricted and would only accommodate small alkyl groups.

Sun et al. [21] validated the functional model presented in Fig. 5B using alternative substrates. It appears that the high specificity of DGD for transamination vs. decarboxylation of L -alanine is due to the greater stability of the substrate carboxylate group in the B vs. the A site, combined with the rapid deprotonation of the external aldimine intermediate [22]. The functional model also implies that 2,2-dialkylglycines such as aminoisobutyrate are subject to nonproductive (with respect to decarboxylation) binding with the carboxylate in the B site, which has the effect of lowering the measured value of kcat. Nonproductive binding was indeed observed crystallographically in complexes of DGD with inhibitors [23]. Apparently, the 2,2-dialkylglycine substrates spend most of their time with the substrate carboxylate in the unproductive B site and only infrequently place it in the stereoelectronically activated A site where decarboxylation occurs. This bias towards carboxylate binding in the B site serves the important purpose of restricting the reactivity of L -alanine to transamination, while it has no effect on the outcome of the 2,2-dialkylglycine half-reaction (since decarboxylation is the only option available to them) except to slow it down. In this regard, it is interesting that the observed rate constant for CO2 loss is $25 s¿1 from the aminoisobutyrate external aldimine while deprotonation of the L -alanine external aldimine is much faster [22]. As part of their studies on stereoelectronic effects in DGD, Sun et al. [21] performed an experiment that provides a simple, qualitative demonstration of the influence of stereoelectronic effects in DGD catalyzed decarboxylation. They provided evidence suggesting that the B site is sterically much more tolerant than the C site. This is illustrated schematically in Fig. 6A. They hypothesized that the use of amino acid substrates with longer side chains would sterically promote the external aldimine conformation in which the larger alkyl group binds in the B site, thereby promoting the substrate carboxylate into the A site. In other words, the longer side chains would alter the equilibrium between the nonproductive binding mode (in which the carboxylate is in the B site) and the productive binding mode (in which the carboxylate is in the stereoelectronically activated A site) to more favor the latter, thereby increasing kcat for decarboxylation. This remarkable prediction was borne out by experiment, the results of which are shown in Fig. 6B. One sees that kcat for decarboxylation increases $2-fold as one goes from one to three side chain carbons, after which it decreases with additional carbons. Our interpretation of these results is that two competing factors are at play. The first, favorable one is the increase in productive binding, while the second, unfavorable one is the detrimental steric interactions made by the larger side chains with the active site, which were also observed with other substrates [21].

M.D. Toney / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 433 (2005) 279≠287

283

Fig. 4. Illustration of Dunathan’s hypothesis of stereoelectronic control of reaction specificity in PLP-catalyzed reactions.

Fig. 6. (A) Concept behind measuring kcat for decarboxylation of amino acid substrates of increasing side chain size. (B) Values of kcat for decarboxylation a a function of increasing side chain size.

Fig. 5. (A) Two half-reactions catalyzed by dialkylglycine decarboxylase. (B) Active site structure of dialkylglycine decarboxylase with a generic external aldimine intermediate modeled into it. The blue notations describe a functional model of the active site.

The second reaction specificity issue with DGD is how the enzyme achieves high specificity for protonation on C4 0 vs. Ca in the decarboxylation half-reaction. We measured an error frequency of less than 1 in 105 turnovers for protonation of Ca vs. C4 0 [21]. Protonation on Ca would require the formation of the carbanionic intermediate as a relatively stable species so that CO2 could be lost from the reaction center and a proton donated by a general acid catalyst. We realized that the very high specificity for protonation on C4 0 could be most elegantly achieved by DGD catalyzing a concerted decarboxylation/proton transfer step in which loss of CO2 from Ca and protonation occurs in the same transition state. We imagined Lys272 being the general base catalyst, in analogy with the proven role of the structurally homologous Lys258 in aspartate aminotransferase [24]. This hypothesis was tested by measuring kinetic isotope effects. The large 13C effect on decarboxylation (1.042 ± 0.009), combined with pre-steady-state data

Fig. 7. Hypothetical model of the concerted decarboxylation/proton transfer transition state catalyzed by dialkylglycine decarboxylase.

demonstrated that the decarboxylation step is fully rate limiting for that half-reaction [22]. We then measured the secondary 2H kinetic isotope effect engendered by deuterating the coenzyme C4 0 . The large inverse secondary isotope effect (0.92 ± 0.02) shows that C4 0 is undergoing rehybridization from sp2 to sp3 in the decarboxylation transition state, and this would only occur if a proton were being donated to C4 0 . This led to the conclusion that DGD indeed enforces specificity

284

M.D. Toney / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 433 (2005) 279≠287

for C4 0 protonation by catalyzing simultaneous Ca≠CO¿ bond breaking and C4 0 ≠H bond making, elim2 inating the possibility of replacing the carboxylate group with a proton on Ca. A model of the concerted transition state is presented in Fig. 7.

Alanine racemase The racemization of alanine is important to bacterial survival since D -alanine is a component of the peptidoglycan layer of the cell wall structure. The X-ray structure [25≠27] shows several interesting active site features. Among these are the disposition of Lys39 (which forms the Schiff base with PLP in the resting enzyme) and Tyr265 on opposite faces of the substrate Ca. This is readily seen in the structure of the complex of alanine phosphonate with alanine racemase [27], which is shown in Fig. 8. It was clear that these two residues are likely to be the two acid/base catalysts in a two-base mechanism for racemization. A second notable feature of the active site structure is the presence of Arg219 that interacts with the pyridine nitrogen. This contrasts with the carboxylic acid group commonly found to interact this atom in aminotransferases. The arginine guanidino group, with a solution pKa of $12.6, is unlikely to protonate the pyridine nitrogen, with a solution pKa of $5 [1,11,13]. On the other hand, one expects that a carboxylic acid group, with a solution pKa of $5 would be likely to protonate the nitrogen, making the pyridine ring substantially more electrophilic. A structurally based mechanism for the alanine racemization is presented in Fig. 9. D -Alanine combines with the enzyme to form the D external aldimine, which is

Fig. 8. Active site structure of the complex between alanine racemase and the inhibitor alanine phosphonate.

Fig. 9. Structurally based mechanism for racemization of alanine catalyzed by alanine racemase.

M.D. Toney / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 433 (2005) 279≠287

285

deprotonated by Lys39 to give a resonance stabilized carbanion that is expected to be relatively unstable due to the lack of pyridine nitrogen protonation. This carbanion is reprotonated on the opposite face to give the L external aldimine, which then loses the product by transimination. Site-directed mutagenesis studies confirmed the general acid/base roles of Lys39 and Tyr265 in the mechanism [28≠31]. The presence of two acid/base catalysts instead of only one has potential advantages for controlling reaction specificity since the second catalytic residue could be pre-positioned to donate rapidly a proton to the antipodal face of the carbanionic intermediate once it is formed. This would reduce competition by alternate reaction pathways, which might be more favored by the structural rearrangements required of a single acid/ base catalyst to interact serially with both faces of Ca. We originally considered the possibility that the quinonoid intermediate is avoided by employing a concerted double proton transfer transition state that leads directly from one aldimine to its antipode since two acid/base catalysts are present in the active site. This would account for the very high specificity of alanine racemase for racemization vs. transamination, which

Fig. 10. Spectral observation of the quinonoid intermediate in the reaction of the R219A mutant of alanine racemase reconstituted with N-methylPLP. The labels ``A'' and ``B'' refer to the two species in the fit of the data to a single exponential equation. Species A is of the enzyme mixture obtained within the dead-time of the stopped-flow instrument and species B is the steady-state mixture of enzyme species.

was measured to be $106-fold [32]. It would also account for the lack of spectroscopic detection of a quinonoid intermediate in steady-state and stopped-flow absorbance spectra with the wild type enzyme [33]. Mechanistically, this proposal suffers from the known preference of electrophilic substitution reactions for front side attack. Using multiple kinetic isotope effects, we demonstrated that a stepwise mechanism is indeed employed [34]. These results and the structure suggested that the carbanionic intermediate is of a relatively high energy, which was confirmed by our subsequent studies discussed below. Interestingly, the quinonoid intermediate is observed in the reactions of the R219E mutant enzyme, where a carboxylic acid group is positioned to protonate the pyridine nitrogen [33]. In previously unpublished work, we also showed that the quinonoid is rapidly formed (in the dead-time of the stopped-flow instrument) when NmethylPLP is employed as coenzyme with the R219A mutant. These results are presented in Fig. 10. The spectra shown were obtained from global analysis of a diode-array data set. Clear quinonoid absorbance is seen at $520 nm, and persists into the steady-state. These two examples with mutant enzymes highlight alanine racemase’s intrinsic ability to form a stable quinonoid intermediate and suggest that the instability of this intermediate in the wild type enzyme serves some mechanistic role. As discussed below, we believe this role is in the maintenance of high specificity towards racemization. The multiple kinetic isotope effect study demonstrated the existence of the carbanionic intermediate on the reaction pathway. Stopped-flow experiments additionally showed that external aldimine formation from free enzyme and free substrate was not significantly rate determining [33]. This allowed us to write the reasonable minimal mechanism shown in Fig. 11. We decided to attempt to define the eight rate constants for this mechanism using simple kinetics experiments. The racemization of alanine has a equilibrium constant of unity and the enzyme employs a single substrate and a single product. We therefore reasoned that a series of racemization progress curves might contain enough information to define the eight rate constants, and allow us to construct a free energy profile for the reaction. To this end, we measured a series of progress curves for

Fig. 11. Minimal mechanism for alanine racemase used for free energy profile definition.

286

M.D. Toney / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 433 (2005) 279≠287

both the L fi D and the D fi L directions with initial substrate concentrations varied from 0.1 to 10 ∑ KM. These data sets were measured at both pH 6.9 and 8.9. These sets of progress curves were then globally analyzed with DynaFit [35] using a carefully designed statistical procedure. Remarkably, this allowed the definition of the eight rate constants and the free energy profiles presented in Fig. 12 were calculated from them [36]. Our results show that the quinonoid intermediate is at least 4 kcal/mol higher in energy than the aldimine intermediates at both pH values examined. This makes good sense knowing that the pyridine nitrogen is not in its protonated form due to the presence of Arg219, and was expected based on the inability to observe this species readily by absorption spectroscopy with the wild type enzyme [33]. Why does alanine racemase not stabilize the quinonoid intermediate more since this would provide some kinetic advantage by lowering the energies of the transition states for proton transfer to and from Ca? We proposed that the high energy of the quinonoid

plays a role in controlling reaction specificity, particularly in reducing the frequency of transamination side reactions. The reasoning behind this proposal follows. Once either Lys39 or Tyr265 has deprotonated Ca of the external aldimine intermediate this species is open to a variety of potential reactions. The most likely of these is the movement of either Lys39 or Tyr265 into close proximity with the coenzyme C4 0 such that a proton is donated to it. This would lead to transamination, giving inactive enzyme by formation of PMP in the active site. The rate limiting step of the transamination pathway is likely to be the physical movement of either Lys39 or Tyr265 close enough to C4 0 to donate a proton. Therefore, this side reaction can be minimized by increasing the rate constant for reprotonation of the quinonoid intermediate, and raising its energy does exactly that. The high energy quinonoid intermediate therefore undergoes reprotonation at Ca (1,1-proton transfer) by either of Lys39 or Tyr265 much more rapidly than either of these residues can come into close contact with C4 0 to yield transamination via 1,3-proton transfer. In summary, PLP enzymes have two principal opportunities to control reaction specificity. The first is in determining which bond to Ca is broken at the external aldimine intermediate stage. The second is in determining the fate of the carbanionic quinonoid intermediate once it is formed. The former is subject to large stereoelectronic effects, which undoubtedly play a major role in the primary control of reaction specificity. The latter entails a much more complex process and is highly dependent on the reaction type under consideration. Specific placement of key catalytic residues and precise positioning of the substrate in the active site are the umbrella mechanisms by which the processing of the quinonoid intermediate is controlled. In alanine racemase, one finds the specific example of selectively destabilizing the quinonoid intermediate in order to promote racemization over transamination. References
[1] P. Christen, D.E. Metzler, Transaminases, Wiley, New York, 1985. [2] P.A. Frey, M.D. Ballinger, G.H. Reed, S-Adenosylmethionine: a ‘poor man’s coenzyme B12’ in the reaction of lysine 2,3aminomutase, Biochem. Soc. Trans. 26 (1998) 304≠310. [3] P.A. Frey, C.H. Chang, M.D. Ballinger, G.H. Reed, Kinetic characterization of transient free radical intermediates in reaction of lysine 2,3-aminomutase by EPR lineshape analysis, Methods Enzymol. 354 (2002) 426≠435. [4] R. Percudani, A. Peracchi, A genomic overview of pyridoxalphosphate-dependent enzymes, EMBO Rep. 4 (2003) 850≠854. [5] M.D. Toney, Computational studies on nonenzymatic and enzymatic pyridoxal phosphate catalyzed decarboxylations of 2aminoisobutyrate, Biochemistry 40 (2001) 1378≠1384. [6] R.D. Bach, C. Canepa, M.N. Glukhovtsev, Influence of electrostatic effects on activation barriers in enzymatic reactions:

Fig. 12. Free energy profiles for alanine racemase at pH 8.9 and 6.9 determined by global analysis of racemization progress curves.

M.D. Toney / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 433 (2005) 279≠287 Pyridoxal 5 0 -phosphate-dependent decarboxylation of alphaamino acids, J. Am. Chem. Soc. V121 (1999) 6542≠6555. R.A. John, Pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzymes, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1248 (1995) 81≠96. A.C. Eliot, J.F. Kirsch, Pyridoxal phosphate enzymes: mechanistic, structural, and evolutionary considerations, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 73 (2004) 383≠415. P.D. van Poelje, E.E. Snell, Pyruvoyl-dependent enzymes, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 59 (1990) 29≠59. C.Y. Lai, B.L. Horecker, Aldolase: a model for enzyme structure≠ function relationships, Essays Biochem. 8 (1972) 149≠178. D.S. Auld, T.C. Bruice, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 89 (1967) 2098≠2106. R.F. Zabinski, M.D. Toney, Metal ion inhibition of nonenzymatic pyridoxal phosphate catalyzed decarboxylation and transamination, J. Am. Chem. Soc. V123 (2001) 193≠198. J.E. Dixon, T.C. Bruice, Comparison of the rate constants for general base catalyzed prototropy and racemization of the aldimine species formed from 3-hydroxypyridine-4-carboxaldehyde and alanine, Biochemistry 12 (1973) 4762≠4766. A. Rios, T.L. Amyes, J.P. Richard, Formation and stability of organic zwitterions in aqueous solution: enolates of the amino acid glycine and its derivatives, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122 (2000) 9373≠9385. C.M. Metzler, D.E. Metzler, Quantitative description of absorption spectra of a pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzyme using lognormal distribution curves, Anal. Biochem. 166 (1987) 313≠327. G.Y. Fraikin, M.G. Strakhovskaya, E.V. Ivanova, A.B. Rubin, Near-UV activation of enzymatic conversion of 5-hydroxytryptophan to serotonin, Photochem. Photobiol. 49 (1989) 475≠477. X. Zhou, M.D. Toney, pH studies on the mechanism of the pyridoxal phosphate-dependent dialkylglycine decarboxylase, Biochemistry 38 (1999) 311≠320. H.C. Dunathan, Conformation and reaction specificity in pyridoxal phosphate enzymes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 55 (1966) 712≠716. M.D. Toney, E. Hohenester, S.W. Cowan, J.N. Jansonius, Dialkylglycine decarboxylase structure: bifunctional active site and alkali metal sites, Science 261 (1993) 756≠759. M.D. Toney, E. Hohenester, J.W. Keller, J.N. Jansonius, Structural and mechanistic analysis of two refined crystal structures of the pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzyme dialkylglycine decarboxylase, J. Mol. Biol. 245 (1995) 151≠179. S. Sun, R.F. Zabinski, M.D. Toney, Reactions of alternate substrates demonstrate stereoelectronic control of reactivity in dialkylglycine decarboxylase, Biochemistry 37 (1998) 3865≠3875. X. Zhou, X. Jin, R. Medhekar, X. Chen, T. Dieckmann, M.D. Toney, Rapid kinetic and isotopic studies on dialkylglycine decarboxylase, Biochemistry 40 (2001) 1367≠1377.

287

[7] [8]

[9] [10] [11] [12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23] V.N. Malashkevich, P. Strop, J.W. Keller, J.N. Jansonius, M.D. Toney, Crystal structures of dialkylglycine decarboxylase inhibitor complexes, J. Mol. Biol. 294 (1999) 193≠200. [24] M.D. Toney, J.F. Kirsch, Lysine 258 in aspartate aminotransferase: enforcer of the Circe effect for amino acid substrates and general-base catalyst for the 1,3-prototropic shift, Biochemistry 32 (1993) 1471≠1479. [25] A.A. Morollo, G.A. Petsko, D. Ringe, Structure of a Michaelis complex analogue: propionate binds in the substrate carboxylate site of alanine racemase, Biochemistry V38 (1999) 3293≠ 3301. [26] J.P. Shaw, G.A. Petsko, D. Ringe, Determination of the structure of alanine racemase from Bacillus stearothermophilus at 1.9angstrom resolution, Biochemistry V36 (1997) 1329≠1342. [27] C.G.F. Stamper, A.A. Morollo, D. Ringe, Reaction of alanine racemase with 1-aminoethylphosphonic acid forms a stable external aldimine, Biochemistry V37 (1998) 10438≠10445. [28] S.X. Sun, M.D. Toney, Evidence for a two-base mechanism involving tyrosine-265 from arginine-219 mutants of alanine racemase, Biochemistry V38 (1999) 4058≠4065. [29] A. Watababe, Y. Kurokawa, T. Yoshimura, T. Kurihara, K. Soda, N. Esaki, Role of lysine 39 of alanine racemase from Bacillus stearothermophilus that binds pyridoxal 5 0 -phosphate Chemical rescue studies of Lys(39) fi Ala mutant, J. Biol. Chem. V274 (1999) 4189≠4194. [30] A. Watanabe, Y. Kurokawa, T. Yoshimura, N. Esaki, Role of tyrosine 265 of alanine racemase from Bacillus stearothermophilus, J. Biochem. V125 (1999) 987≠990. [31] A. Watanabe, T. Yoshimura, B. Mikami, N. Esaki, Tyrosine 265 of alanine racemase serves as a base abstracting alpha-hydrogen from L -alanine: The counterpart residue to lysine 39 specific to D -alanine, J. Biochem. V126 (1999) 781≠786. [32] Y. Kurokawa, A. Watanabe, T. Yoshimura, N. Esaki, K. Soda, Transamination as a side-reaction catalyzed by alanine racemase of Bacillus stearothermophilus, J. Biochem. V124 (1998) 1163≠ 1169. [33] S. Sun, M.D. Toney, Evidence for a two-base mechanism involving tyrosine-265 from arginine-219 mutants of alanine racemase, Biochemistry 38 (1999) 4058≠4065. [34] M.A. Spies, M.D. Toney, Multiple hydrogen kinetic isotope effects for enzymes catalyzing exchange with solvent: application to alanine racemase, Biochemistry 42 (2003) 5099≠5107. [35] P. Kuzmic, Program DYNAFIT for the analysis of enzyme kinetic data: application to HIV proteinase, Anal. Biochem. 237 (1996) 260≠273. [36] M.A. Spies, J.J. Woodward, M.R. Watnik, M.D. Toney, Alanine racemase free energy profiles from global analyses of progress curves, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 126 (2004) 7464≠7475.

