Nitric Oxide 14 (2006) A75­A78 www.elsevier.com/locate/yniox

Posters

NO Synthesis Enzymology
P177. Direct measurement by laser flash photolysis of intramolecular electron transfer in two-domain constructs of nitric oxide synthase: The output state for nitric oxide formation Changjian Feng a, Gordon Tollin b, John C. Salerno c, Dipak K. Ghosh d a University of New Mexico b University of Arizona c Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute d Duke University and VA Medical Centers Intraprotein electron transfer (IET) from FMN to heme is essential in the delivery of electrons required for O2 activation in the heme domain and the subsequent nitric oxide (NO) synthesis by NO synthase (NOS). Regulation of NO synthesis is primarily regulated through control of electron transfer from NADPH to the catalytic site. The kinetics of IET between the FMN and heme domains in novel two-domain oxyFMN constructs of murine inducible NOS and rat neuronal NOS, in which only the FMN and heme domains are present, were directly determined using laser flash photolysis of CO dissociation in comparative studies on partially reduced oxyFMN and single domain heme oxygenase constructs. Previous structural and functional studies concentrated on calmodulin regulation in the reductase unit; available structures describe the input state for electrons from NADPH, in which FAD and FMN are closely associated. This work provides the first direct evidence of CaM control of electron transfer between FMN and heme domains through facilitation of FMN/heme alignment in the output state. This is essential in coupling electron transfer in the reductase domain in NOS with NO synthesis in the oxygenase domain. doi:10.1016/j.niox.2006.04.247 on parameters such as the distal environment, the properties of the proximal ligand, and the structure of the heme. These results were correlated with the kinetic analysis of FeIINO oxidation and led us to suggest parameters that could promote in situ PN production. We then analyzed the interaction between peroxynitrite and NOS. We showed that NOS oxygenase domain was able to activate PN decomposition. Fast kinetic analysis allowed us to propose a mechanism for PN activation. The mechanism involved, as well as the induced reactivity, is sensitive to exogenous conditions (e.g., pH and heme environment) but also depends on the NOS isoform. In particular, when PN is activated by the inducible NOS, its nitrative and oxidative capacities are enhanced, whereas they are quenched upon activation by the bacterial NOS from Bacillus subtilis. These results could help to better understand the specific role of each NOS isoform in the cellular processes of detoxification, signalisation or direct production of oxidative stress. doi:10.1016/j.niox.2006.04.248

P179. The role of the active site water molecule in proton shuttling revealed by structures of nNOS with L-arginine and NO bound Huiying Li a, Jotaro Igarashi b, Joumana Jamal b, Weiping Yang b, Thomas L. Poulos b a Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, UC Irvine b UC Irvine Diatomic ligand binding to the heme active site of nitric oxide synthases is of vital importance to catalysis. The binding of dioxygen, followed by cleavage of the O­O bond generates the active species that hydroxylates L-Arg to give N-hydroxy-L-Arg. A second oxidation step releases the product, NO, which diffuses out of the active site to serves its many signaling functions but can also bind to the heme iron and thus serves as an inhibitor. Structural studies of NOS­diatomic complexes have been scarce owing to the labile nature of these gaseous ligands. The dioxygen complex of NOS is especially short-lived posing challenges to both the crystal preparation and crystallographic data collection. While none of the nNOS­O2 complex crystals showed density of a bound O2, we did obtain structures of nNOS with either CO or NO bound. These structures with fully occupied substrate, L-Arg, have provided a detailed picture of H-bonding networks in the active site that involves not only the bound diatomic ligand, substrate, but also an ordered water molecule. Analysis of H-bonding geometries has lead to the conclusion that this water molecule rather than the substrate itself directly donates the proton(s) needed for the O­O bond cleavage. Therefore, a proposed coupled electron/proton transfer route would go from the cofactor H4B, through substrate and water molecule, to the bound O2. doi:10.1016/j.niox.2006.04.249

P178. NO-synthases and oxidative stress: A novel nitration activity Amandine Marechal a, Tony A. Mattioli b, Dennis J. Stuehr c, ´ ^ Jerome Santolini b a DSV_DBJC_SBE, CEA SACLAY b CEA SACLAY c Cleveland Clinic Foundation It has been recently suggested that NOSs, after NO biosynthesis, can partition in two distinct catalytic cycles via two different complexes: (i) FeIIINO complex whose dissociation leads to NO (ii) FeIINO complex, whose oxidation produces other reactive nitrogen species. We previously suggested that FeIINO oxidation could lead to the transient formation of peroxynitrite (PN).1 We first studied the structure­reactivity relationship of FeIINO complex by combining EPR and resonance Raman spectroscopies. We focus J. Santolini, A.L. Meade, D.J. Stuehr, J. Biol. Chem. 276 (52) (2001) 48887­48898.
1

doi:10.1016/j.niox.2006.04.246

