J. Mol. Biol. (1998) 277, 449±466

An Example of a Protein Ligand Found by Database Mining: Description of the Docking Method and its Ê Verification by a 2.3 A X-ray Structure of a Thrombin ±Ligand Complex
P. Burkhard, P. Taylor and M. D. Walkinshaw*
Structural Biochemistry The University of Edinburgh Michael Swann Building King's Buildings, Edinburgh EH9 3JR, UK A computer program (SANDOCK) has been developed for the automated docking of small ligands to a target protein. It uses a guided matching algorithm to ®t ligand atoms into the protein binding pocket. The protein is described by a modi®ed Lee-Richard's dotted surface with each dot coded by chemical property and accessibility. Orientations of the ligand in the active site are generated such that a chemical and a shape complementary between the ligand and the active site cavity have to be ful®lled. The generated ®ts are evaluated with scoring functions which account for van der Waals, hydrophobic and hydrogen bonding interactions. This newly developed docking program can ef®ciently screen very large databases in a reasonable time and has been used to successfully identify novel ligands. The X-ray structure of a thrombinligand complex predicted by SANDOCK is described. The ligand binds Ê to thrombin with a Kd of 65 mM and has an rmsd of 0.7 A for all ligand atoms from the predicted binding mode by SANDOCK.
# 1998 Academic Press Limited

*Corresponding author

Keywords: drug-design; automated docking; ligand binding; thrombin

Introduction
The process of lead ®nding using docking procedures can be summarised in three steps (Figure 1). First the protein binding pocket is de®ned and characterised. This template is then used to select potential ligands using a computational docking procedure which involves matching and ®tting ligand atoms onto the protein surface. In the ®nal stage the proposed docking hits must be evaluated experimentally, preferably by a high resolution X-ray structure of the predicted complex. A number of good reviews in the ®eld of protein-ligand binding and drug design have been written (Bohm, 1995; Ajay & Murcko, 1995; Bohm & Klebe, 1996; Gschwend et al., 1996). The program GRID (Goodford, 1985) was the ®rst computational tool for determining potential ligand binding sites by characterising protein surfaces using calculated interaction energies of differPresent address: P. Burkhard, Biocentre, Basel University, Kingelbergstrasse, Basel, Switzerland. Abbreviations used: FKBP, FK506 binding protein; NBEN, f-aminobenzamidine; PDB, Protein Data Bank; 3D, three-dimensional.
0022±2836/98/120449±18 $25.00/0/mb971608

ent spherical probe atoms. Speci®c hydrogenbonding interactions were subsequently included in this (Wade & Goodford, 1993; Boobbyer et al., 1989) and related approaches (Walkinshaw & Floersheim, 1990). The general method of using empirical interaction energies in a grid provides a starting point for fragment ®tting procedures, which are incorporated into programs like LUDI (Bohm, 1994, 1995, 1996). The pioneering database searching program DOCK (Desjarlais et al., 1988; Knetgel et al., 1997) originally generated clusters of spheres lying in the active site cavity as the site points for ®tting atoms of potential ligand molecules. A similar purely geometrical approach based on an algorithm which makes use of Delaunay spheres was presented by Sanner et al. (1996). The problem of ®nding or designing new ligands to match the protein surface has been tackled in various ways. De novo design of potential ligands which are built up from smaller chemical building blocks has been implemented into programs like GROW (Moon & Howe, 1991), LUDI (Bohm, 1992), MCSS (Josephmccarthy et al., 1995; Eisen et al., 1994), GenStar (Rotstein & Murcko, 1993) and BUILDER (Roe & Kuntz, 1995). An alternative to designing a new and generally unsynthesised
# 1998 Academic Press Limited

450

Database Mining

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the steps (labelled a through e) involved in the process of electronic database screening used in the SANDOCK procedure.

ligand is to search libraries of existing molecules of known or calculated 3D structure. This latter database mining approach (Martin, 1992; Bemis & Kuntz, 1992) involves the selection of molecules from large 2D and 3D databases which can contain over one million entries, and an ef®cient matching and docking algorithm is therefore a prerequisite. The most rigorous and computationally expensive way of solving this docking problem makes use of molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo methods (Lau & Karplus, 1994; Read et al., 1995). A multiple-start Monte Carlo calculation has been successful in a number of cases including the correct docking of methotrexate into dihydrofolate reductase (Hart & Read, 1992). Simulated annealing is used in the program Autodock, which has successfully predicted binding modes for six different protein-ligand systems including camphor/ cytochrome P-450 and biotin/streptavidin (Goodsell et al., 1996). These successful docking calculations used only pairwise atomic interaction energies with van der Waals, hydrogen bonding and electrostatic terms, with no account taken of solvent. Such detailed simulations take minutes of computer time per ligand (Goodsell et al., 1996)

and are only feasible for testing a few selected complexes. A more robust approach must be taken to screen large databases in a reasonable time. Programs like DOCK employ a graphmatching technique to ®t atoms of a rigid ligand onto site points de®ned in a protein binding pocket (Desjarlais et al. 1988). This approach requires large numbers of ligand binding modes to be tested and chemical descriptors matching atom type to site point have been introduced to reduce the number of test ®ts (Meng et al., 1992). The development of shape descriptors to encode molecular shape is another development which has been used to screen databases and also search for molecular similarity (Shoichet et al., 1992). One of the major problems is conformational ¯exibility of both ligand and protein and this can be partially addressed by using multiconformer databases in which a number of low energy conformations are calculated (Martin, 1992). By docking each conformer of a particular ligand the conformational space can be sampled. The best test of the accuracy of predicting a docked proteinligand complex is by veri®cation of the predicted structure from an experimentally determined X-ray structure. One example is of three chemically distinct ligands discovered by DOCK which inhibit thymidylate synthase (Shoichet et al., 1993). Here we describe a modi®ed docking algorithm and methods of characterising the ligand and the active site cavity. The main test protein in this work is the serine protease thrombin, which has been well studied as a target for the design of antiblood coagulation drugs (Stubbs & Bode, 1995). It facilitates the ®nal step in the blood clotting pathway and cleaves ®brinogen allowing formation of the ®brin clot. A number of inhibitors that act at picomolar concentrations are known, but most have poor oral bioavailability (Tapparelli et al., 1993a,b). Thrombin still provides an interesting design target for the discovery of novel inhibitors with an improved pharmacological pro®le. The methods described here for ®nding thrombin ligands are quite general, and any high resolution protein X-ray structure can provide a 3D template for a structure-based design approach for discovery of novel small molecule ligands. Candidate ligands form 3D libraries are sequentially ®tted onto the negative template of the active site of the target protein and the strength or score of the ®t is estimated. The strength of protein-ligand binding depends on the complementarity of shape and charge of the ligand and protein as well as a number of entropic factors including the ¯exibility of the ligand and also the displacement of water from the ligand binding site (Janin, 1995). Features which distinguish the SANDOCK program include (a) the description of the active site, (b) the evaluation of complementarity between the ligand and the protein, (c) the computational ef®ciency of the docking algorithms. An X-ray structure of a ligand

Database Mining

451

bound to human a-thrombin which was identi®ed by the program SANDOCK is also presented and shows the usefulness and accuracy of the approach.

The Docking Procedure
Ligand accessible surface A modi®ed Lee-Richard's surface (``the ligand accessible surface'') was developed in this work to provide the most probable complementary surface for different ligand atom types. It is de®ned by the locus of the centre of probe sphere with a variable radius rolling over the protein. The atom type and radius of the rolling probe is assigned to be that of the most likely partner atom at any given point on the protein surface (Table 1). This surface is composed of dots which have the chemical properties of the relevant protein atoms and are used as points for ligand matching. Atoms of a protein molecule are paired to the ligand atoms as shown in Table 1. This Table lists the receptor atom with its radius, the corresponding most probable ligand atom with its radius and the so called ``double van der Waals radius'', which is the sum of their radii. The new surface is the same as van der Waals surface contoured with the double van der Waals radius. The receptor atom radii (C, N, O and S) were taken from the SYBYL (Tripos Associates, 1991) atom de®nitions. The double van der Waals radius for an aromatic carbon atom was taken from the X-PLOR force ®eld for the atom type ``CR'' (Brunger, 1993). Dot properties Connolly's program (Connolly, 1983) was used to generate a ligand accessible surface contoured with the radii shown in Table 1 (Figure 2). Points from a dotted representation of the ligand accessible surface are taken as possible ligand atom sites. Dots lying in grooves of the ligand accessible surface have an optimal distance to at least two protein atoms and will have a greater van der Waals interaction energy. The dot density of the surface is chosen such that between 60 and 500 dots are selected to de®ne the ligand binding site. Each dot has hydrogen-bonding, electrostatic and hydrophobic properties used in the subsequent matching process.
Table 1. Soluble van der Waals radii
Receptor atom type Ê Receptor atom radius (A) Most probable ligand atom type Ê Ligand atom radius (A) Ê Double van der Waals radius (A) C 1.8 C 1.8 3.74 O 1.4 N/O 1.4/1.5 2.85 N 1.5 O 1.4 2.9 S 1.9 Any (1.4À) 1.8 3.6

Figure 2. An example of the ligand accessible surface. Part of the active site cavity of the X-ray structure of FKBP (Vanduyne et al., 1993) showing a phenylalanine and proline side-chain. The ligand accessible surface is shown as a dotted magenta surface. The atoms of the pipecolidine ring of the ligand rapamycin are lying very close to this ligand accessible surface.

Hydrogen bonding parameters Hydrogen bond acceptor atoms of the protein are given a negative hydrogen bonding parameter while hydrogen bond donors are given a positive value. Atoms which can be both acceptor and donor (like the hydroxyl group of serine) are given a value of 0.99. For all other atom types the hydrogen bonding parameter is zero (Table 2). All atoms of the receptor protein within a given Ê cutoff radius (recommended value: 3.0 A) contribute to the hydrogen bonding parameter of a given dot: hbd 
n  i1

hbpi

where, hb(d) is the hydrogen bonding parameter of the dot; hb(p) is the hydrogen bonding parameter of the receptor atom; and n is the number of receptor atoms within the cutoff. If this sum is more than 1 or less than À1 it is set to 1 or À1, respectively. Dots in the vicinity of both acceptor and donor atoms are given a value of 0.99. A distance (but no angle) criterion is used to determine the hydrogen bonding potential.

Hydrogen atoms were not included in the surface calculation but for carbon atoms they were included via an enlarged double van der Waals radius.

452
Table 2. Hydrogen bonding parameters
Dots (protein) O carbonyl O hydroxyl O carboxyl N peptide Side-chain (of R,K,H,N and Q ± ± ± ± ± ± ± À1.0 0.99 À1.0 1.0 1.0 ± ± ± ± ± ± ± Ligand O carbonyl O hydroxyl O carboxyl N peptide ± N aliphatic N nitroxy N nitril N ring donor N ring acceptor F Cl À1.0 0.99 À1.0 1.0 ± 1.0 À0.2 À1.0 0.5 À0.5 À0.2 À0.1

Database Mining

which are deep in a binding packet rather than those that are more solvent exposed. The priority parameter is a measure of the number of intermolecular van der Waals contacts being made. Ligand atoms close to high priority dots will be less solvent exposed. The priority parameter of the dots is calculated in two steps. First a general priority is calculated as follows: prc 
n  i1

eÀ2disti Àdvdwi 

2

aprli

Hydrophobicity parameter This empirical term accounts in part for the hydrophobic effect by preventing hydrophilic ligand atoms being placed in exclusively hydrophobic sites. For each surface dot, all atoms of the receptor protein within a certain cutoff radius contribute to the hydrophobicity such that a tenth of the hydrophobicity parameter of these atoms is added to the hydrophobicity of the dot. (From test runs with known protein-inhibitor complex strucÊ tures, a value of about 5.0 A for this cutoff radius gave the best results): phobd  0X1
n  i1

where, pr(c), is the general priority parameter of the dot; dist, is the distance between dot and receptor atom; dvdw, is the double van der Waals radius of the receptor atom; prli, is the limit within which atoms of the receptor protein are included (in genÊ eral 5 A). The priorities are then normalised such that the maximum priority is 1 and the minimum priority is 0.25. Databases Subsets of the three different databases were used. The version of the database of the Fine Chemicals Directory (FCD; Aldrich Chemical Co. 1990) used in this work contained some 170,000 small molecule structures each converted to a single 3D conformation using the rule based program CONCORD (Rusinko et al., 1986; Pearlman et al., 1994). The Sandoz In-House Database contained 160,000 molecules and both a single conformer database generated using CONCORD (Rusinko et al., 1986) and a multi-conformer database were generated (Smellie et al., 1995). A subset of about 35,000 small rigid organic structures were also selected form the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD; Allen et al., 1991). Screening putative ligands for size was straightforward and only molecules containing between nine and thirty non-hydrogen atoms were used in this work. Screening out ¯exible ligands was found to be very useful for some searches. A program was written to apply a ``rigidity ®lter'', which rejected ligands if the ratio of the number of nonrotatable bonds compared to the total number of bonds was lower than a certain variable limit. In most cases this was tuned to give up to two freely rotatable bonds per ligand. Properties of ligand atoms

phobpi

where, phob(d) is hydrophobicity parameter of the dot; phob(p) is hydrophobicity parameter of the receptor atom; n is number of atoms within the cutoff. The hydrophobicity parameters for all atoms of the receptor protein listed in Table 3 have been optimized with a number of known protein-ligand complexes. The hydrophobicity parameter of carbon atoms is used in SANDOCK as a variable to tune the binding characteristics of the target protein under study. Topological parameters Besides the geometrical and the chemical characterisation of the dot a topological property is accounted for which is called the priority parameter. The idea is to give a higher priority to dots
Table 3. Hydrophobicity parameters
Dots (protein) C N O F P S Cl Metal ions À0.2 À 0.7 0.8 1.0 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 2.0 Ligand C N O F P S Cl Metal ions À0.5 0.8 1.0 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 2.0

As for the surface dots, each ligand atom is ascribed parameters for hydrogen bonding potential (Table 2) and hydrophobicity (Table 3). The hydrogen bonding parameter for all atoms not listed in Table 2 is 0. There is no priority parameter for ligand atoms; however, another topological feature of the ligand atom is checked. Atoms which can be removed from the ligand molecule without destroying its shape are ¯agged as ``removable''. These are terminal atoms which have an sp3 hybri-

Database Mining

453

dised atom bonded to the ligand molecule. These atoms can be replaced by hydrogen atoms without changing the shape of the molecular framework. The possibility of removing such atoms during the docking procedure prevents the unnecessary rejection of otherwise interesting hits. Matching Atoms of the ligand are ®tted onto the dots of the ligand accessible surface by a distance matching algorithm. Distances between the atoms are compared to distances between the dots. If a certain number of distances can be found which do not differ by more than a certain tolerance, e, then a rigid body transformation is carried out; the atoms belonging to the selected atom distances are ®tted onto the dots belonging to the selected dot distances. To incorporate chemical properties of the dots and the matched ligand atoms, the tolerance, e, is increased or reduced depending on the property parameters of the dots and of the matched ligand atom. Thus a hydrophobic ligand atom ®tting near a hydrophobic dot will be given a larger tolerance, as will a hydrogen bond acceptor dot atom. The topological property of the dot (its priority parameter) is also used to downweight the tolerance for less important dots. It scaled such that the maximum value is 1 and the hydrogen bonding parameters for the dots are reduced to one for values greater than one. The equation for the tolerance variable enew is: 4new  f prior Â f phob  f hbX The effect of this variable tolerance e is shown in Figure 3 for the active site cavity of FKBP. An example of dots generated for a SANDOCK run is displayed in Figure 4. In the active site of thrombin some 500 dots are generated lying on the surface of the ligand accessible surface. These dots are then characterised according to the protein environment. In this case dots in the vicinity of Asp189 (coloured red) favour hydrogen bond donors in the ligand molecule, while the dots coloured in green are located in more hydrophobic environment and favour hydrophobic ligand atoms. Three constraining points are shown in magenta: in searching for thrombin ligands initial pairs are tested only if the properties of the dots and the ligand atoms match and the score is only calculated if in the generated orientation a ligand atom of correct type is close to the constraining points. Scoring Every ®t generated by the matching algorithm has to be evaluated. The score is composed of three different individually weighted functions comprising the geometrical ®t, the hydrophobic ®t and the hydrogen bonding ®t: score  a Â geom  b Â phob  c Â hbond Hydrophobic score For the hydrophobic ®t two scoring functions can been used: one is similar to the simple scoring function for the geometrical ®t and the other has an additional reduction of the score for ligand atoms closer to the protein (Figure 6).

Figure 3. Graphical representation of the tolerance e in the active site of FKBP (Vanduyne et al., 1993). The radii of the spheres correspond to the tolerance e for an atom of a speci®c type. The radii of the red, blue and grey spheres indicate the tolerance when the ligand atoms are oxygen, nitrogen and carbon, respectively.

In addition, distance constraints for special requirements have been built in to check whether a selected feature is ful®lled by the orientation. Such constraints can be used, for example, to ®lter out candidate ligands lacking a required hydrogen bond.

Geometric score Two different scoring functions have been used and both have two cutoff limits. If the distance between any ligand atom and a receptor atom is less than min limit, this orientation is immediately discarded. Distances larger than max do not contribute to the score. The ®rst scoring function is only based on the distance between neighbouring ligand and receptor atoms and is independent of the radii of ligand and receptor atoms and is computed using the function A in Figure 5: in the second scoring function the limits are dependent on the atomic radii of the ligand molecule and the protein atoms. This function (Figure 5B) is similar to a negative Lennard-Jones potential.

454

Database Mining

Figure 4. Part of the active site of thrombin showing the ligand accessible surface in purple. Regions of the surface marked in red and green highlight the hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions of the surface. Positions for three ideal hydrogen-bonding ligand atoms are shown as magenta spheres and two of them are partners for the carboxylate group of Asp189. In the matching step the ®rst ligand was only matched to dots in the vicinity of the red-green surface.

Hydrogen bonding score The ®rst two scoring functions for the hydrogen bonding ®t are similar to the hydrophobic scoring functions but with steeper curves. This gives a narrower maximum range compared to the hydrophobic score (Figure 7).

Results
Two important features of any docking program are the speed with which trial dockings can be accomplished and the accuracy of the relative scoring for the different ligands being compared. Computer time becomes a limiting factor for the screening of large (multiconformer) databases containing up to a million entries. The procedure described here was developed on an Alliant FX28 with 28 processors allowing up to 28 molecules to be handled simultaneously. The ®rst step in each screening run (initialisation) involves reading in the receptor atom coordinates and sorting the coordinates of the surface dots. This

takes only a few seconds up to a minute. For large databases the second step of reading in all ligand structures can take up to half an hour or more. This step cannot easily be parallelised. However, slicing the database into smaller pieces characterised by a certain property, like a special ligand size, makes it possible to run several jobs at the same time on a multiprocessor machine without any overhead. The calculation step for each ligand is the most time consuming and involves (a) assignment of the ligand atom types, (b) matching, (c) scoring. A matching process requiring an exhaustive search of all pairs of ligand atoms to surface dots is computationally very expensive. Rules governing the selection of atoms used to test the ®t were found to be key to the computational speed and accuracy of the process. An example of a ligand being docked into HIV-protease shows the three approaches. The three different choices for the selection of the next ligand atom (random, distance, minimax) give atom selections as shown in Figure 8. This example is a ligand docked into HIV

Database Mining

455

Figure 5. Two scoring functions used for the geometrical ®t. Min is the cutoff distance for the close contacts. Distances to the protein atoms larger than max give no contribution to the score. Min, bot, top, max are input parameters.

Figure 6. Two scoring functions for the hydrophobic ®t. Min is the cutoff distance for close contacts. Distances to the protein atoms larger than max give no contribution to the score. Min, bot, top, max are input parameters.

protease with the different selection modes and the best orientation is examined for the selected atoms. (1) ``Random'': the next ligand atom is selected randomly by a built-in random number generator. The atom selection is fast but the selected atoms are not representative for the shape of the molecule and a clustering of selected atoms may occur. (2) ``Distance'': the next selected ligand atom is most distant from the previous one. A feature observed here is shown in Figure 8B in which every odd-numbered atom is on the left of the molecule and every even-numbered atom is on the right while in the middle there is a gap. The selected atoms, however, are quite representative for the shape of the molecule. (3) ``Minimax'': the next selected ligand atom is most distant from all previously selected atoms and a good distribution of the selected atoms can be reached. A similar problem exists for selecting pairs of dots and three options are available: (1) ``Next'': the distances are sequentially searched and the ®rst pair of dots that matches the

criterion |dij À dkl| < e is selected if all previously selected pairs also match. (2) ``Opt'': all new dots are checked whether they ful®l the criterion |dij À dkl| < e and that one for which the sum of all |dij À dkl| to all previously selected pairs is smallest is chosen.

Figure 7. A scoring function for the hydrogen bonding ®t. Min is the cutoff distance for close contacts. Distances to the protein atoms larger than max give no contribution to the score. Min, bot, top, max are input parameters. The shape of this function is similar to function B in Figure 6 but more pronounced around the input parameter bot.

456

Database Mining Table 4. Time used with different atom selection modes
Option Random Distance Minimax Time (seconds) 77.7 89.4 96.1 Orientations 1749 2273 1692 Scores 393.1 476.3 464.8

Results of a SANDOCK run on a test database with ligand molecules of some 25 (non-hydrogen) atoms. The average times (in seconds) needed in the atom selection, the number of generated orientations and the average scores are listed.

Figure 8. Three different methods are used to select ligand atoms for matching with selected dots of the ligand accessible surface. The atom numbers indicate the order in which they were selected using the different options. A, In random the numbers 2 to 7 are very much clustered, and the selected atoms are not representative of the shape of the molecule. B, In distance every odd number is on the left and every even on the right while in the middle there is a gap; the selected atoms, however, are quite representative of the shape of the molecule. C, In minimax the selected atoms are well distributed over the molecule; however, the higher numbers are not at the far ends of the molecule and are therefore less important. The lower numbers are very representative of the shape and the chemical properties.

the computing time required. Figure 4 illustrates the use of this option. For a characteristic representation of the shape of the molecule fewer atoms can be chosen. This can improve the performance of the docking procedure. A comparison of the scores obtained with the three different modes (Table 4) showed that the random option is the worst as it gives the lowest scores. The other two are strongly dependent on the number of pairs to be built, the size and shape of the ligand molecule and give comparable results. For large ligand molecules the minimax option is better, since the shape can be better described with fewer atoms. Computer times (and the ®nal scores) are dependent on the size and shape of the ligand molecule and also on the number and distribution of the dots. An overall average time was 1.5 minutes per ligand. Applying ®lters for the dot selection and constraints for ligand properties reduced the time required per ligand molecule to less than one second. This makes it possible to perform database screening runs even over huge multiconformer databases with up to one million structures within one day. Using SANDOCK to search for thrombin inhibitors The X-ray structure of human thrombin complexed with D-Phe-Pro-Arg chloromethylketone was used as the protein template (Bode et al., 1989) and used to generate dots for the ligand accessible surface in the S1 pocket (Figure 4). The cluster contained some 500 dots, which where assigned according to the properties in the S1 pocket (Schechter and Berger, 1967). The red dots (Figure 4) are hydrophilic hydrogen bond acceptors and the green dots are hydrophobic with no hydrogen bond potential. In addition three constraining points were used, two of them in optimal positions for hydrogen bonding partners to Asp189 and Gly219 and one of then is in an optimal position for a hydrophobic ligand atom lying in the
Table 5. Time used with different dot selection modes
Option Next Opt Sort Time (seconds) ± 559.7 96.1 Orientations ± 9823 1692 Average scores ± 561.3 464.8

(3) ``Sort'': basically the same as opt but all dot ± dot distances are ®rst sorted. Then the 11 distances closest to the atom ±atom distance are checked, again to select the pair with the smallest sum of all |dij À dkl| as in opt. The three different choices for the selection of the next dot (next, pt, sort) give values for the computer time and generated scores as listed in Table 5. The ®rst option is very quick but not representative. The second option is very exhaustive but gives the optimal next dot. The third option should give the most representative subset of possible options for the next dots. In general the time used increases by more than a factor of n2 with the number of dots for options one and two (Table 5). A procedure for restraining certain dots to match particular ligand atom types substantially reduces

Database Mining

457 NBEN as possible thrombin inhibitor) was not the native protein structure but the D-Phe-Pro-Arg chloromethylketone inhibitor structure. The sidechain of residue Glu192 has a rather different conformation in the native structure and also the residues Ser195 and His57 differ somewhat (see below). Nevertheless, using the native structure as protein template, test runs were also successful and gave an even increased score compared to the 1ppb structure (633.6 compared to 616.9). None of the ligands presented has a hydrophobic atom in the vicinity of the constraining point for hydrophobic atoms. This point is really buried deeply in the pocket and from the shape of the ligand molecules it is nearly impossible to ®t an atom onto this point without violating the van der Waals interaction due to close contacts of the ligand to some parts of the protein. X-ray crystallographic validation of ligand binding The structure of a complex of human a-thrombin with the ligand p-amino-benzamidine (NBEN) is presented and shows that the ligand adopts the predicted binding mode. NBEN is a small ligand

middle of the hydrophobic part of this active site cavity. The S1 pocket of human a-thrombin is a small subpocket of the substrate binding site which binds the positively charged residue of the substrate peptide (lysine or arginine). Only small compounds containing between 8 and 15 non-hydrogen atoms were searched to ®t into this pocket. A SANDOCK run using these hydrogen bonding constraints and the selected cluster of surface dots produced hits as shown in Figure 9. In the matching and in the scoring function it was required that at least two of these constraining distances should be ful®lled by the docked ligands. As can be seen in Figure 9, these docked ligands all have two good hydrogen bonds to the aspartic residue with two atoms lying approximately on top of the constraining points as required by the input parameters. In addition all of them form a good hydrogen bond to the glutamic residue 192, which was not required by the constraining points. Two of the ligands also have a hydrogen bond to the active site residue Ser195 but the geometry of this hydrogen bond is not optimal. The protein template initially used for the docking experiments (which identi®ed the molecule

Figure 9(a) (legend on page 459)

458

Database Mining

Figure 9(b) (legend opposite)

with only ten non-hydrogen atoms that binds to thrombin with a Kd value of 65 mM (Evans et al., 1982). It was found with the SANDOCK options Ê listed in Table 6. One distance constraint of 1.2 A was required for hydrogen bond acceptors to a site within hydrogen bonding distance to Asp189 Od2 and Gly219 O. Crystals of a second complex of human a-thrombin with the ligand 1,2,4,5tetra-amino-benzene have also been prepared. However, these crystals are too small for data collection and the only proof of binding is the clear to brown colour change observed on soaking unligated thrombin crystals with the brown coloured ligand. Cocrystallisation of the human a-thrombin complex with NBEN gave crystals which were isomorphous to the crystal form previously reported (Skrypczak-Jankun et al., 1991) with space group C2. The unit cell dimensions were only slightly Ê Ê changed and were: a  71.0 A, b  72.4 A, Ê and b  100.5 . Data used for re®nec  72.7 A Ê ment were in the resolution range 8.0 to 2.3 A and consisted of 13,521 re¯ections greater than (I > 2s(I)). The ®nal R factor was 17.2%; rms Ê bond lengths, 0.015 A; and rms bond angles,

2.58 . The electron density for the hirudin fragment was very weak, but the electron density of the ligand NBEN was very pronounced. The difference electron density for NBEN is shown in Figure 10. The rms difference between the atoms of the docked ligand and the X-ray structure of the ligand Ê is 0.72 A (Figure 11). There are a number of hydrogen bonds formed between the ligand and the protein, one of them with the active site residue Ser195 and the others with the hydrogen bonding partners in the so-called S1 pocket. These hydrogen bonds are summarised for the docked ligand and the X-ray structure in Table 7. The hydrogen bonds in the docked version are very similar to those of the X-ray structure except for the hydrogen bond between N4 and Asp Od1, which is shorter in the docked version; i.e. the docked ligand is slightly deeper in the S1 pocket than the ligand in the X-ray structure (Figure 11). Also the orientation of the X-ray structure is slightly different: the conformation of the active site residues of the protein template for the docking was taken from the coordinates of the entry 1ppb in the Brookhaven database. In this structure

Database Mining

459

Figure 9. (a), (b) and (c) Three examples of ligands docked into the active site of thrombin. In all cases two of three distance constraints are ful®lled (points in magenta). All of them form favourable hydrogen bonds to Asp189 as required by the constraining points. The carbon atoms of the ligands are shown in yellow and the most important hydrogen bonds formed to the protein are shown in green.

the ligand is covalently bound to the two active site residues Ser195 and His57, pulling the serine residue to the left and the histidine residue to the right. This is re¯ected in the two ligand orientations, where the distance to the Ser Og is roughly Ê Ê the same (3.08 A compared to 3.12 A) but the ligand of the X-ray structure is pulled to the left due to the different conformation of Ser195. Also the residue Glu192 is different: if it was the same in the X-ray structure, there would be a very close contact to the ligand NBEN.

Discussion
Energetics of protein-ligand interaction Protein-ligand binding energy can be broken down into a series of empirical terms which account for the enthalpic and entropic differences between the bound and unbound states. Molecular mechanics force ®elds (Brunger, 1993; Tripos Associates, 1991) provide parameters to calculate ligand-protein hydrogen bonding and van der Waals energies which determine geometric ®t. The complex changes in entropy caused by ligand binding and subsequent release of water into the bulk solvents can be approximated by molecular dynamics simulations. Such an approach is not yet feasible for screening large numbers of potential ligands and empirical terms have been developed to account for changes in entropy caused by hydrophobic surfaces docking together (Klebe & Bohm, 1997). Entropy terms must take account of changes in conformational freedom of protein and ligand side-

Table 6. Parameters for thrombin SANDOCK run
Option Atom selection Dot selection Number of dots Ê e (A) Number of required pairs Rigidity filter Distance Sort 393 1.4 5 0.7

460

Database Mining

Figure 10. An (Fo À Fc) difference electron density map for the ligand NBEN contoured at 4 s. The ligand NBEN Ê forms ®ve hydrogen bonds in the range of 2.73 to 3.18 A in the protein ligand complex, one of them with the structural water molecule W468, two with the carboxyl group of Asp189, one with the carbonyl Gly219 and one with the hydroxyl group of the active site residue Ser195.

chains and also restricted translational and rotational molecular motion. It has been estimated that, on average, loss of side-chain motion for an amino acid will disfavour ligand binding by an amount TÁS  À0.5 kcal/mol (Pickett & Sternberg, 1993). This value is similar to the estimated change in free energy caused by rigidifying each freely rotatable bond in a ligand molecule (Doig & Sternberg, 1995). Docking and binding of a ligand molecule onto a protein receptor restricts translational and rotational molecular motion. The resulting entropic changes disfavour ligand binding and have a free energy contribution estimated to be about 11 kcal/mol for drug sized molecules (Krystek et al., 1993). These unfavourable entropic effects may be partially compensated by the release of bound water. It has been estimated that the entropic cost of transferring a single water molecule from bulk water to an immobile site corresponds to a free energy cost estimated variously at 2 kcal/mol (Dunitz, 1994) and 2.4 kcal/mol (Verkhivker et al., 1995). The release of water molecules from a hydrophobic protein pocket into

bulk solvent provides a major component of the hydrophobic effect driving the formation of the ligand-protein complex. A signi®cant decrease in protein-ligand dissociation constant from 1 mM down to 1 nM corresponds to a change in the protein-ligand dissociation energy from 4.2 to 12.6 kcal/mol. The relatively small ligand binding energies are generally the result of large opposing terms. The enthalpic contribution from van der Waals and hydrogen bonds made when a ligand binds into a protein pocket are balanced against the entropy terms which disfavour the binding of ¯exible ligands with many free rotatable bonds. For a series of ligands binding into the same protein pocket, a number of these terms will be similar. By treating terms such as desolvation of the protein as constant, the use of simple empirical terms can be used to compare ligand binding strengths for a particular protein. An effective empirical scoring function has been developed (Bohm, 1994) which describes binding as the sum of polar interactions (À1.1 kcal/mol for

Database Mining

461

Figure 11. Overlay of the docked and the re®ned NBEN structures. Yellow: the re®ned NBEN structure as in Figure 10. White: protein atoms of the docked structure. The ®t is based on the least-squares ®t of all Ca atoms of the model and X-ray thrombin molecules in the vicinity of the ligand. Note the differences of the two structures of the Ê active site residues His57 and Ser195. The rms difference between the atoms of the two ligands is 0.726 A.

each neutral hydrogen bond and À2.0 kcal/mol for each ionic contact), lipophilic contact Ê (À0.04 kcal/mol A2 for each lipophilic surface) and loss of ligand entropy (1.4 kcal/mol for each rotatable bond in the ligand). This function gives a good estimate of the free energy of ligand binding for over 40 protein-ligand complexes of known structure. In another study, a detailed analysis of the X-ray structures of a set of seven peptide ligands bound to HIV-protease has led to an empirical set of 11 energy terms which accurately
Ê Table 7. Hydrogen bond distances of NBEN (A)
SANDOCK N1-Gly219 O N1-Asp189 Od2 N4-Asp189 Od1 N4-W468 O N17-Ser195 Og 2.88 2.68 2.59 ± 3.12 X-ray 2.73 2.77 3.18 2.81 3.08

describe the binding of this training set (Verkhivker et al., 1995). In a calorimetric and crystallographic analysis of the binding to small hydrophobic ligands to an internal cavity of lysozyme (Morton & Matthews, 1995; Morton et al., 1995) it was suggested that the energies of binding could be analysed in terms of three principal energetic components described as desolvation, immobilisation and packing. Matching and scoring in SANDOCK The use if the molecular surface described for SANDOCK is novel. The changing radius according to the ideal matching ligand atom gives a surface on which the ligand atoms would ideally sit. By using this dotted surface as the template, there is an implicit drive to maximise the contact surface between protein and ligand. The matching algorithm also makes use of the ``priority'' parameter assigned to the surface dots to ®rst satisfy those

The docked and the X-ray structures are compared.

462 regions on the protein surface that lie in the deepest pockets and provide the strongest van der Waals interactions. The priority and ``type'' designations of the surface dots and also the possible use of speci®c constraints in the matching algorithm reduce the number of ®tted ligand con®gurations which need to be tested. The distribution of ligand atoms selected for ®tting using one of the options (random, dist, minimax) also provide ef®cient ways of testing the ®t. This matching procedure allows the protein surface to be accurately described by dot clusters composed of up to 500 dots, which act as the template for an optimum geometrical ®t of the generated ligand orientations. The scoring function consists of three linearly independent terms describing geometric, hydrophobic and hydrogen bonding interactions. Individual weights on the three terms provides a means of tuning the type of interactions and indeed the type of ligand selected from the database. Speci®c constraints can be used to complement strongly conserved hydrogen bonding interactions. The enthalpic term is scored using speci®c hydrogen bonding and van der Waals terms. These different options are available. Known proteinligand complexes give the best scores with nonbonded van der Waals contacts calculated using the Lennard-Jones potential. The second scoring function (B in Figure 6) can be tuned such that close contacts result in poorer scores compared with the real van der Waals interaction score This can be useful in avoiding bad contacts in the ligand orientations. Since the receptor itself is to a certain degree ¯exible, some close contacts may nevertheless be tolerated and compensated by small movements in the protein structure. If the scores for the hydrogen bonding interactions are calculated using Lennard-Jones 9-6-1 potential, which is very sensitive to the atom position, then close contacts are heavily penalised with this parameter for only slightly misplaced hydrogen bonds. The hydrophobic scores are relatively insensitive to the atomic position (as is expected for a hydrophobic interaction). Of the two hydrophobic functions tested, the ®rst scoring function (A in Figure 7) had the disadvantage that close contacts were given a positive score. This is not the case for the second function (B in Figure 7), which was used in subsequent work. Docking strategies The two main problems with all docking procedures are accounting for the ¯exibility of the ligand and the protein and in determining the role of solvent in ligand binding. The crystallographic results of nine ligand-lysozyme complexes (Morton et al., 1995; Morton & Matthews, 1995) showed that Ê protein movements ranged between 0.7 and 2.5 A depending on the ligand. In this case ligand binding invariably gave rise to increasing protein ¯exi-

Database Mining

bility. This picture of modest structural change was also observed in a series of 11 cyclophilinligand crystal complexes, which had rmsd backÊ bone variations of less than 0.2 A among the different structures, though atoms on certain side-chains Ê could move up to 2 A. Similarly, the different thrombin-ligand complexes show rather small changes but these have been shown to have important effects on the modes of ligand binding (Engh et al., 1996). There are other proteins like maltose binding protein (Sharff et al., 1992) which undergo major domain movements on ligand binding, which must be dealt with separately. However, even the relatively small side-chain movements observed in the rigid class of receptors can cause signi®cant differences in the scoring procedure. The simplest approach to deal with this problem is to reduce the repulsive non-bonded contact distances, which also helps compensate for possible wrong conformations of the ligand. Another approach used to account for ligand ¯exibility has been to make use of multiconformer databases in which a number (up to ten) of low energy conformers of a ¯exible ligand are stored and used as separate trial ligands in the matching procedure. A very useful technique developed in this work was the use of rigidity ®lters to screen out overly ¯exible ligands, which, as discussed above, are not only dif®cult to dock, but are also entropically disfavoured as tight binding ligands. The role of solvent is also not explicitly included in the scoring function except as a general and tunable hydrophobic term, which should vary among proteins depending on whether the binding is determined more by enthalpic or entropic effects. Water frequently plays another role by acting as a hydrogen bridge between ligand and protein, or even forming an integral part of the protein binding site (Engh et al., 1996; Huang et al., 1995). It is not feasible to test the different water-binding sites in conjunction with a docking run of thousands of ligands. It is however possible to use some crystallographically conserved water molecules as possible additions to the surface. In the case of certain cyclophilin-ligand complexes the displacement of conserved water molecules was found to be energetically unfavourable to binding (Mikol et al., 1995) while in the case of designed ligands for HIV-protease the replacement of a tightly bound water molecule gave a ligand which bound well (Lam et al., 1994). For protein binding sites with conserved and tightly bound water molecules, it is appropriate to carry out searches on protein templates both with and without water. The thrombin-ligand structure The ®rst human a-thrombin complex to be solved by X-ray crystallography was with D-PhePro-Arg chloromethylketone (Bode et al., 1989). This structure showed the active site geometry and explained the observed activities of a number of ligands) Stubbs & Bode, 1995). The S1 binding

Database Mining

463 Conclusions SANDOCK provides the ability to screen very ef®ciently large 3D databases of small ligand molecules for ligands with shape and chemical complementarity to a target enzyme. This is due to a number of novel features in the program. (1) A new molecular surface provides an ideal geometrical template for the ligand. The chemical properties of the dotted surface provide an ef®cient way of matching a scoring ligand binding. (2) A guided matching algorithm: the priority and type designations of the surface dots and also the possible use of speci®c constraints in the matching algorithm reduce the number of ®tted ligand con®gurations which need to be tested. The distribution of ligand atoms selected for ®tting using one of the options (random, dist, minimax) also provide ef®cient ways of testing the ®t. (3) A simple and fast scoring function: the parameterisation of the interaction using hydrophobicity, van der Waals contacts and hydrogen bonds along with a method using constraints to impose required interactions provides a fast way of screening large databases. (4) On the ¯y modi®cation of ligand shape: the option to change molecular shape by removing terminally bound carbon atoms which do not ®t into the binding pocket provides a way of suggesting and designing new potential ligands from existing databases. Proof that the program can select ligands and predict their binding modes is given by the X-ray structure of thrombin with NBEN. The proteinligand complex with NBEN determined by X-ray structure analysis shows that the binding mode proposed by SANDOCK corresponds to the real binding mode (Figure 11). Minor differences are due to differences in the protein conformation of the template protein used for docking and the protein conformation in the X-ray structure. These results show SANDOCK be a useful database searching tool for identifying small ligands which bind to target proteins in the micro molar range.

site is the principal determinant of substrate speci®city and is designed to hold an arginyl side-chain. Asp189 sits at the bottom of the pocket and forms a saltbridge with the guanidinium group. Subsequently, structures of some 30 different complexes of human or bovine thrombin with different ligands have been published (Grootenhuis & Vangalen, 1995). The ligands fall into three chemical classes based on the archetypes argatroban (Banner & Hadvary, 1991), N-(2napthyl -sulphonyl-glycyl) -p-amidinophenylalanylpiperidine (NAPAP; Banner & Hadvary, 1991; Grutter et al., 1990; Brandstetter et al., 1992) and N-(4-toluene-sulphonyl)-p-amidinophenylalanyl-piperidine (TAPAP; Brandstetter et al., 1992). Molecular mechanics calculations incorporating only non-bonded (van der Waals and electrostatic) terms have been used with a series of over 30 ligands of the argatroban and TAPAP families to give a reasonably good correlation of measured binding constants with calculated interaction energies (Grootenhuis & Vangalen, 1995). This suggests that for series of chemically related ligands the solvation and entropy terms are rather similar. Furthermore the thrombin binding pocket was kept rigid and only the ligand was ¯exible in the docking procedure, which suggests that the protein is relatively in¯exible. X-ray structures of aminopyrolidine thrombin inhibitors (Engh et al., 1996) show that this new class of inhibitors in the S1 pocket in two ways. In both cases the charged ring nitrogen atom of the 4-amino pyrolidine group is hydrogen bonded directly with Asp189 at the bottom of the S1 pocket. However in one case the pyrolidine ring adopts a conformation such that the 4-amino nitrogen atom forms a direct hydrogen bond with a carbonyl oxygen atom of Ser214, while in another similar inhibitor complex the 4-amino nitrogen atom makes a hydrogen bond to a water molecule which makes two further bridging hydrogen bonds to the protein. The different hydrogen bonding motifs are accompanied by a rotation in the plane of the amide group between residues 214 and 215. The X-ray structure of an inhibitor with a napthamidine base bound in the S1 pocket in a fashion similar to that of benzamidine inhibitors is the only thrombin complex which induces a substantial movement in main-chain atoms and residues 191 Ê to 193 are moved by up to 2 A constricting the S1 pocket (Engh et al., 1996). The combined X-ray results of the different published complexes highlight the problems in predicting correct binding modes for novel ligands, particularly when protein conformation can subtly change and water molecules provide unpredictable alternative hydrogen bonding networks. The conformation of thrombin in the complex with NBEN compared with the PPACK complex has a maxiÊ mum shift of 1 A in residues His57 and Ser195 in the S1 active site and no signi®cant conformational changes were observed in the other binding pockets.

Experimental
Crystallisation Human a-thrombin was kindly supplied to us by Dr M. Zurini. Crystals we regrown using the hanging drop method (McPherson, 1990) and the crystallisation procedure was as described by Skrypczak et al. (1989). The hirudin fragment was used to stabilise the protein, but it does not compete with the active site inhibitor NBEN since it binds to another site of the protein (Skrypczak et al. (1991). The protein solution contained the following thrombin, hirudin fragment and NBEN concentrations: 7.5 mg/ml thrombin (dissolved in 0.75 mM NaCl), 10 mg/ml hirudin fragment 55 to 65 (not sulphated), 20 mM NBEN. The well contained 33 to 36% (w/w) PEG

464
8000 with 0.04% (w/v) NaN3 buffered with 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer at pH 7.3. The drop was made by mixing 5 ml protein solution with 5 ml well solution. Crystal seeding was carried out after one week of preequilibration and after one month crystals of up to 0.4 mm Â 0.3 mm Â 0.3 mm had grown. Data collection and structure solution X-ray data were collected on a FAST area detector (Enraf-Nonius, Delft, Holland) mounted on a FR571 rotating anode. Data processing was carried out with the program MADNES (Messerschmidt & P¯ugrath, 1987) and data reduction was carried out with the programs ROTAVATA-AGROVATA of the CCP4 program suite (SERC Daresbury Laboratory, 1986). For the re®nement the X-PLOR program package (Brunger, 1993) was used and model building was carried out with the graphical software O (Jones et al. (1991).

Database Mining for the design of new drugs? Angev. Chemie-Int. . Edit. (In English), 35, 2589± 2614. Boobbyer, D. N. A., Goodford, P. J., Mcwhinnie, P. M. & Wade, R. C. (1989). New hydrogen-bond potentials for use in determining energetically favorable binding-sites on molecules of known structure. J. Med. Chem. 32, 1083± 1094. Brandstetter, H., Turk, D., Hoeffken, H. W., Grosse, D., Sturzebecher, J., Martin, P. D., Edwards, B. F. P. & Bode, W. (1992). Re®ned 2.3-angstrom X-ray crystal-structure of bovine thrombin complexes formed with the benzamidine and arginine-based thrombin inhibitors napap, 4-tapap and mqpa ± a starting point for improving antithrombotics. J. Mol. Biol. 226, 1085± 1099. Brunger, A. T. (1993). X-PLOR Version 3.1: a System for X-ray Crystallography and NMR, Yale University Press. Connolly, M. L. (1983). Solvent-accessible surfaces of proteins and nucleic-acids. Science, 221, 709± 713. Desjarlais, R. L., Sheridan, R. P., Seibel, G. L., Dixon, J. S., Kuntz, I. D. & Venkataraghavan, R. (1988). Using shape complementarity as an initial screen in designing ligands for a receptor-binding site of known 3-dimensional structure. J. Med. Chem. 31, 722± 729. Doig, A. J. & Sternberg, M. J. E. (1995). Side-chain conformational entropy in protein-folding. Protein Sci. 4, 2247± 2251. Dunitz, J. D. (1994). The entropic cost of bound water in crystals and biomolecules. Science, 246, 670. Eisen, M. B., Wiley, D. C., Karplus, M. & Hubbard, R. E. (1994). Hook ± a program for ®nding novel molecular architectures that satisfy the chemical and steric requirements of a macromolecule binding-site. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 19, 199± 221. Engh, R. A., Brandstetter, H., Sucher, G., Eichinger, A., Baumann, U., Bode, W., Huber, R., Poll, T., Rudolph, R. & Vondersaal, W. (1996). Enzyme ¯exibility, solvent and weak interactions characterize thrombin ligand interactions ± implications for drug design. Structure, 4, 1353 ±1362. Evans, S. A., Olson, S. T. & Shore, J. D. (1982). Para-aminobenzamidine as a ¯uorescent-probe for the active-site of serine proteases. J. Biol. Chem. 257, 3014± 3017. Goodford, P. J. (1985). Favored sites for drug design. J. Mol. Graphics, 3, 107± 108. Goodsell, D. S., Norris, G. M. & Olson, A. J. (1996). Automated docking of ¯exible ligands ± applications of autodock. J. Mol. Recog. 9, 1 ± 5. Grootenhuis, P. D. J. & Vangalen, P. J. M. (1995). Correlation of binding af®nities with nonbonded interaction energies of thrombin-inhibitor complexes. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, Biol. Crystallog. 51, 560± 566. Grutter, M. G., Priestle, J. P., Rahuel, J., Grossenbacher, H., Bode, W., Hofsteenge, J. & Stone, S. R. (1990). Crystal-structure of the thrombin hirudin complex ± a novel mode of serine protease inhibition. EMBO J. 9, 2361± 2365. Gschwend, D. A., Good, A. C. & Kuntz, I. D. (1996). Molecular docking towards drug discovery. J. Mol. Recog. 9, 175± 186. Hart, T. N. & Read, R. J. (1992). A multiple-start MonteCarlo docking method. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 13, 206± 222. Huang, K., Lu, W. Y., Anderson, S., Laskowski, M. & James, M. N. G. (1995). Water molecules participate

Acknowledgement
We thank Novartis A. G. for supporting this work.

References
Ajay, & Murcko, M. A. (1995). Computational methods to predict binding free-energy in ligand-receptor complexes. J. Med. Chem. 38, 4953± 4967. Aldrich Chemical Co. (1990). Fine Chemicals Directory. Allen, F. H., Davies, J. E., Galloy, J. J., Johnson, O., Kennard, O., Malone, O., Macrae, C. F., Mitchell, E. M., Mitchell, G. F., Smith, J. M. & Watson, D. G. (1991). The development of version-3 and version-4 of the Cambridge structural database system. J. Chem. Inform. Comput. Sci. 31, 187 ± 204. Banner, D. W. & Hadvary, P. (1991). Crystallographic Ê analysis at 3.0 A resolution of the binding to human thrombin of 4 active site-directed inhibitors. J. Biol. Chem. 266, 29985± 20093. Bemis, G. W. & Kuntz, I. D. (1992). A fast and ef®cient method for 2d and 3d molecular shape-description. J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Design, 6, 607 ± 628. Bode, W., Mayer, I., Baumann, U., Huber, R., Stone, Ê S. R. & Hofsteenge, J. (1989). The re®ned 1.9 A crystal-structure of human alpha-thrombin ± interaction with d-phe-pro-arg chloromethylketone and signi®cance of the tyr-pro-pro-trp insertion segment. EMBO J. 8, 3467± 3475. Bohm, H. J. (1992). The computer-program ludi ± a new method for the de novo design of enzyme inhibitors. J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Design, 6, 61± 78. Bohm, H. J. (1994). The development of a simple empirical scoring function to estimate the binding constant for a protein complex of known 3-dimensional structure. J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Design, 8, 243 ± 256. Bohm, H. J. (1995). Site-directed structure generation by fragment-joining. Persp. Drug Disc. Design, 3, 12± 33. Bohm, H. J. (1996). Towards the automatic design of synthetically accessible protein ligands ±peptides, amides and peptidomimetics. J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Design, 10, 265 ± 272. Bohm, H. J. & Klebe, G. (1996). What can we learn from molecular recognition in protein-ligand complexes

Database Mining in proteinase-inhibitor interactions ± crystal structures of leu(18), ala(18), and gly(18) variants of turkey ovomucoid inhibitor 3rd-domain complexed with streptomyces-griseus proteinase-b. Protein Sci. 4, 1985± 1997. Janin, J. (1995). Elusive af®nities. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 21, 30 ± 39. Jones, T. A., Zou, J. Y., Cowan, S. W. & Kjeldgaard, M. (1991). Improved methods for building protein models in electron-density maps and the location of errors in these models. Acta Crystallog. sect. A, Fundamentals Crystallog. 47, 110 ± 119. Josephmccarthy, D., Karplus, M. & Hogle., J. M. (1995). Use of mcss to design new structure-based drugs for poliovirus and related viruses. FASEB J. 9, A1254. Klebe, G. & Bohm, H. J. (1997). Energetic and entropic factors determining binding af®nity in proteinligand complexes. J. Receptor Signal Transd. Res. 17, 459± 473. Knegtel, R. M. A., Kuntz, I. D. & Oshiro, C. M. (1997). Molecular docking to ensembles of protein structures. J. Mol. Biol. 266, 424±440. Krystek, S., Stouch, T. & Novotny, J. (1993). Af®nity and speci®city of serine endopeptidase protein inhibitor interactions: empirical free-energy calculations based on X-ray crystallography structures. J. Mol. Biol. 234, 661± 679. Lam, P. Y. S., Jadhav, P. K., Eyermann, C. J., Hodge, C. N., Ru, Y., Bacheler, L. T., Meek, J. L., Otto, M. J., Rayner, M. M., Wong, Y. N., Chang, C. H., Weber, P. C., Jackson, D. A., Sharpe, T. R. & Ericksonviitanen, S. (1994). Rational design of potent, bioavailable, nonpeptide cyclic ureas as HIV protease inhibitors. Science, 263, 380± 384. Lau, F. T. K. & Karplus, M. (1994). Molecular recognition in proteins: simulation analysis of substratebinding by a tyrosyl-transfer-RNA synthetase mutant. J. Mol. Biol. 236, 1049± 1066. Martin, Y. C. (1992). 3d database searching in drug design. J. Med. Chem. 35, 2145± 2154. Mcpherson, A. (1990). Current approaches to macromolecular crystallization. Eur. J. Biochem. 189, 1 ± 23. Meng, E. C., Shoichet, B. K. & Kuntz, I. D. (1992). Automated docking with grid-based energy evaluation. J. Comput. Chem. 13, 505 ± 524. Messerschmidt, A. & P¯ugrath, J. W. (1987). Crystal orientation and X-ray pattern prediction routines for area-detector diffractometer systems in macromolecular crystallography. J. Appl. Crystallog. 20, 306± 315. Mikol, V., Papageorgiou, C. & Borer, X. (1995). The role of water molecules in the structure-based design of (5-hydroxynorvaline)-2-cyclosporine synthesis, biological activity, and crystallographic analysis with cyclophilin-a. J. Med. Chem. 38, 3361± 3367. Moon, J. B. & Howe, W. J. (1991). Computer design of bioactive molecules ± a method for receptor-based de novo ligand design. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 11, 314± 328. Morton, A. & Matthews, B. W. (1995). Speci®city of ligand-binding in a buried nonpolar cavity of T4 lysozyme ± linkage of dynamics and structural plasticity. Biochemistry, 34, 8576± 8588. Morton, A., Baase, W. A. & Matthews, B. W. (1995). Energetic origins of speci®city of ligand binding in an interior nonpolar cavity of t4 lysozyme. Biochemistry, 34, 8564± 8575.

465
Pearlmann, R. S., Balducci, R., Motherwell, W. D. S. & Allen, F. H. (1994). A proper assessment of molecular structures in databases used for 3d searching ± concord and csd. Abstr. Papers Am. Chem. Soc. 207, 35 ±CINF. Pickett, S. D. & Sternberg, M. J. E. (1993). Empirical scale of side-chain conformational entropy in protein folding. J. Mol. Biol. 231, 825 ± 839. Read, R. J., Hart, T. N., Cummings, M. D. & Ness, S. R. (1995). Monte-Carlo algorithms for docking to proteins. Supramol. Chem. 6, 135± 140. Roe, D. C. & Kuntz, I. D. (1995). Builder v2 ± improving the chemistry of a de novo design strategy. J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Design, 9, 269± 282. Rotstein, S. H. & Murcko, M. A. (1993). Genstar ± a method for de novo drug design. J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Design, 7, 23 ±43. Rusinko, A., Skell, J. M., Balducci, R. & Pearlmann, R. S. (1986). Concord ± rapid generation of high-quality approximate 3-dimensional molecular coordinates. Abstr. Papers Am. Chem. Soc. 192, 12 ± COMP. Sanner, M. F., Olson, A. J. & Spehner, J. C. (1996). Reduced surface ± an ef®cient way to compute molecular surfaces. Biopolymers, 38, 305 ± 320. Schechter, I. & Berger, A. (1967). On the size of the active site in proteases. I. Papain. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 27, 157 ± 162. SERC Daresbury Laboratory (1986). CCP4 Collaborative Computing Project 4, Daresbury Laboratory, Warrington, Cheshire. Sharff, A. J., Rodseth, L. E., Spurlino, J. C. & Quiocho, F. A. (1992). Crystallographic evidence of a large ligand-induced hinge-twist motion between the 2 domains of the maltodextrin binding-protein involved in active transport and chemotaxis. Biochemistry, 31, 10657± 10663. Shoichet, B. K., Bodian, D. L. & Kuntz, I. D. (1992). Molecular docking using shape descriptors. J. Comput. Chem. 13, 380± 397. Shoichet, B. K., Stroud, R. M., Santi, D. V., Kuntz, I. D. & Perry, K. M. (1993). Structure-based discovery of inhibitors of thymidylate synthase. Science, 259, 1445± 1450. Skrypczak-Jankun, E., Rydel, T. J., Tulinsky, A., Fenton, J. W. & Mann, K. G. (1989). Human D-Phe-Pro-ArgCH2 ± a-thrombin crystallization and diffraction data. J. Mol. Biol. 206, 755± 757. Skrypczak-Jankun, E., Carperos, V. E., Ravichandran, K. G. & Tulinsky, A. (1991). Structure of the hirugen and hirulog 1 complexes of a-thrombin. J. Mol. Biol. 206, 755± 757. Smellie, A., Teig, S. L. & Towbin, P. (1995). Poling ± promoting conformational variation. J. Comput. Chem. 16, 171 ± 187. Stubbs, M. T. & Bode, W. (1995). The clot thickens ± clues provided by thrombin structure. Trends Biochem. Sci. 20, 131. Tapparelli, C., Metternich, R., Ehrhardt, C. & Cook, N. S. (1993a). Synthetic low-molecular-weight thrombin inhibitors ± molecular design and pharmacological pro®le. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 14, 366± 376. Tapparelli, C., Metternich, R., Ehrhardt, C., Zurini, M., Claeson, G., Scully, M. F. & Stone, S. R. (1993b). In vitro and in vivo characterization of a neutral boron-containing thrombin inhibitor. J. Biol. Chem. 268, 4734± 4741. Tripos, Associates (1991). SYBYL Molecular Modelling Software, Version 5.4.

466
Vanduyne, G. D., Standaert, R. F., Karplus, P. A., Schreiber, S. L. & Clardy, J. (1993). Atomic structures of the human immunophilin fkbp-12 complexes with fk506 and rapamycin. J. Mol. Biol. 229, 105± 124. Verkhivker, G., Appelt, K., Freer, S. T. & Villafranca, J. E. (1995). Empirical free-energy calculations of ligandprotein crystallographic complexes. 1. Knowledgebased ligand-protein interaction potentials applied to the prediction of human immundoe®ciency

Database Mining virus-1 protease binding-af®nity. Protein Eng. 8, 677± 691. Wade, R. C. & Goodford, P. J. (1993). Further development of hydrogen-bond functions for use in determining energetically favorable binding sites on molecules of known structure. 2. Ligand probe groups with the ability to form more than 2 hydrogen bonds. J. Med. Chem. 36, 148± 156. Walkinshaw, M. D. & Flowesheim, P. (1990). Hydrophilicity of proteins and DNA. J. Mol. Struct. 237, 63± 73.

Edited by F. Cohen (Received 27 June 1997; received in revised form 18 December 1997; accepted 18 December 1997)

