Mutational analysis of protein stability
Robert T. Sauer and Wendell A. Lim
¢

M a s s a c h u s e t t s Institute of T e c h n o l o g y , C a m b r i d g e , M a s s a c h u s e t t s , USA Folded proteins can accommodate a wide spectrum of amino acid substitutions, and these modified proteins have provided one of the main tools for analyzing protein stability. Residues in the hydrophobic core seem to play a key role in stabilizing proteins and determining their detailed structure. Current Opinion in Structural Biology 1992, 2:46-51

Introduction
Understanding protein stability, which is determined by the difference between the free energies of the native and denatured conformations, is an important part of under° standing how the sequence of a protein determines its three-dimensional structure. Moreover, issues of stability affect how we think about protein evolution, design, and folding pathways. Comparing the stabilities and structures of proteins differing by one or a few amino acids has been one of the major ways of testing and refining our knowledge of the determinants of protein stability.

Two somewhat surprising results of the T4 lysozyme study were that glutamine could be accommodated at many buried positions, and that proline could be accommodated at many surface positions in a-helices [2°°]. In contrast, in related studies in )~ repressor, strongly polar residues like glutamine were never allowed at buried positions, and proline was never allowed in a-helices [3,7]. These differences probably reflect the fact that such substitutions are destabilizing (see below), with some proteins being more stable and thus less sensitive to destabilization. Alternatively, such differences could reflect the stringency of the genetic tests of protein activity used in the two systems.

Tolerance to amino acid substitutions
Genetic studies can be used to determine the tolerance of positions in a protein to amino acid substitutions and thereby to determine the relative importance of different residues to protein structure and function [1,2°°,3-5]. The most complete work in this area is that of Poteete and his colleagues [2o°], who have used amber suppression to determine the effects of substituting Gly, Ala, Ser, Cys, Pro, Leu, Gin, Glu, His, Phe, Tyr, Arg and Lys at 163 of the 164 residue positions in phage T4 lysozyme. Using a genetic screen in which 3% or more of the wild-type level of activity was required, only 328 of the 2015 substitutions were found to be deleterious. At more than half of the positions, all of the substitutions were acceptable. At the remaining positions, an average of two-thirds of the substitutions were acceptable. Positions in the hydrophobic core of T4 lysozyme were generally more sensitive to substitution than surface positions, with proline and the polar amino acids Glu, Lys and Arg being notably excluded from most interior positions [2°°]. Similar trends have been observed in other systems and, in general, buried residues are far less tolerant of substitutions than surface residues [3,6]. Some surface residues, however, including those involved in salt bridges, hydrogen bonds and aromatic-aromatic interactions, can also have restricted substitution patterns which suggest a role for them in protein stability [2°°,3].

Tolerance to insertions and deletions
If proteins can accommodate most side-chain substitutions without loss of function, then what about more dramatic changes such as insertions or deletions? Sondek and Shortle [8°°] constructed and examined the effects of single glycine or alanine insertions at 20 sites within a-helices, 13-strands, tums, loops or extended regions o f staphylococcal nuclease. Although some of the mutants had extremely low enzymatic activity, indicating changes in structure, the remarkable finding was that mutants with insertions at 14 of the sites were fully active. Clearly, although there must be some structural changes in the latter mutants, such changes are not propagated to the active site. As might be expected, the insertion mutants were less stable than wild-type nudease, with an average destab'dization of roughly 6 kcal m o l - 1 for insertions in a-helices and 13-strands, and 4 k c a l m o l - 1 for those in loops, turns, etc. Although these energies may seem large, at many positions the insertions were no more destabilizing than substitution mutations in which one or the other of the flanking residues were replaced with glycine or alanine! Deletion of a side chain to the C a or CI3 position will simply remove atoms from the structure, whereas an insertion of an entire residue will move the flanking residues apart by at least 3 A and will introduce a number of additional atoms. That the protein is able to accommodate such modifications indicates that there must be

46

~) Current Biology Ltd ISSN 0959-440X

Mutational analysisof protein stability Sauer and Lim 47
alternative structural arrangements (involving either local or global perturbations) that are acceptable within the context of the protein's basic folded structure. Systematic studies of deletions in proteins have not been reported, and it will be interesting to see if proteins are as tolerant to small deletions as they are to small insertions. In one case, however, Poole etal. [9"] recovered a variant of staphylococcal nuclease in which six residues of an fl-loop near the active site were deleted. Although the mutant was less active than the wild type, it was found to be 2.5kcalmo1-1 more stable. This increase in stability may result from a decrease in the conformational entropy of the denatured state. some cases, these penalties may approach or exceed the net stability of the folded protein.

Hydrophobic packing in the protein core
It has been proposed that there are significant constraints on the volume and side-chain shape of core residues, in addition to the simple requirement that they be largely hydrophobic [13]. This issue was addressed in ~ repressor by randomizing three interacting core positions using only the five hydrophobic amino acids Val, Ile, Leu, Met and Phe [14..]. All fully active sequences had core residue volumes within two methylene equivalents of the wild-type volume. This suggests that maintaining a reasonable packing density is energetically important. Nevertheless, mutant proteins differing from the wild type by - 3 to + 5 methylene equivalents were found to retain some activity [7,14o.]. In a related study on the fd gene V protein, active core variants differed from the wild type by - 8 to + 4 methylene equivalents [15"" ]. These results indicate that protein folding does not have a strict volume or packing requirement. The native protein can accommodate alterations in the core, albeit often with reduced stability and/or propagation of structural changes to the surfaces of the protein that mediate activity. To what extent can we understand the stability changes that occur when one hydrophobic residue is substituted for another in the core? At some core positions, the relative stabilities of a series of substituted proteins are reasonably close to those calculated from changes in the free energies of transfer of the appropriate side chains [ 16] and show a linear correlation with side-chain volume [17]. When many different core substitutions are compared, however, it becomes clear that there is no simple correlation between stability and changes in either sidechain hydrophobicity or volume [14--,15o.,16-22,23o.]. This indicates that the interior of a protein cannot be modelled as a non-polar liquid [15"']. As discussed above, the core can adapt to significant alterations in packing. Nevertheless, the steric properties of core side chains must be important for both stability and structure as simply switching the positions of two core residues can lead to large differences [15..]. For example, a variant of the fd gene V protein with the core combination Leu35-Val47 is approximately 4 kcal m o l - 1 more stable than the variant with Val35-Leu47. Similar substitutions in different contexts can also have different effects. For example, a valine to isoleucine substitution at position 36 of ~. repressor is stabilizing by 1 kcal m o l - 1 [14oo], whereas at position 75 in dihydrofolate reductase, the identical substitution is destabilizing by 2 kcal m o l - 1 [20]. XX~hen a hydrophobic side chain in the core is replaced by one of different shape or larger volume, the resulting stability effects are complicated by potential steric clashes and/or structural perturbations. Even when mutations simply reduce the size of the side chain, the same core substitutions can have quite different effects depending upon the core position chosen. Thus, in staphylococcal nuclease, the average destabilization resulting

Polar residues in the protein core
As mentioned above, most polar substitutions in the hydrophobic core seem to be unacceptable [2"',3,7]. This presumably reflects the strong need of individual polar groups to satisfy their hydrogen-bonding potential. Polar or charged amino acids, however, are occasionally found in protein interiors. Are hydrophilic groups required at such positions or are they simply tolerated? Two studies suggest that polar groups are not required and in fact are destabilizing [10-,11.]. Asn51 in yeast iso-l-cytochrome c is a buried residue that is hydrogen bonded to the heme and to several nearby polar side chains. Replacing Asn51 with isoleucine, however, increases-the stability of the protein by 4.2 kcal m o l - 1 [10o]. In the crystal structure of the I1e51 mutant, there are local side-chain movements but no changes in the positions of any main-chain atoms. Another example occurs in Esc~ricbia coli thioredoxin, where the side-chain oxygens of ASp26 are buried in a deep hydrophobic cavity near the active-site disulfide. Replacing Asp26 with alanine results in a mutant that is 3.7 kcal m o l - 1 more stable than the wild type near neutral pH [11.]. Both Asn51 in the cytochrome c family and ASp26 in the thioredoxin family are conserved residues. AS they are not required for protein stability (and in fact are destabilizing), their conservation presumably indicates a functional role. As discussed above, T4 lysozyme appears to tolerate the presence of polar glutamine residues at many positions within its core [2o.]. Do the polar portions of these residues remain in the core or do they manage to escape to the solvent? Although the answer to this question is not known, the Va166Lys substitution in staphylococcal nuclease provides an interesting example of the response of a protein to a newly introduced polar side chain [12-]. Val66 is buried in the nuclease core and the lysine substitution is destabilizing by 7.5 kcal m o l - 1 at neutral pH. Nevertheless, the e-amino group of the lysine is seen to be fully buried within the core in the crystal structure. Taken together, these studies of proteins in which buried polar side chains are either introduced or removed indicate that polar groups can be accommodated in protein cores, but often with significant energetic penalties. In

48 Foldingand binding
from nine different valine or alanine substitutions at positions that are greater than 95% buried was found to be 2.65kcalmol-1 [23"']. Substituting alanine for Valll4, however, caused no change in stability, whereas substituting alanine for Vall 11 destabilized the nuclease by 4.7 kcal m o l - 1. Because the sensitivity of proteins to changes in core residue shape and size can vary considerably from one buried position to another, several authors have suggested that core positions might be divided into different classes, some having intrinsically higher levels of deformability [15-°,20]. Core positions might also be divided on the basis of their potential effects on the denatured state. Thus, Shortle and colleagues [23 .o] found that alanine or glycine substitutions in one part of the nuclease core led to increases in m-values whereas the same substitutions in another part of the core led to decreases in m-values. An m-value gives a quantitative measure of the decrease in free energy of folding as a function of denaturant concentration, and changes in m-value are often taken as indicating changes in the compactness or solvent accessibility of the denatured state. Although such changes cannot be interpreted rigorously, they highlight the fact that mutations can affect the denatured as well as the native state of proteins [24..]. How do native proteins respond structurally to mutations that alter core residue size? When larger side chains are inserted in the core of T4 lysozyme, potential overlaps are avoided through subtle movement of contacting residues [19]. In many cases, the mutant side chain and nearby residues adopt slightly less favorable side-chain dihedral and bond angles. Interior mutations are also accommodated by main-chain atom displacements of up to 0.5A. Similar results have been observed in a bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor mutant in which a buried disulfide bond is replaced by two alanine residues [25]. The void left by the loss of the two sulfur atoms is filled as a result of concerted structural rearrangements, including the slight shift of an a-helical segment. In the Cys6Ala mutant of superoxide dismutase, the Ca and CI3 atoms of the alanine as well as adjacent side-chain atoms move toward the vacancy created by the detected sulfur atom, resulting in good overall packing [26]. Significant shifts occur in many main-chain atoms, and the hydrogen-bond geometry in the mutant appears slightly better than in the wild type because two 13-strands move closer together. There are, however, limits to the degree of rearrangement that can occur in a protein core. Whereas most internal mutations in subtilisin also result in structural rearrangements, in one case, a cavity created by mutation was found to persist [27]. Presumably, rearranging the structure to eliminate this cavity is energetically unfavorable. In an attempt to better understand the consequences of changes in core packing, Lee and te~tt [28o°] have devised a computational algorithm that moves a set of core side chains through different side-chain conformations, seeking arrangements that are well packed in the context of the rest of the protein. Good packing is defined by a simple energy function that includes van tier Waals and torsional potentials. Although the method explicitly ignores many factors that undoubtedly come into play in the real world, it performed surprisingly well in ranking 78 different ~, repressor mutant combinations in a way that correlated with their measured activities. Moreover, there was also a reasonable correlation between the rank order of the calcultated energies and the experimentally determined melting temperatures for a set of purified mutants. These results suggest that packing interactions may be largely responsible for many of the stability and activity changes that accompany mutations in protein cores.

Surface residues and protein stability
Surface residues may contribute to protein stability in a variety of ways. In the badey chymotrypsin inhibitor, the Arg67Ala substitution disrupts a tertiary hydrogen bond with Thr58 and reduces the stability of the protein by 1.4kcalmo1-1 [29]. Hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions between side chains and the amino and carboxyt termini of a-helices seem to be another common stabilizing interaction. The stability of T4 lysozyme has been improved by 0.5-1 kcalmo1-1 by substitutions designed to introduce such interactions [30], and the stability of barnase has been reduced by as much as 2.3 kcal m o l - 1 by mutations that disrupt such interactions [31]. Interactions between aromatic groups can also play a significant role in protein stability. In barnase, Tyrl3 and Tyrl7 interact on the solvent exposed face of an 0t-helix. The stabilities of the Tyrl3Ala mutant, Tyrl7Ala mutant and the double mutant are reduced by 3.7 kcal m o l - 1, 2.3 kcal m o l - 1 and 4.6kcalmol-1, respectively [32°°]. Analysis of the thermodynamic cycle formed by wild-type barnase and the three mutants suggests that the aromatic-aromatic interaction contributes ~ 1.2 kcal m o l - 1 to stability, whereas disruption of other interactions that are mediated by each tyrosine side chain is responsible for the remaining loss of stability. Fersht and colleagues [33 °°] have also used double and triple mutant thermodynamic cycles to analyze an interesting tripartite salt bridge, in which Argll0 of barnase interacts with both Asp8 and Aspl2. Here, mutation of any of the sIngle residues to alanine reduced stability by 0.3-1 kcal m o l - 1. Moreover, the strength of either Asp-Arg interaction is dependent on the presence of the other Interaction. Thus, the Asp8-Arg110 interaction energy is - 0 . 9 8 k c a l m o l - 1 in the presence of Aspl2 but only - 0 . 2 1 k c a l m o 1 - 1 when Aspl2 is mutated to alanine. Analyses of thermodynamic cycles can reveal cooperative interactions of this type and can also reveal the positive and negative contributions of a side-chain substitution [33°°]. For example, even though the salt bridge seems to contribute to stability, as evidenced by the favorable interaction energies, these energies are offset by other factors and the triple mutant (AlaS, Ala12, Alall0) is actually slightly more stable than the wild type. This bamase salt bridge is highly exposed to solvent, which may contribute to its relatively modest stabilizing (or destabilizing) influence. In T4 lysozyme, the AspT0 and His31 side chains form a salt bridge that is only partially

Mutational analysis of protein stability Sauer and Lira 49
accessible to solvent. The His31Asn mutant, Asp70Asn mutant and the double mutant all have stabilities reduced by ~ 4 kcal m o l - 1, suggesting that, in this case, the native salt bridge contributes significantly to stabilization of the protein [34]. The surface residues discussed thus far have been involved in side chain-side chain or side chain-backbone interactions. Stability effects, however, have also been observed for substitutions of surface residues that are n o t involved in any obvious interactions. In ~ Cro, replacing a hyper-exposed surface residue resulted in proteins whose stabilities were inversely proportional to the hydrophobicity of the substituted amino acid [35]. Thus, replacing the wild-type tyrosine by valine, glutamine or aspartate increased the stability of the mutant proteins by 0.45 kcalmo1-1, 0.7kcalmo1-1 and 1.35kcalmo1-1 per side-chain, respectively. In this case, it was suggested that the hydrophobic side chains were more exposed to solvent in the native structure than in the denatured state, thereby giving rise to a 'reverse' hydrophobic effect. In principle, such effects could contribute to stability changes for any surface position where solvent accessibility is reduced as a consequence of denaturation. Surface residues can also affect protein stability through effects on secondary structure propensity. This effect is likely to arise, in part, from the restriction of side-chain conformations. For example, Vail31 in T4 lysozyme is an exposed cz-helical residue whose side-chain x l angle is strained to avoid a steric clash with a carbonyl oxygen in the preceding turn of the s-helix [36]. This strained interaction is relieved in the Vall31Ala mutant and the stability of the mutant protein is increased by ~0.2 kcalmol- 1 Additional increases in stability were also obtained when nearby surface residues in the helix were replaced with alanine, which is generally a good helix-forming residue [37"']. To assess the helix-forming tendencies of different amino acids, O'Neil and DeGrado [38"'] determined the stabilities of a leucine-zipper-type protein with each of the 20 amino acids inserted at a surface position in the center of an cz-helix. The proline mutant was about 3 kcal moJ- 1 less stable then any of the other variants. Of the remaining 19 proteins, the most stable (alanine) differed fronf the least stable (glycine) by 0.7 kcal m o l - 1 per side chain. Overall, the ranking of helix-forming tendencies from this study corresponded with independent estimates of the relative helix-forming abilities of the different amino acids from peptide studies [39-41]. Recent advances in understanding protein secondary structure formation are reviewed by Ptitsyn (pp 13-20) elsewhere in this section. The destabilizing effects of proline in the middle of an 0t-helix are thought to be caused both by a kinking of the helix and by loss of an intrahelical hydrogen bond. Prolines at the amino-terminal ends of s-helices should acttmlly be favorable, however, as there would be no distortion or loss of hydrogen bonding and the ~b-angle of proline is already constrained to the s-helical value of - 6 0 °. In X repress.r, a solvent-exposed proline at the amino-terminal end, of an 0t-helix does seem to be stabilizing as the Pro+Ala mutation reduces the stability of the protein by 1.6kcalmo1-1 [42].

Summary and perspective
Some residues in a protein sequence are more important than others in stabilizing the folded structure. This is evident in studies of mutational tolerance and has been shown directly by studying proteins modified by one or a small number of amino acid substitutions. Residues in the hydrophobic core play a major role and mutations at these positions can have large effects on stability. Nevertheless, other residues in the protein engage in a variety of interactions that often contribute to stability in significant ways. Recent studies have given us a better idea of the ability of proteins to accommodate different kinds of amino acid substitutions as well as more drastic modifications such as insertions. It is still difficult to predict the precise effects of any substitution on protein structure and/or stability. Moreover, although it is generally easy to rationalize an observed change in stability, it is difficult to be sure that one's hypothesis is correct. It is probably very rare for stability changes to reflect only a single factor, such as loss of a hydrogen bond, changes in hydrophobicity, .or changes in secondary structure propensity. Careful structural studies, examination of multiple mutations at the same position, similar mutations at many different positions and mutations that remove sets of interacting residues can help to reveal the different factors that contribute to the stability changes. However, partitioning stability changes into a meaningful sum of the individual energy changes that occur between the native and denatured states of the mutant and wild-type proteins remains a challenge for the future.

Acknowledgements
We thank J Hu for helpful comments. Work in our laboratory is supported by NIH grant AI-15706.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particularinterest, publishedwithin the annual period of review, have been highlightedas: · of special interest o0 of outstanding interest 1. KLEin MdI.LER Genetic Studies of the Lac Represso~ LG, JH: XIII. ExtensiveAmino Acid Replacements Generated by the
Use of Natural and Synthetic Nonsense Suppressors. J Mol
Biol

1990, 212:295-318.

RENNELL BOUVIER SE, HARDY LW, POTEETE AR: Systematic D, Mutation of Bacteriophage T4 Lysozyme. J Mol Biol 1991, 222:67-88. A comprehensive study of the effects of over 2000 amino acid substitutions on the activity in vivo of T4 lysozyme. 2. ..

50

Folding and binding 3.
BOWIEJU, SAUER RT: Identifying Determinants of Folding and Stability for a Protein of Unknown Structure. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989, 86:2152-2156.
REIDHAAR-OLSON SAUER RT: Functionally Acceptable SubJF, stitutions in Two u-Helical Regions of ~, Repressor. Proteins 1990, 7:306-316.

18.

SANDBERG WS, TERWIILLGERTC: Influence of Interior Packing and Hydrophobicity on the Stability of a Protein. Science 1989, 245:54-57.
KARPUSASM, BAASE WA, MATSUMURA M, MATrHEWS BW: Hydrophobic Packffag Mutants in T4 Lysozyme Probed by Cavity-filling Mutants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989, 86:8237-8241. GARVEY MATrHEWSCI~ Effects of Multiple Replacements EP, at a Single Position on the Folding and Stability o f Dihydrofolate Reductase from Escherichia coll. Biochemistry 1989, 28:2083-2093. CONNELLYPR, VARADARAJANR, STURTEVANTJM, RICHARDS FM: Thermodynamics of Protein-Peptide Interactions in the Ribonuclease S System Studied by Titration Calorimetry. Bi~ chemistry 1990, 29:6108-6114. KELtJSJT, NYBERG K, FERSHT AR: Energetics of Complementary Side Chain Packing in a Protein Hydrophobic Core. Biochemistry 1989, 28:4914-4922.

4.

19.

5.

LOEB DD, SWANSTROMR, EVERrrr L, MANCHESTERM, STAMPER SE, HUTCHINSON CA: Complete Mutagenesis of the HIV-1 Protease. Nature 1989, 340:397-400. BOWIE JU, REIDHAAR-OLSON LIM WA, SAUERRT: DecipherJF, ing the Message in Protein Sequences: Tolerance to Amino Acid Substitutions. Science 1990, 247:1306--1310.
LIM WA~ SALTER RT: Alternative Packing Arrangements in the Hydrophobic C o r e o f Lambda Repressor. Nature 1989, 339:31-36.

20.

6.

21.

7.

8.
ee

SONDEK SHORTLED: Accommodation of Single Amino Acid J,

22.

Insertions by the Native State of Staphylococcal Nuclease. Proteins 1990, 7:299-305. A study showing that staphylococcal nuclease variants modified by the insertion of single glycine or alanine residues are often fully active and surprisingly stable. POOLE LB, LOVEYS DA, HALE SP, GERLT JA: Deletion of the ~-Loop in the Active Site of Staphylococcal Nuclease: 1. Effect on Catalysis and Stability. Biochemistry 1991, 30:3621-3627. A study showing that deletion of six residues actually stabilizes the mutam protein. HICKEYDR, BERGHUISAM, LAFONDG, JAEGERJA~ CARDILLOTS, McLENI~N D, DAS G, SHERMAN F, BRAYER GD, MCLENIX)N G: Enhanced Thermodynamic Stabilities of Yeast Iso-lcytochrome c with Amino Acid Replacements at Positions 52 and 102. J Biol Chem 1991, 256:11686-11694. A study of the effect of different substitutions on the stability and structure of yeast iso-l-cytochrome LANGSETMO K, FUCHS JA, WOODWARD C: The Conserved, Buried Aspartic Acid in Oxidized Escherichia coli Thioredoxin has a pKa of 7.5. Its Titration Produces a Related Shift in Global Stability. BioJxrmistry 1991, 30:7603-7609. A study showing that substitution of a buried aspartic acid by alanine results in significant stabilization of thioredoxin. STITESWE, GITrls AG, SHORTLE D, LATrMANEE: In a Staphylococcal Nuclease Mutant the Side Chain of a Lysine Replacing Valine 66 is Fully Buried in the Hydrophobic Core. J Mol Biol 1991, 221:7-14. A study of the stability and structure of a staphylococcal nuclease mutam in which a lysine residue has been introduced into the core. 13. PONDERJW, RICHARDSFM: Tertiary Templates for Proteins. Use of Packing Criteria in the Enumeration of Allowed Sequences for Different Structural Classes. J Mol Biol 1987, 193:775-791. 12. · 11. · 10. · 9. ·

SHORTLED, STrrES WE, MEEKER AK: Contributions of the Large Hydrophobic Amino Acids to the Stability of Staphylococcal Nuclease. Biochemistry 1990, 29:8033--8041. A study of the stabilities of 83 variants of staphylococcal nuclease modified by replacing large hydrophobic residues with glycine or alanine. 24. DILL KA, SHORTLED: Denatured States of Proteins. A n n u Rev .. Biochem 1991, 60:795-825. An excellent review of theory and experiments directed at understanding the denatured conformations of proteins. 25. EIGENBROTC, RANDAL M, KOSSLAKOFFAA: Structural Effects Induced by Removal of a Disulfide-bridge: the X-ray Structure of the C30A/C51A Mutant of Basic Pancreatic Trypsin Inhibitor at 1.61L Protein Eng 1990, 3:591-598. MCREEDE, REDFORD SM, GETZOFF ED, LEPOCKJR, ~ L L RA, TAINER JA: Changes in Crystallographic Structure and Thermostability of a Cu, Zn Superoxide Dismutase Mutant Resulting from the Removal of a Buried Cysteine. J Biol Chem 1990, 265:14234--14241. KATZB, KOSSIAKOFFAA: Crystal Structures of Subtilisin BPN' Variants Containing Disulfide Bonds and Cavities: Concerted Structural Rearrangements Induced by Mutagenesis. Proteins 1990, 7:343-357.

23. ee

26.

27.

LEE C, LEVITt M: Accurate Prediction of the Stability and Activity Effects of Site-directed Mutagenesis on a Protein Core. Nature 1991, 352:448~51. Calculation of the stabilization energies for 78 variants of ~. repressor modified by hydrophobic substitutions in a three-residue packing unit in the core. 29. JANDUSK, RAY S, BROOKS L, LEATHERBARROW Role of ArgiRJ: nine 67 in the Stabilization of Chymotrypsin Inhibitor 2: Examination of Amide Proton Exchange Rates and Denaturation Thermodynamics of an Engineered Protein. Biochem/stry 1990, 29:6264-6269. NICHOLSON BECKTELWJ, MATFHEWSBW: Enhanced Protein H, Thermostability from Designed Mutations that Interact with ~t-Helix Dipoles. Nature 1988, 366:651-656. SERRANO FERSHTAt~ Capping and at-Helix Stability. Nature ~ 1989, 342:296-299.

28. ··

LIM WA, SALTERRT: The Role of Internal Packing Interactions in Determining the Structure and Stability of a Protein. J Mol Biol 1991, 219:359-376. A study showing that almost 70% of all combinations of Phe, Ile, Met, Leu and Val can be accommodated in a three-residue packing unit in' the core of ~ repressor. 14. ee 15. SANDBERGWS, TERWILLIGERTC: Energetics of Repacking a ·· Protein Core. Proc N a a Acad Sct USA 1991, 88:1706-1710. A study of the stabilities of 30 variants of f d gene V protein bearing hydrophobic substitutions at two positions in the core. 16. MATSUMURA BECKTELWJ, MATIHEWSBW: Hydrophobic StaM, bilization in T4 Lysozyme Determined Directly by Multiple Substitutions of Ile3. Nature 1988, 334:406-410. MALCOLM BA, WILSON KP, MATITtEWS BW, KIP6CHJF, WIISON AC: Ancestral Lysozymes Reconstructed, Neutrality Tested, and Thermostability Linked to Hydrocarbon Packing. Nature 1990, 345:86-89.

30.

31. 32. .·

SERRANO[~ BYCROFT M, FERSHT AR: Aromatic-Aromatic Interactions and Protein Stability: Investigation by Doublemutant Cycles. J Mol Biol 1991, 218:465~75. An analysis, using double mutant thermodynamic cycles, of the interaction energy of a tyrosine-tyrosine surface interaction in bamase. HOROVITLAH, SERRANO L, AVRON B, BYCROFT M, FERSHT AR: Strength and Cooperativity of Contributions of Surface Salt Bridges to Protein Stability. J Mol Biol 1990, 216:1031-1044. A study of the interaction energies of surface salt bridges in barnase using double and triple mutant cycles. 33. .·

17.

Mutational analysis of protein stability S a u e r a n d Lira
34 . ANDERSON DE, BECKTELWJ, DAHLQUISTFW: pH-induced Denaturation of Proteins: a Single Salt Bridge Contributes 3--5 kcal/mole to the Free Energy of Folding of T4 Lysozyme. Biochemistry 1990, 29:2403-2408. PAKULA SAUERRT: Reverse Hydrophobic Effects Relieved AA, by Amino Acid Substitutions at a Protein Surface. Nature 1990, 344:363-364. A study of the stabilities of variants of a leucine-zipper-type protein with all 20 commonly occurring amino acids at a surface position in an orhelix. 39. PADMANABHAN S, MARQUESEE S, RIDGEWAY T, LAUE TM, BALDWINRL: Relative Helix-forming Tendencies of Nonpolar Residues. Nature 1991, 344:268-270. LYU PC, IJFF MI, MARKYLA, KALLENBACHNR: Side Chain Contributions to the Stability of Alpha-helical Structure in Peptides. Science 1990, 250:669-673. MERUTKA STELLWAGENE: Positional Independence and AdG, ditivity of Amino Acid Replacements on Helix Stability in Monomeric Peptides. Biochemistry 1990, 29:894-898. REIDHAAR-OKSON PARSELLDA, SAUERRT: An Essential ProJF, line in ~. Repressor is Required for Resistance to Intracellular Proteolysis. Biochemistry 1990, 29:7563-7571.

51

35.

40.

36.

DAO-PIN S, BAASE WA, MATrHEWS BW: A Mutant T4 Lysozyme (Vall31--*Ala) Designed to Increase Thermostability by the Reduction of Strain Within an ~t-Hellx. Proteins 1990, 7:198-204. 41.

ZHANGXJ, BAASEWA, MATrHEWS BW: Toward a Simplifica. tion of the Protein Folding Problem: a Stabilizing Polyalanine c~-Helix Engineered in T4 Lysozyme. Biochemistry 1991, 30:2012-2017. A study of the stability and structure of a T4 lysozyme variant containing a potyalanine ~x-helix. 38.

37. oo

42.

eo

O'NEILKT, DEGRADO WF: A Thermodynamic Scale for the Helix-forming Tendencies of the Commonly Occurring Amino Acids. Science 1990, 250:646-651.

RT Sauer and WA Lira, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Biology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

