Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 101 (2009) 26e37

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pbiomolbio

Counterdiffusion methods applied to protein crystallization
Fermín Otálora a, José Antonio Gavira a, Joseph D. Ng b, Juan Manuel García-Ruiz a, *
a b

Laboratorio de Estudios Cristalográficos (IACT), CSIC-Universidad de Granada, Av. de la Innovación s/n, Armilla (Granada), Spain Laboratory for Structural Biology, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alabama in Huntsville, Huntsville, AL 35899, USA

a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history: Available online 16 December 2009 Keywords: Counterdiffusion Protein crystallization Screening Crystal quality Microfluidics Crystallization in gels

a b s t r a c t
Accumulated experience during the last years on counterdiffusion crystallization methods shows that they are a convenient and generally applicable way of optimizing solution crystal growth experiments. Irrespective of whether the objective of the experiment is to improve crystal quality or size, many experiments reporting a positive or neutral effect of counterdiffusion exists, but adverse effects are consistently absent. Thus counterdiffusion is viewed as a rational crystallization approach to minimize supersaturation and impurity levels at the crystal growth front and to ensure steadiness of both values. This control of the phase transition state is automatically achieved and sustained by a dynamic equilibrium between mass transport and aggregation kinetics. The course of this function can be implemented in any media permitting diffusive mass transport (gels, capillaries, microfluidic devices or microgravity). The counterdiffusion technique has been exploited in many recent applications revealing interesting effects on nucleation and polymorphic precipitation, hence opening further possibilities for innovative screening of crystallization conditions. Ó 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction The objective of a vast majority of protein crystal growth experiments is to produce samples suitable for X-ray diffraction and deciphering the protein's three-dimensional structure at atomic resolution (Drenth, 1999 and McPherson, 1999). The accuracy of the protein structure is limited by the statistical quality of the diffraction data that is affected by the order of the crystal. Ultimately, if a protein can be crystallized, its quality is highly influenced by the protein's purity and how the crystals are grown (Garcia-Ruiz and Otálora, 2004). There are many established techniques to grow protein crystals. The most common include batch and vapor diffusion techniques (Ducruix and Giege, 2004). Batch crystallization is an equilibrium process that entails immediate mixing of protein and precipitating solutions. As a result, a supersaturation condition is rapidly achieved such that nucleation can occur in an irreproducible manner after convective mixing (Howard et al., 2009). Vapor diffusion, on the other hand, can be prepared in hanging or sitting droplet configurations. This technique is less sensitive to mixing issues but is subject to solute convection derived from the evaporation at the gas/liquid interface. Both techniques have inherent buoyancy-driven convection during

* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ34 669 434 700; fax: þ34 958 181 632. E-mail address: jmgruiz@ugr.es (J.M. García-Ruiz). 0079-6107/$ e see front matter Ó 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2009.12.004

the crystal growth process due to solute depletion near the crystal surface and sedimentation in the crystal droplet. Consequently, crystals are grown in a heterogeneous environment compromising uniform crystal growth and quality. Both chaotic mixing and evaporation driven convection can be reduced or eliminated when the crystallization process is allowed to proceed by diffusively mixing the protein and precipitant solutions in a restricted geometry. This technique involves the placement of the protein solution adjacent to that of the precipitant whereby the solutions are initially in contact to one another and intermixing proceeds by diffusion. There are several implementations that allow two solutions to mix by diffusion (see Section 4 and García-Ruiz, 2003). Most of them, usually called liquideliquid diffusion or free-interface diffusion are designed with the aim of reaching the critical supersaturation for nucleation very slowly, seeking for a single nucleation event (Zeppezauer et al., 1968; Weber and Goodkin, 1970; Salemme, 1972; Salemme, 1974; Weber and Salemme, 1977). Hence typical free-interface diffusion experiments can be considered as batch experiments conducted at a very slow rate of mixing of solutions (Otálora and Garcia-Ruiz, 1997) thus allowing a wider and richer screening for precipitation conditions than batch or vapor diffusion procedures. However, in our opinion, the best implementation that includes all the advantages of mixing by liquid diffusion is the counterdiffusion technique. In counterdiffusion, the protein and

F. Otálora et al. / Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 101 (2009) 26e37

27

precipitant are initially prepared in contact to one another in a narrow geometry such that diffusion is limiting. This can be achieved in cylindrical chambers such as a capillary where the cross section is very small with respect to the container length. Unlike other techniques aimed at finding initial conditions close to equilibrium, counterdiffusion looks for initial high values of supersaturation thus provoking even the formation of amorphous precipitates at the earliest stages of the experiment. Then, by using a long protein chamber (for instance a glass capillary rather than a drop) the technique exploits the simultaneous event of diffusion and crystallization giving rise to a supersaturation gradient along the length of the crystallization chamber (see Section 3). By its very nature, the counterdiffusion technique requires an experimental implementation in which mass transport is governed by diffusion. Different ways to achieve a diffusive mass transport scenario are discussed in Section 2. In Section 4 we describe several devices to implement the counterdiffusion technique emphasizing the use of glass capillaries. Section 5 explains the nucleation in counterdiffusion technique and their novel use for screening of crystallization conditions, while in Section 6 we discuss in details why counterdiffusion techniques yield crystals of the highest quality. Finally, Section 7 discusses the last approaches to use counterdiffusion for growing large crystals for neutron diffraction studies.

GrN ¼ L3 bl DcgnÀ2
where L is the thickness of the cell (cm), Dc is the concentration difference, bl is the solutal expansivity in cm3/mg (the ratio of change in density to change in concentration) and n is the kinematic viscosity (cm2/s). The smaller the value of the Grashof number, the smaller the importance of convective flow in a particular system. The value of GrN suggest three main ways to reduce convection from a protein crystallization experiment. The first is to increase the kinematic viscosity of the solution (which enters in the equation to the second power) by adding, for instance, carbohydrates or long polymers. The second is much more effective and consists of gelling the solution, i.e., to reduce L (which goes to the third power). Using a gel reduces the characteristic size L of a container such as a test tube to the size of the pore of the gel, thus reducing L by a factor of 10À5. As experimentally demonstrated, agarose gels are extremely effective in reducing advective mass and heat transport in protein crystallization experiments (Garcia-Ruiz et al., 2001a; Gavira and Garcia-Ruiz, 2002). In ungelled experiments, L can be reduced using capillary volumes, such as glass capillaries with a diameter below 200 microns or microfluidic devices (Gerdts et al., 2006; Hansen et al., 2006, 2002; van der Woerd et al., 2003; Zheng et al., 2005, 2003; Zheng and Ismagilov, 2005; Squires and Quake, 2005). Finally, convection free crystallization experiments can be done in microgravity using facilities for protein crystallization provided by international space agencies. In microgravity, g is reduced in the above equation. In ideal microgravity experiments, the value of the Grashof number can be decreased by a factor of 10À6. In practice, the reduction of g achievable in most manned flights is in the range of 10À3e10À4. Thus gel experiments are much more effective than space experiments in removing convective flow (Garcia-Ruiz et al., 2001a). 3. How counterdiffusion works A counterdiffusion experiment starts with a chamber (for instance a glass capillary) filled with the protein solution. One of the ends of the protein chamber must be in contact with a chamber containing the solution of the precipitating agent. This contact must avoid convective mixing to allow the mass transport of protein and precipitating agent molecules to proceed only by diffusion. The concentration of protein in the protein chamber could be the one typical in protein crystallization experiments, namely between 4 mg/ml and 20 mg/ml while higher concentration can be also used. However, it is recommended that the concentration of the precipitating agent solution is very high, even close to saturation. When these conditions are fulfilled, it is possible to exploit the coupling between diffusion and precipitation, which is known to trigger remarkable precipitation patterns, such as Liesegang's structures. Henisch and Garcia-Ruiz (1986a,b) have discussed the basis of the technique for crystallization of small molecules, which are formed upon the reaction of two soluble compounds. In the case of macromolecules where the crystallization is triggered by a reduction of solubility instead of by a chemical reaction, the technique works in a slightly different way as the molecules of precipitating agent are not appreciably consumed during crystallization (Otálora and Garcia-Ruiz, 1996, 1997). After setting the experiment, the molecules of the precipitating agent diffuse faster towards the protein solution and provoke at the liquideliquid interface the formation of an amorphous phase or a microcrystalline precipitate. Immediately, the concentration of protein in the vicinity of the precipitate decreases but the molecules of precipitant diffuse further beyond the precipitate. As the process continues, a gradual supersaturation gradient is formed allowing proteins to nucleate and undergo crystal growth in

2. Protein crystallization in diffusive environments The Brownian velocity of protein molecules (molecular weight 104e106 Da) at room temperature is v ¼ (3 kT/m)1/2 ¼ 2.7e27 m/s (depending on the molecular weight of the protein), at least five orders of magnitude larger than the typical value for bulk natural convection in normal protein crystallization setups. All molecularscale processes involved in protein crystal growth are unaffected by convective flow (Grant and Saville, 1991). The force generated by free convection is eight orders of magnitude too small to strip protein molecules from the crystal surface. In addition, the ratio of rotational and shear rates is larger than 107 so fluid flow cannot impose any relevant degree of orientation to the macromolecules being incorporated at the interface. Moreover, natural convection is at least 3 orders of magnitude slower than the velocity required to produce the slightest degree of denaturation in proteins. So, why do we care about convective mass transport in protein crystal growth? The obvious answer is that the growth of a crystal is a two-step process. Molecules must be incorporated into the crystal at the crystal/solution interface and this incorporation is controlled by molecular-level processes. Prior to this event, molecules must be transported from the bulk solution to the interface. In this case, the most relevant processes operate at the macroscopic level. Mass transport controls the concentration of the solute molecules at the crystal/solution interface out of all the chemicals involved in the crystallization processes. The overall driving force for the molecules to assemble onto the crystal lattice is a function of the local supersaturation. As a result, the kinetics of the crystal growth process is affected by the state of supersaturation and influences the incorporation rate of protein molecules or impurities. The source of crystal perfection or defects are therefore dictated by these kinetic processes. Ensuring a steady mass transport regime while maintaining a uniform growth rate is the central rationale for any successful protein crystal growth experiment and, in particular, the central paradigm of counterdiffusion methods. A way to characterize the relative contribution of convective mass transport in a given crystallization experiment is to use dimensionless numbers such as the Grashof number, GrN, that accounts for the relative importance of buoyancy and viscous forces in a fluid (GrN ¼ bouyancy force/viscous drag force). It is given by:

28

F. Otálora et al. / Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 101 (2009) 26e37

regions of lower supersaturation values resulting in fewer and larger volume crystals. Iteration of this coupled mass transport and precipitation phenomena creates a wave of supersaturation of decreasing amplitude that moves always towards equilibrium. This action elicits the formation of few crystals of the highest quality at locations far from the initial interface of mixing between the two solutions (Otálora et al., 1996; Garcia-Ruiz et al., 2001b; Lopez-Jaramillo et al., 2003). In order to fully develop this behavior, the protein chamber length must be long enough to allow the development of the spatio-temporal pattern. The processes described above account for a number of properties that makes this technique attractive for protein crystallization and screening (García-Ruiz, 2003; Ng et al., 2003, 2008b). Unlike classical crystallization techniques, counterdiffusion self searches for the best crystallization conditions. As the system is completely heterogeneous in space and time, no location in the protein chamber has the same equilibration history. As shown in Fig. 1, a single counterdiffusion experiment screens a long path across the phase diagram, thus being equivalent to a high number of vapor diffusion or batch experiments. In this illustration, the precipitation/crystallization events are independently recorded at different locations of the capillary. 4. How to implement counterdiffusion Counterdiffusion crystallization is carried out in restricted geometry. The most simple and effective configuration is the usage of thin capillaries with diameter of less than 0.2 mm. When larger diameters are used, inert gels are included in the crystallization chambers. This review will focus on the application of using capillary counterdiffusion. 4.1. Capillary devices and gels Crystallization in capillaries has been widely used to crystallize materials in small volumes for different purposes. Zeppezauer implemented the batch techniques using X-ray capillaries to slow down mass transport by the separation of protein and precipitant volumes through a dialysis membrane or a gel column (Zeppezauer et al., 1968).

In 1972 Salemme proposed the elimination of the dialysis membrane to create a liquideliquid free-interface diffusion system (Salemme, 1972). Graduate glass micropipettes were also proposed to implement microbatch technique, after mixing protein and precipitant solutions, since it provides a robust container reducing the final volume to the order of 1 ml. The narrow volume also reduces the surface area of the solution exposed to the atmosphere limiting evaporation and simplifying the setup, transport and subsequent inspection under a microscope (Luft et al., 1999). Quartz or X-ray transparent capillaries have also been used to avoid manipulation of especially fragile macromolecular crystals. Capillary-based implementations of different growth methods have been reported: batch (Wikoff et al., 1998), liquideliquid diffusion (Thunnissen et al., 1995), vapor diffusion (Bessman et al., 1991; Cockburn et al., 2003; Alvarado et al., 2001), and the so-called "plug-based crystallization" in capillaries generated using microfluidics devices (Zheng et al., 2005). The counterdiffusion technique implemented in capillaries encompasses all the advantages above mentioned and provides screening capabilities for a wide range of supersaturation and supersaturation rates in a single experiment. Three different configurations of the capillary counterdiffusion are typically used for screening and/or enhancement of crystal properties (Fig. 2). A three chamber, or three layer (3L), configuration is often used featuring protein, buffer and precipitant "chambers". The protein chamber is always implemented in the narrow portion of the capillaries. The physical buffer chamber (so called to avoid confusion with the chemical buffer added to control pH) is typically a gelled (agarose) segment separating protein and

Fig. 1. Path of the supersaturation into a capillary using the counterdiffusion technique. As the precipitant diffuses into the protein solution (confined into the capillary volume due to the lower diffusion coefficient), the interplay of the precipitation and the mass transport generate a supersaturation wave that travel along the capillary (x) as time increases (t). The picture in the lower part shows the experimental result of the evolution of the supersaturation from high nucleation density to discrete nucleation. In this case, individual well-shaped crystals of hemoglobin HbII from Lucina Pectinata are formed.

Fig. 2. Schematic representation of the three most used configuration of the counterdiffusion technique in capillaries; (A) the three layer configuration (3L) setup in a Lindeman capillary; (B) the prefilled Granada Crystallization Box Domino (GCB-DÒ, Triana S&T); and (C) the Gel Acupuncture Method, setup in a GCB-D. In all three configurations, the protein solution (red) fill the capillary. An agarose gel (violet) separates protein from the precipitant solution (grey-blue) and serves as physical support for the capillaries in the GCB-D (A) and GAME (C) configuration.

F. Otálora et al. / Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 101 (2009) 26e37

29

precipitant solutions. The role of this chamber is to delay the initial diffusion process or avoid osmotic shock. A typical example of the buffer chamber usage is to delay the first nucleation event in microgravity experiments using the Granada Crystallization Facility. This procedure is called "passive activation" of the experiments and ensures that no crystals start growing during the preorbital phase of the space mission. Setups lacking this buffer chamber are termed as "Two Layers" (2L) and are used only when the protein solution is gelled. The single capillary configuration can be used alternatively in 3L or 2L setups. The precipitant chamber usually has a volume larger (at least 3 times) than protein or buffer chambers. In some of the setups, notably in the Gel Acupuncture Method (GAME), it is possible to modify the precipitant chamber composition during the experiment. In this way, the precipitant concentration can be increased to extend the growth, to elicit nucleation/precipitation when the capillary remains clear after several weeks, or even to modify or completely replace the precipitant solution by a new cocktail. Examples of this application are the incorporation of cryo-protectant or heavy atoms in the crystal (Gavira et al., 2002). Other interesting possibilities can contemplate reactions within the crystal (Domininguez-Vera et al., 1996), etc. The differences between each setup are related to the quantitative aspects of the experiment, mainly the range of supersaturation values desired and the timing of nucleation. But all of them share basically the same qualitative principle of operation, i.e. the dynamic development of a spatial-temporal heterogeneous gradient of supersaturation in the protein chamber (see Section 3). Counterdiffusion techniques can be implemented using capillaries filled with protein solution to equilibrate with precipitants in any type of reservoir containment such as an Eppendorf tube or a test tube. In order to facilitate the implementation and follow the evolution of the experiments using optical microscopy, special containers are available, for instance the "Granada Crystallization Box" (GCB) (Garcia-Ruiz et al., 2002) and the "T-tubes" (Tanaka et al., 2004). GCB-Domino is a plastic flat test tube very convenient for capillary counterdiffusion. Several examples of proteins crystallized using GCB and GCBDomino for initial screening and optimization can be found in the literature (Martinez-Rodriguez et al., 2006, 2008; Camara-Artigas et al., 2007; Ruiz-Martinez et al., 2009) (Fig. 3). The single capillary setup in 2L or 3L configuration has been widely used to improve crystal quality with several proteins that fails to produce high quality crystal with other techniques. For instance Hjc resolvase from Archaeoglobus fulgidus (Biertumpfel et al., 2005) and oxyHbII from lucina pectianta (Gavira et al., 2006), have been crystallized in capillaries of 0.3 and 0.2 mm diameter using 2L and 3L configurations respectively. In both cases the protein solution of Hjc and oxyHbII were gelled with 0.3 and 0.1% (w/v) agarose concentration respectively. 2L and 3L single capillary setups were employed to crystallize several systems including globular proteins (Lopez-Jaramillo et al., 2001), RNA and DNAeprotein complexes (Biertumpfel et al., 2002) or big membrane proteins complex such as PSIIcc from higher plants (Kuta Smatanova et al., 2006). In all the configurations of the capillary counterdiffusion technique crystal quality along the capillary can be initially tested for X-ray diffraction at room temperature by mounting the whole capillary, or a part of it, on a standard goniometric head (Ng et al., 2003). Using a laboratory source, complete data set can be acquired and the structured solved from those data (CamaraArtigas et al., 2007) while for synchrotron radiation sources, data collection needs to be done under cryo-conditions to avoid radiation damage. In this case, the type and concentration of cryoprotectant must be selected by screening. In 2L and 3L setups cryogenic agents can be initially included in the precipitant

chamber (Lopez-Jaramillo et al., 2001) alone or in combination with heavy atoms for phasing (Gavira et al., 2002; Ng et al., 2003) avoiding any mechanical (crystal handling) or chemical (osmotic) stress. Fig. 4 shows a flash-cooled crystal in a nitrogen stream within the capillary were it was grown. When the crystallization cocktail contains the cryo-protectant, crystals can be extracted from the capillary to follow a standard cryo-protection protocol (Gavira et al., 2006; Martinez-Rodriguez et al., 2006; Ruiz-Martinez et al., 2009). When crystals of large size are obtained in capillaries of 0.1 mm in diameter, it is recommended to equilibrate a portion of capillary containing the selected crystal, with an isotonic or slightly hypertonic precipitant solution containing the cryo-protectant agent (Martinez-Rodriguez et al., 2008). Different portions of the capillary containing crystals can be used to test different cryogenic agent, heavy atom, or additives, including small ligands. 4.2. Counterdiffusion crystallization in micro-channels The counterdiffusion crystallization technique has also been applied in micro-channel or microfluidic formats where protein crystals obtained were suitable for in situ X-ray data collection and crystallographic structure determination. Narrow diameters of less than 0.1 mm in channel lengths ranging from 1 to 10 cm fixed in transparent plastic constructs give the possibility to screen and optimize micromoles of biological macromolecular crystallization in a completely convective minimized environment. Presently there is a number of these restricted geometry platforms that miniaturize and parallelize macromolecular crystallization developed in academic and commercial laboratories. The following three examples are representatives of this idea. First, Fluidigm Corporation (San Fancisco, CA) has constructed the TOPAZ system using Free-Interface Diffusion within a microfluidic chip (Hansen et al., 2002). Narrow chambers coupled to integrated fluidic circuits require about only 1 ml (10e20 mg of protein) to screen 96 crystallization experiments at the same time. The TOPAZ chips are liquideliquid devices because the protein and precipitant chambers have the same volume and are not long enough to develop the characteristic counterdiffusion pattern. Therefore they are set at low supersaturation to assure slow mixing and near-equilibrium precipitation. However, the device generates a crystallization gradient when using high concentration of protein in each crystallization chamber where smaller protein crystals can be grown close to the interface valve (and reagent) and larger crystals are obtained along the length of the chip. The TOPAZ chips can interactively mix reagents enabling highly systematic screening across diverse chemical conditions. Second, novel plastic microscope slides have also been constructed to contain micro-channels from cyclic olefin polymers that are non-birefringent and compatible for microfluidic crystallization in restricted geometry (Ng et al., 2008a,b). The slide format provides a simple and low cost setup to crystallize macromolecules by counterdiffusion. The plastic construct contains micro-channels of different configurations to hold 500 nl of protein solution for each crystallization chamber. Protein crystals grown from this arrangement can be evaluated in situ by synchrotron radiation and their diffraction quality was evaluated without invasive manipulation. Fluidic crystallization in this plastic platform can also be coupled with a commercialized automated imager such as an in situ X-ray scanner that can inspect crystals grown by counterdiffusion with both optical microscopes and a fine-focused X-ray beam. Results from this study demonstrated for the first time that complete structure of macromolecules could be determined from synchrotron X-ray data collected and processed in situ from a micro-channel configuration.

30

F. Otálora et al. / Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 101 (2009) 26e37

Fig. 3. Examples of protein crystals grown by capillary counterdiffusion technique: (A) membrane protein PSIIcc from Pisum sativum; (B) hydantoin racemase from Sinorhizobium meliloti; (C) PDZ domain of the mammalian PSD95 protein; and (D) PurE.

Third, micro-channels fabricated in poly-dimethylsiloxane (PDMS), poly-methyl-methacrylate (PMMA) and cyclo-olefin-copolymer (COC) by replica casting, laser ablation and hot embossing were used for counterdiffusion crystallization in chip format (Dhouib et al., 2009). This material is also transparent and the crystal growth process is able to be monitored by optical microscopy. In this case, the advantages of the previous two examples are combined in such that screening is low cost, in situ X-ray analysis is permissible at the synchrotron and ultimately three-dimensional structures can be performed in a single chip. 4.3. Microgravity experiments As in the case of other implementations of counterdiffusion setups, microgravity has some distinctive advantages and disadvantages (Otálora et al., 2001; García-Ruiz et al., 2001c; Snell and Helliwell, 2005; Vergara et al., 2005). In microgravity, it is possible to implement counterdiffusion setups less restrictive in size and geometry than in capillaries or microfluidic devices while retaining similar or better levels of advective velocity. Large diameter

capillary counterdiffusion experiments in microgravity can proceed to nucleation and growth without the interaction of gel fibers that can mask the diffusive effects in nucleation and growth kinetics. Although these gel effects have not been reported to-date to be detrimental for diffraction data quality, it must be kept in mind that microgravity is in theory the "cleanest way to counterdiffusion". On the negative side, the low stability of the gravity scenario and their low frequency noise have affected space protein crystallization experiments (García-Ruiz, 1998), because most were performed in manned flight or in the International Space Station (Otálora and Garcia-Ruiz, 1997; García-Ruiz and Otálora, 1997; Boggon et al., 1998; Zegers et al., 2006). Only recently has it been possible to carry out actual 10À5e10À6 g experiments with low gravity noise in the unmanned flight FOTON M3 (Gonzalez-Ramirez et al., 2008). The preliminary results of these experiments suggest that crystals of higher and comparable quality can be obtained either in gels, on ground or without gels in space using the counterdiffusion technique. In addition, the availability of space research opportunities is too infrequent for the requirements of an active scientific project, and the effort required to prepare microgravity experiments can

F. Otálora et al. / Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 101 (2009) 26e37

31

Fig. 4. In situ cryo-cooling of a protein crystal at the beam line BM16 of the ESRF. Crystals were obtained and transported at room temperature in a GCB-D prefilled with a mix of PEGs (KIT-PEG448-49, Triana S&T). A portion of the capillary containing the selected crystal was glued to a cryo-pin and flash-cooled in the nitrogen stream (see insert).

only be compensated by outstanding results. Consequently our opinion is that microgravity counterdiffusion studies with proteins are only meaningful for experiments with a complexity above the average and dealing with problems that cannot be solved on the ground due to fundamental limitations. 5. Nucleation in counterdiffusion experiments 5.1. Polymorphism Interesting and unusual nucleation behavior has been observed in many of the counterdiffusion experiments that have been followed carefully in time and compared with identical experiments performed with classical techniques. It appears that the statistical nature of nucleation, when coupled with the transient supersaturation wave can also produce polymorphism in the crystals obtained. Equilibrium considerations indicate that, among the possible polymorphs that can be produced from the same solute, the one having the lowest energy will be selected. This energy is a function of the chemical potential of molecules in the lattice and in the solution and, therefore is controlled by the concentration of the reactants, pH, temperature and potentially other physicochemical variables. Because in a counterdiffusion experiment, different parts of the system have different properties, notably different protein and precipitant concentrations, the chemical potential is equally heterogeneous. It is possible therefore to obtain polymorphs other than the ones produced by the same chemical conditions in a more homogeneous setup (Zegers et al., 2006; Maes et al., 2007). In fact it is even possible to get more than one polymorph in the same experiment, something that is very unlikely in other crystallization techniques. Furthermore, each possible polymorph has a given probability of nucleating which is an exponential function of the lattice energy. Thus precritical aggregates of the different polymorphs are likely to occur with a frequencies controlled by these relative probabilities. In a close to equilibrium experiment, these probabilistic

fluctuations in the selection of the crystallizing polymorph are smeared-out by probability accumulation over the long metastable periods before nucleation. However, in situations sufficiently far from equilibrium, it is possible that the "wrong" polymorph is selected by quenching of a nuclei distribution sufficiently deviating from the equilibrium one. These time-dependent effects on nucleation have been investigated in terms of the maximum supercooling that can be reached in a crystallizing system as a function of the cooling rate (see for example Sangwal and Wójcik, 2009) but studies on time-dependent polymorphic selection during nucleation are just comencing. Finally, it is noteworthy that after the critical size is overcome, the selected polymorph is fixed and the crystal will continue to grow whatever is the selection. An exception to this may be when Ostwald ripening occurs in the presence of other coexisting polymorphs. Besides the large interest of this behavior, the main practical consideration on polymorphism during protein crystal growth in counterdiffusion experiments has to do with the quality of diffraction data. Structural biologists are not concerned with the packing "selected" during nucleation, but only with solving the atomic structure of the packed molecules. The important point in this regard is that different polymorphs are known to produce diffraction data having very different quality (due to changes in water content or crystal contacts), and that the structure of many macromolecules reluctant to produce well diffracting crystals have been solved after getting a different polymorph (normally by changing the crystallization cocktail). The ability of counterdiffusion to produce polymorphs unattainable by other techniques can be very interesting in these situations. We have probably been using the time-dependent polymorphic selection feature described previously unintentionally. Nucleation of protein crystals in most crystal growth techniques happens at very high supersaturation by direct mixing. This is a situation where the conditions are far from equilibrium in which a metastable polymorph can be selected instead of one that is more stable having a larger critical nucleus (for example due to a higher symmetry of the crystal lattice). This

32

F. Otálora et al. / Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 101 (2009) 26e37

second polymorph would be selected by the diffusive mixing favored by counterdiffusion. 5.2. Screening with counterdiffusion technique After considering the rich nucleation behavior of protein solutions in the counterdiffusion technique, it seems reasonable to explore the possibilities of this technique for the screening of crystallization conditions. The reason is clear when considering the number of supersaturation and rates of supersaturation values screened by a single counterdiffusion experiment. It was shown that, compared with vapor diffusion and batch techniques, counterdiffusion clearly achieves a much richer and wider scanning of the phase diagram (García-Ruiz, 2003; Ng et al., 2003). New crystallization kits have been developed to screen the ability of a single precipitant to crystallize a protein as a function of pH (CamaraArtigas et al., 2007). The diffusive nature of the technique also permits the simultaneous screening of mixed salts and polyethylene glycols against the protein since the diffusion rate is a function of molecular size. Thus, up to four different precipitants with different molecular weights may scan the protein solution in a single experiment. We have also recently tested the success of a screening set of just 24 conditions as an alternative to classical screening (Ruiz-Martinez et al., 2009). It is noticeable that for these screening kits, the amount of protein per capillary experiment is less than 300 nL, i.e. similar of even less than high throughput robots based on drop techniques (Garcia-Ruiz and Ng, 2006). Presently, there are commercially available kits for initial screening (http://www.trianatech.com) adapted from the mini-screen described by Kimber and co-workers (Kimber et al., 2003). On a home-made preparation, the same amount of protein is needed to setup these 24 conditions using the Gel Acupuncture Method but slightly bigger amount is required to setup 24 independent 3L Lindeman-type capillaries. 6. Counterdiffusion and crystal quality The intensity of a Bragg peak in an X-ray diffraction experiment depends on the corresponding structure factor and on the volume of the crystal lattice scattering coherently. Scattering noise mainly is derived from the incoherent scattering by atoms out of the crystal (solvent, air.), atoms misplaced within the lattice (lattice disorder), or scattering incoherently from lattice nodes (impurities and molecular-level disorder). Part of this noise concentrates around Bragg positions or along reciprocal space lines or planes, contributing even further to decreasing signal over noise statistics. Long-range disorder like crystal bending by strain fields or gradual changes of the lattice d-spacing by strain or chemical gradients produce widening of the diffraction peaks, that can also be detrimental for the signal over noise statistics, specially for low intensity, high angle diffracted beams (Snell et al., 1995). Improving the statistical quality of diffraction data is, therefore, a matter of reducing the density of lattice defects and impurities within the crystal (Garcia-Ruiz and Otálora, 2004). "Impurities" here being used in a broad "diffraction-centric" sense meaning "any molecule that contributes incoherently to scattering even if correctly placed at a lattice node" (for instance impurities or molecules having alternative configurations or flexible domains). Some of the crystal disorder is an unavoidable feature of the lattice, as in the case of impurities or vacancies whose equilibrium concentration in the crystal follows a Boltzmann distribution. However, many of the atomic disorder are created and trapped in the crystal lattice during its growth process experiencing only minor reductions by annealing or other processes. Removal of crystal lattice disorder is especially difficult in elastic materials like

protein crystals (Chernov, 2003). Impurities are a major issue in macromolecular crystal growth because the purification levels that can be reached are much smaller than the ones used in small molecule crystal growth. In addition, proteins are usually unstable, susceptible to denaturation, proteolysis, aggregation and other heterogeneous-forming processes. The equilibrium concentration of a given impurity in the crystal lattice is generally different from the impurity concentration in the solution. During crystal growth, the crystal/solution interface serves as a source (K < 1) or as a sink (K > 1) of impurities for the mother medium, where K is the ratio of the impurity concentration in the crystal to its average concentration in the mother solution. In diffusive media, any situation other than K ¼ 1 implies the existence of an impurity concentration gradient and a concentration of impurities at the interface larger (K < 1) or smaller (K > 1) than in the bulk (Chernov, 1984). When K > 1, impurities accumulate into the crystal lattice during the first stages of crystal growth right after nucleation, and the surrounding solution is depleted in impurity molecules and hence purified. This process is called "impurity filtering" (Lee and Chernov, 2002). In stirred solutions or in setups with natural convection, diffusive transport of impurities is restricted to the boundary layer and transport of impurities out of the interface (K < 1) or to the interface (K > 1) is more efficient. As a consequence, diffusive mass transport is expected to produce better crystals when the qualitylimiting impurities have K > 1 while stirred setups are expected to be better when K < 1. If more than one impurity species with different K-behavior is present in the solution, it is necessary to determine which one has a deeper impact for crystal quality. In the case of protein crystal growth, it has been shown frequently that K > 1 for the "homogeneous impurities" (K ¼ 4 for ferritin dimers, K ¼ 2.15e3.42 for acetylated lysozyme (Thomas and Chernov, 2001)) that happen to be the most detrimental for the quality of crystals, while "foreign impurities" whose incorporation has a smaller impact on the crystal quality have K values smaller than 1 (Thomas et al., 2000). Therefore diffusive systems can be beneficial to obtain better crystals through the impurity filtering mechanism (Lin et al., 2001; Van Driessche et al., 2008). Fig. 6 shows a comparison of the growing surface of lysozyme crystals from impure solution and the impurity filtering effect of diffusive (gelled solution) mass transport in counterdiffusion. Line and plane lattice defects, notably dislocations and stacking faults, originate at stressed or impurity-rich surfaces like the crystal nucleus or at growth striations induced by sudden changes in the solution composition or temperature. Nucleation of defects during later, more quiet, growth are in most cases due to the mismatch of the upper layers of macrosteps and/or the presence of large particles in the solution (Chernov, 1984). Diffusive mass transport reduces the sedimentation of colloidal (or larger) particles and therefore limits the effect of these processes. Furthermore, the steady supersaturation regime favored by diffusive crystal growth is also expected to reduce the frequency of macrosteps. Macrosteps are produced by step bunching because of the statistical fluctuations in interstep separation during layerwise growth and are an intrinsic instability of the crystal growth process (Vekilov et al., 1998; Chernov et al., 2004) that can be limited only by reducing the amplitude of fluctuations in the frequency of step generation. Because the major control of this frequency is supersaturation, it is expected that less macrosteps develop on a crystal surface where supersaturation is steady, as in the case of diffusive setups. On the contrary, the largest supersaturation fluctuations and density of macrosteps are expected to happen in systems undergoing natural convection. Forced convection is an intermediate situation, the amplitude of the fluctuations is smaller but directional, which can enhance or reduce step bunching depending on the relative orientation of steps and fluid flow.

F. Otálora et al. / Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 101 (2009) 26e37

33

Signal over noise statistics in diffraction data depend on the number of scatterers in the beam, so larger crystals can produce better data (at least within the 50e500 mm range of crystal sizes commonly used in protein crystallography). This issue is especially relevant for neutron diffraction (see Section 7) where, owing to the smaller scattering cross section, large volumes (around 1 mm3) are required to get adequate data. In most small molecule crystal growth experiments, the growth rate increases with stirring, because the convective flow supplies the growth unit faster. In the case of proteins, however, it has been shown that the growth rate decreases with flow velocity, except for very low flow rates (Pusey et al., 1988; Vekilov and Rosenberger, 1998). Whether this effect is due to the coupling of convective and diffusive mass transport (Wang et al., 2008), to the different rate of incorporation of impurities (Vekilov et al., 1998), or to both, it is evident for a given supersaturation, reducing convection will generally increase the growth rate. Consequently, the crystal size will increase if the rate of impurity incorporation and defect generation remains constant or diminishes. This increase of crystal size is further reinforced by the lower nucleation flow (and consequently number of crystals) in counterdiffusion setups due to the automatic tuning of the nucleation conditions to lower values of supersaturation. Because nucleation in counterdiffusion systems also happens at a lower supersaturation, the degree of disorder in the crystal nuclei and the density of defects nucleated are also expected to be smaller. In consideration to the basic mechanisms of crystal growth and diffraction, we believe that counterdiffusion methods are expected to produce larger and more perfect crystals, which is often the case. Optimization of size and crystal quality is normally performed with classical techniques by the so-called "fine screen" around the condition(s) hit in the crystallization screening. It consists on the setup of new crystallization experiments with discrete incremental changes of the concentration of one component of the initial cocktail. In many cases, this results in a similar outcomes to those found in the initial hit. Alternatively, counterdiffusion techniques allow the screening of all the components in any precipitant cocktail in a continuous instead of a stepwise scan. In those cases in which the counterdiffusion experiments were compared with vapor diffusion or batch experiments of identical (bio)chemistry, there were found either crystal of similar or higher quality as determined by measuring the X-ray intensity over noise data. For example, tetragonal hen egg white lysozyme crystals that diffracted to 0.94 Å were obtained under microgravity (Sauter et al., 2001) as well as on ground, a quality much better than any other tetragonal crystal of this model protein grown from drop techniques. Similar results were obtained in the case of the type II dehydroquinate dehydratase crystallized in space and on ground by counterdiffusion at resolution better than from vapor diffusion (Maes et al., 2004). The technique works not only for proteins but also for small peptides such as (PPG)10. Again in this case no difference was found between crystals obtained under microgravity conditions compared to those obtained from ground gel experiments using the counterdiffusion (Vergara et al., 2005). The capillary counterdiffusion technique has proven to have an inverse relationship between supersaturation (growth rate) and crystal quality (Otálora et al., 1996; Lopez-Jaramillo et al., 2003). As expected from theoretical considerations, crystal quality varies along the length of the protein chamber. In order to avoid intrinsic difficulties of capillary grown crystals, we repeated a similar study with lysozyme crystals grown in agarose gel. A direct relationship between average supersaturation, estimated from crystal habit, location and crystal quality was found (Fig. 5). In the worst case, lysozyme crystals grown in agarose at 0.075% (w/v) still reach the 1 Å resolution limit and in the best case the limit goes to 0.94 Å.

Fig. 5. Representation of a counterdiffusion experiment setup in agarose gel in a three layer configuration. The spatial-temporal evolution of the supersaturation produces lysozyme crystal of different aspect ratio (W/L). The lower panel displays the crystal quality measured by I/s(I) as a function of the resolution for data with I/s(I) > 2 from four selected crystals located at three different positions corresponding to crystals shown in the upper panel. Data collection was performed using synchrotron radiation.

6.1. Limits to the expected enhancement Crystal growth methods can be chosen or refined to improve crystal quality in terms of diffraction limit, mosaicity, or size. But the level of control is limited to the available tools. Quality of crystals can be improved by limiting the incorporation of impurities, that will be a fraction K of the impurities at the solution in contact with the growing crystal face. We can limit this amount using diffusive setups and therefore allowing for impurity purification and for a steady rate of incorporation, which results in a lower rate of defect generation and strain accumulation. On the other hand, crystallization methods can do nothing to reduce the overall amount of impurities in the solution so efforts in purification must always run in parallel to the improvement of crystal growth methods. The contribution of crystal growth optimization to the reduction of the number of defects in crystals also has limits. The concentration of some of the defects in the crystal lattice is an equilibrium property of the crystal lattice so they cannot be reduced. Fortunately they are mostly point defects (for example vacancies) that are supposed to have a limited impact on the diffraction quality of crystals. Defects generated at macrosteps are also difficult to handle and can only be limited by carefully ensuring a steady supersaturation level at the solution/crystal interface. Finally, the long-range strain in the protein crystal lattice is also difficult to limit due to its origin from the crystalline nucleus and high supersaturation. Strain associated with nucleation is handled in the small molecule crystal growth processes using seeding to provide a good quality initial surface for crystals to grow at a reasonably low supersaturation. However, no conclusive results are available on the relation of seeding and crystal quality in macromolecular crystal growth where seeding is not so well developed.

34

F. Otálora et al. / Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 101 (2009) 26e37

Fig. 6. Laser confocal differential interference contrast microscope images of a {110} face of a tetragonal lysozyme crystal grown in a gel-free (A) and gelled (B) solution. (A). Crystal surface grown without gel showing the typical shape of rounded 2D islands due to impurities present in the commercial protein (Sigma, purity approx. 95.0%). (B). When the same crystal is re-grown in a gelled solution of similar concentration, the shape of the 2D islands becomes significantly more elongated due to reduced concentration of impurity molecules at the crystal surface.

7. Large protein crystals Considering how the counterdiffusion technique works, it is easy to understand why crystals of large size are normally obtained with this technique (see Fig. 1). It occurs by two main phenomena. First, the reduction of the amplitude of the supersaturation wave moving across the capillary accounts for the formation of very few nuclei at the end of the capillary. Eventually only one nucleus forms and the protein molecules inside the region of the capillary affected by the supersaturation wave proceeds to increase its size. Sometimes, these crystals are able to fill completely the diameter of cylindrical glass capillary, referred to as "rod crystals" (Moreno et al., 1996). Note that when this occurs, the crystals may continue to grow because the molecules of the precipitating agent diffuse across the very protein crystals eliciting the aggregation of the protein molecules from the solution past the rod crystal. In addition, another source of protein molecules for these large crystals is the dissolution of the amorphous or low crystallinity material precipitated at the initial proteineprecipitant interface. These earliest precipitates start to dissolve once the supersaturation wave leaves the location where they formed, thus contributing to the additional growth of the large crystals located along the length of the capillary. Crystals of 5 mm in length filling capillaries of 1 mm in diameter have been obtained with this technique (Fig. 7). Therefore, it is reasonable to propose counterdiffusion crystallization method as a promising technology for growing three-dimensional protein crystals for neutron crystallography. Neutron crystallography is a technique that can provide critical information in structural biology, enzymology, and functional genomics due to its versatility in the accurate determination of protons, protonation states, H/D exchange and hydration in macromolecular crystals even at a moderate 2.0 to 2.5 Å resolution (Bon et al., 1999; Borah et al., 1985; Coates et al., 2001; Gutberlet et al., 2001; Habash et al., 2000; Helliwell, 1997; Ho et al., 2001; Kossiakoff, 1983, 1984, 1985; Kurihara, 2001; Niimura, 1999; Niimura et al., 1997; Ostermann et al., 2002; Raghavan and Wlodawer, 1987; Schoenborn, 1984, 1985, 1996; Shu et al., 2000; Timmins, 1995; Tsyba and Bau, 2002; Wlodawer, 1982; Wlodawer and Hendrickson, 1982; Wlodawer et al., 1989, 1984). Neutron crystallography relies on neutrons being scattered by atomic nuclei, rather than by electron clouds as in the case of X-rays, allowing the visibility of hydrogen atoms from surrounding

water, substrates and proteins such that protonation states can easily be determined. The biggest obstacle in neutron crystallography is obtaining large volume diffracting crystals. Presently, protein crystals are generally required to have a volume of at least 0.5 mm3 (in most cases equal or greater than 1.0 mm3) for successful neutron analysis while crystal volumes of this size are more than sufficient for X-ray crystallography (especially for those analyzed by intense synchrotron beam source). In the advent of the development of high power spallation neutron sources and superior time sensitive neutron detectors, performance and gains in data-collection rates have been shown to increase 10e100 fold. Thereby the true limiting parameter becomes achieving large macromolecular crystal size. Protein crystals are difficult to grow in large volumes compared to small inorganic molecules due to the protein's inherent heterogeneity, instability and non-uniform impurity incorporation (Malkin and Thorne, 2004). Those proteins that can be obtained pure, in high amounts and stable for long duration of time are the best candidates for extensive crystal growth experiments. There are few protein crystals that have been able to achieve sufficient volume size for Neutron diffraction such as hemoglobin, Xylose Isomerase, Thaumatin, Lysozyme and others (Blakeley et al., 2008). Rational approaches have been employed to find appropriate conditions to grow large single protein crystals. These include establishing a detailed crystallization phase where crystals are ripened by adjusting the precipitant concentrations into the metastable region (Niimura and Bau, 2008). Others have used response surface methods using solubility data as a guide while adjusting the amounts of precipitant and temperature (Snell et al., 2006). While these techniques produced crystals adequate for neutron diffraction for selected proteins, there is still a considerable challenge finding a widely applicable method to grow large single crystals without extensive solubility data. In principle, the counterdiffusion crystallization method is amenable for growing three-dimensional protein crystals for neutron crystallography because protein crystals are able to nucleate and grow in a broad range of conditions corresponding to an integrated area of its phase diagram within the labile and metastable regions. As the result, the condition for optimized crystal growth can most likely be found where single nucleation and maximum crystal growth occur all in the same. No solubility data are required. In this case, the protein crystals can fill up the

F. Otálora et al. / Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 101 (2009) 26e37

35

Fig. 7. Examples of protein crystals filling the diameter of the capillaries referred to as "rods crystals" of (A) apoferritin; (B) glucose isomerase; (C) cyan hemoglobin complex; (D) Sh3 domain; (E) lysozyme; (F) concanavalina A; (G) ferritin; and (H) insulin.

entire diameter of the reaction volume. Evaluation of crystal quality and data collection can be easily performed non-invasively by directly diffracting the crystals in situ with X-ray or neutron radiation (Ng et al., 2008a). There is no requirement for physical handling of the crystal thereby minimizing crystal damage (especially when crystal volumes are large and fragile). Capillary grown protein crystals can readily exchange with ligands, metals, cryogenic preservatives (Gavira et al., 2002) by simply swapping equilibration solutions (Ng et al., 2008b). This method can equally be used to efficiently exchange H2O for D2O to increase the contrast of the Fourier synthesis maps obtained from neutron diffraction data. Initial conditions to crystallize protein targets can be determined by conventional crystallization screening using vapor diffusion (Jancarik and Kim, 1991) or counterdiffusion (as described above) techniques. Using quartz capillaries (do not use capillary material that will strongly scatter neutron such as boron-silicate glass) with diameters ranging from 1 to 2 mm, purified protein can be carefully aspirated into the capillary following the precipitating agent in a 1:1 ratio where half of the capillary is filled protein and the other half the precipitating agent. The two solutions can be allowed to be directly touching each other or separated by a gel plug. Since the diameter of the capillary chamber must be sufficiently large, convective mixing is inevitable, therefore the viscosity of the precipitant must be adequately high. This is usually achieved by choosing precipitants that have inherently high viscosity such as 30% (or higher) 2-methyl-2-4-pentanediol (MPD) or glycerol. Other precipitants or additives that have been useful in maintaining suitable viscosity for diffusion limiting processes include polyethylene glycol and common cryo-protectants for protein crystallization. The gradient is unstable as a function of time and slow mixing will occur. However, existing crystals can undergo Ostwald-like ripening where depletion zones around growing crystals are revealed such that the most stable crystals (not necessarily the

biggest) grow at the expense of the weaker ones (not necessarily the smallest). This process is accelerated when the equilibration process is allowed to experience temperature changes of as little as Æ3  C (temperature ripening) after the gradient is noticeable. Significant background noise in neutron diffraction is attributed to hydrogen atoms due to their large incoherent scattering contribution. In practice, several methods have been employed to either replace hydrogen atoms completely with deuterium (perdeuteration) (Shu et al., 2000), exchange H2O with D2O while crystals are growing, or by soaking procedures (Niimura and Bau, 2008). The latter technique can be implemented the easiest in the counterdiffusion method as the capillary geometry can be exploited for easily exchanging solvents without any physical manipulation of the protein crystal to be analyzed. The protein crystals are generally allowed to grow until they are completely or closely occupy the diameter of the capillary. Usually, the crystals are attached to the capillary wall and are immobile. Therefore, it is very easy to remove the mother liquor and replace it with an equivalent solution containing D2O. In all the exchange methods the capillaries are delicately excised and the equilibrated protein solution is carefully removed leaving the largest crystal with some residual mother liquor. Deuterium exchange by vapor diffusion is executed simply by refilling the capillary with the deuterated solutions from both sides leaving an empty space between the solution and the crystals. Finally, growing large protein crystals require very stable proteins due to the required extended equilibration and growth time. Generally, the stability of the protein has to be greater than the length of the equilibration process. Since large volume crystals usually take several weeks to attain its maximum size, the selected protein must be thermally or chemically stable during this time. Therefore, hyperthermophilic (or those resistant to heat denaturation) proteins that are structurally compact have the highest chances of success for large volume growth.

36

F. Otálora et al. / Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 101 (2009) 26e37 García-Ruiz, J.M., Otálora, F., 1997. Crystal growth studies in microgravity with the APCF. II. Image analysis studies. J. Cryst. Growth 182, 155e167. Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., Otalora, F., 2004. Macromolecular crystals e growth and characterization. In: Muller, G., Metois, J., Rudolph, P. (Eds.), Crystal Growth e From Fundamentals to Technology. Elsevier Science BV, pp. 369e390. Gavira, J.A., Toh, D., Lopez-Jaramillo, J., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., Ng, J.D., 2002. Ab initio crystallographic structure determination of insulin from protein to electron density without crystal handling. Acta Cryst. D 58, 1147e1154. Gavira, J.A., de Jesus, W., Camara-Artigas, A., Lopez-Garriga, J., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 2006. Capillary crystallization and molecular-replacement solution of haemoglobin II from the clam Lucina pectinata. Acta Cryst. F 62, 196e199. Gavira, J.A., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 2002. Agarose as crystallisation media for proteins II: trapping of gel fibres into the crystals. Acta Cryst. D 58, 1653e1656. Gerdts, C.J., Tereshko, V., Yadav, M.K., Dementieva, I., Collart, F., Joachimiak, A., Stevens, R.C., Kuhn, P., Kossiakoff, A., Ismagilov, R.F., 2006. Time-controlled microfluidic seeding in nl-volume droplets to separate nucleation and growth stages of protein crystallization. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 45, 8156e8160. Gonzalez-Ramirez, L.A., Carrera, J., Gavira, J.A., Melero-Garcia, E., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 2008. Granada crystallization facility-2: a versatile platform for crystallization in space. Crystal Growth Des. 8, 4324e4329. Grant, M.L., Saville, D.A., 1991. The role of transport phenomena in protein crystal growth. J. Cryst. Growth 108, 8e18. Gutberlet, T., Heinemann, U., Steiner, M., 2001. Protein crystallography with neutrons e status and perspectives. Acta Cryst. D 57, 349e354. Habash, J., Raftery, J., Nuttall, R., Price, H.J., Wilkinson, C., Kalb, A.J., Helliwell, J.R., 2000. Direct determination of the positions of the deuterium atoms of the bound water in concanavalin A by neutron Laue crystallography (Gilboa). Acta Cryst. D 56, 541e550. Hansen, C.L., Skordalakes, E., Berger, J.M., Quake, S.R., 2002. A robust and scalable microfluidic metering method that allows protein crystal growth by free interface diffusion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 16531e16536. Hansen, C.L., Classen, S., Berger, J.M., Quake, S.R., 2006. A microfluidic device for kinetic optimization of protein crystallization and in situ structure determination. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128, 3142e3143. Helliwell, J.R., 1997. Neutron Laue diffraction does it faster. Nat. Struct. Biol. 4, 874e876. Henisch, H.K., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 1986a. Crystal growth in gels and Liesegang ring formation: I. Diffusion relationships. J. Cryst. Growth 75, 195e202. Henisch, H.K., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 1986b. Crystal growth in gels and Liesegang ring formation: II. Crystallization criteria and successive precipitation. J. Cryst. Growth 75, 203e211. Ho, J.-X., Declercq, J.-P., Myles, D.A.A., Wright, B.S., Ruble, J., Carter, D.C., 2001. Neutron structure of monoclinic lysozyme crystals produced in microgravity. J. Cryst. Growth 232, 317e325. Howard, E.I., Fernandez, J.M., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 2009. On the mixing of protein crystallization cocktails. Cryst. Growth Des 9, 2707e2712. Jancarik, J., Kim, S.H., 1991. Sparse matrix sampling: a screening method for crystallization of proteins. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 24, 409e411. Kimber, M.S., Vallee, F., Houston, S., Necakov, A., Skarina, T., Evdokimova, E., Beasley, S., Christendat, D., Savchenko, A., Arrowsmith, C.H., Vedadi, M., Gerstein, M., Edwards, A.M., 2003. Data mining crystallization databases: knowledge-based approaches to optimize protein crystal screens. Proteins 51, 562e568. Kossiakoff, A.A., 1983. Neutron protein crystallography: advances in methods and applications. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng. 12, 159e182. Kossiakoff, A.A., 1984. Use of the neutron diffraction-H/D exchange technique to determine the conformational dynamics of trypsin. Basic Life Sci. 27, 281e304. Kossiakoff, A.A., 1985. The application of neutron crystallography to the study of dynamic and hydration properties of proteins. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 54, 1195e1227. Kurihara, K., 2001. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. A70 (Suppl.), 400e402. Kuta Smatanova, I., Gavira, J.A., Rezacova, P., Vacha, F., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 2006. New techniques for membrane protein crystallization tested on photosystem II core complex of Pisum sativum. Photosyn. Res. 90, 255e259. Lee, C.P., Chernov, A.A., 2002. Solutal convection around growing protein crystals and diffusional purification in space. J. Cryst. Growth 240, 531e544. Lin, H., Petsev, D.N., Yau, S.T., Thomas, B.R., Vekilov, P.G., 2001. Lower incorporation of impurities in ferritin crystals by suppression of convection: modeling results. Cryst. Growth Des. 1, 73e79. Lopez-Jaramillo, F.J., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., Gavira, J.A., Otalora, F., 2001. Crystallization and cryocrystallography inside X-ray capillaries. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 34, 365e370. Lopez-Jaramillo, F.J., Otálora, F., Gavira, J.A., 2003. Protein crystal quality in diffusive environments and its evaluation. J. Cryst. Growth 247, 177e184. Luft, J.R., Rak, D.M., DeTitta, G.T., 1999. Microbatch macromolecular crystallization in micropipettes. J. Cryst. Growth 196, 450e455. Maes, D., Gonzalez-Ramirez, L.A., Lopez-Jaramillo, J., Yu, B., De Bondt, H., Zegers, I., Afonina, E., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., Gulnik, S., 2004. Structural study of the type II 3-dehydroquinate dehydratase from Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae. Acta Cryst. D 60, 463e471. Maes, D., Decanniere, K., Zegers, I., Vanhee, C., Sleutel, M., Willaert, R., Van De Weerdt, C., Martial, J., Declercq, J.-P., Evrard, C., Otalora, F., Garcia-Ruiz, J., 2007. Protein crystallisation under microgravity conditions: what did we learn on TIM crystallisation from the Soyuz missions? Microgravity Sci. Technol. 19, 90e94.

Acknowledgments This work was supported by the OptiCryst project of the VI European Framework Program and the Andalusian Regional Government, Spain, project RNM 5384. This paper is a product of the "Factoría Española de Cristalización", a project ConsoliderIngenio 2010 of the Ministerio de Innovación y Ciencia (MICINN) of Spain. The authors also acknowledge Dr. Alexander van Driesche for Fig. 6. F.O. acknowledges the financial support of project ESP200611327 of the MICINN.

References
Alvarado, U.R., DeWitt, C.R., Shultz, B.B., Ramsland, P.A., Edmundson, A.B., 2001. Crystallization of a human Bence-Jones protein in microgravity using vapor diffusion in capillaries. J. Cryst. Growth 223, 407e414. Bessman, M.J., Bullions, L.C., Bhatnagar, S.K., Braden, B.C., Love, W.E., 1991. Crystallization and preliminary X-ray diffraction studies on the mutT nucleoside triphosphate pyrophosphohydrolase of Escherichia coli. J. Biol. Chem. 266, 9055e9056. Biertumpfel, C., Basquin, J., Suck, D., Sauter, C., 2002. Crystallization of biological macromolecules using agarose gel. Acta Crystallogr. D 58, 1657e1659. Biertumpfel, C., Basquin, J., Birkenbihl, R.P., Suck, D., Sauter, C., 2005. Characterization of crystals of the Hjc resolvase from Archaeoglobus fulgidus grown in gel by counter-diffusion. Acta Crystallogr. F 61, 684e687. Blakeley, M.P., Langan, P., Niimura, N., Podjarny, A., 2008. Neutron crystallography: opportunities, challenges, and limitations. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 18, 593e600. Boggon, T.J., Chayen, N.E., Snell, E.H., Dong, Jung, Lautenschlager, P., Potthast, L., Siddons, D.P., Stojanoff, V., Gordon, E., Thompson, A.W., Zagalsky, P.F., Bi, R.C., Helliwell, J.R., 1998. Protein crystal movements and fluid flows during microgravity growth. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 356, 1045e1061. Bon, C., Lehmann, M.S., Wilkinson, C., 1999. Quasi-Laue neutron-diffraction study of the water arrangement in crystals of triclinic hen egg-white lysozyme. Acta Cryst. D 55, 978e987. Borah, B., Chen, C.W., Egan, W., Miller, M., Wlodawer, A., Cohen, J.S., 1985. Nuclear magnetic resonance and neutron diffraction studies of the complex of ribonuclease A with uridine vanadate, a transition-state analog. Biochemistry 24, 2058e2067. Camara-Artigas, A., Palencia, A., Martinez, J.C., Luque, I., Gavira, J.A., Garcia-Ruiz, J. M., 2007. Crystallization by capillary counter-diffusion and structure determination of the N114A mutant of the SH3 domain of Abl tyrosine kinase complexed with a high-affinity peptide ligand. Acta Cryst. D 63, 646e652. Chernov, A.A., 1984. Modern Crystallography III: Crystal Growth. Springer, Berlin. Chernov, A.A., 2003. Protein crystals and their growth. J. Struct. Biol. 142, 3e21. Chernov, A.A., De Yoreo, J.J., Rashkovich, L.N., Vekilov, P.G., 2004. Step and kink dynamics in inorganic and protein crystallization. MRS Bull. 29, 927e934. Coates, L., Erskine, P.T., Wood, S.P., Myles, D.A., Cooper, J.B., 2001. A neutron Laue diffraction study of endothiapepsin: implications for the aspartic proteinase mechanism. Biochemistry 40, 13149e13157. Cockburn, J.J., Bamford, J.K., Grimes, J.M., Bamford, D.H., Stuart, D.I., 2003. Crystallization of the membrane-containing bacteriophage PRD1 in quartz capillaries by vapour diffusion. Acta Cryst. D 59, 538e540. Dhouib, K., Khan Malek, C., Pfleging, W., Gauthier-Manuel, B., Duffait, R., Thuillier, G., Ferrigno, R., Jacquamet, L., Ohana, J., Ferrer, J.L., ThéobaldDietrich, A., Giegé, R., Lorber, B., Sauter, C., 2009. Microfluidic chips for the crystallization of biomacromolecules by counter-diffusion and on-chip crystal X-ray analysis. Lab. Chip 9, 1412e1421. Domininguez-Vera, J.M., Rondon, D., Moreno, A., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 1996. A preliminary study on the interaction of ferritin single crystals with chelating agents. J. Cryst. Growth 168, 138e141. Drenth, J., 1999. Principles of Protein X-ray Crystallography. Springer, New York. Ducruix, A., Giege, R., 2004. Crystallization of Nucleic Acids and Proteins. A Practical Approach, second ed. Oxford University Press, Oxford. García-Ruiz, J.M., 1998. On the sensitivity of protein crystallization to the quality of the microgravity environment. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 11, 74e77. García-Ruiz, J.M., 2003. Counterdiffusion methods for macromolecular crystallization. Methods Enzymol. 368, 130e154. Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., Novella, M.L., Moreno, R., Gavira, J.A., 2001a. Agarose as crystallization media for proteins I: transport processes. J. Cryst. Growth 232, 165e172. Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., Otalora, F., Novella, M.L., Gavira, J.A., Sauter, C., Vidal, O., 2001b. A supersaturation wave of protein crystallization. J. Cryst. Growth 232, 149e155. García-Ruiz, J.M., Drenth, J., Ries-Kautt, M, Tardieu, A., 2001c. A world without gravity e Research in space for health and industrial processes. Seibert, G. et al., (ed.) ESA SP 1251. Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., Gonzalez-Ramirez, L.A., Gavira, J.A., Otalora, F., 2002. Granada crystallisation box: a new device for protein crystallisation by counter-diffusion techniques. Acta Cryst. D 58, 1638e1642. Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., Ng, J.D., 2006. Counter-diffusion capillary crystallization for high throughput applications. In: Chayen, N.E. (Ed.), Protein Crystallization Strategies for Structural Genomics. International University Line (Chapter 5).

F. Otálora et al. / Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 101 (2009) 26e37 Malkin, A.J., Thorne, R.E., 2004. Growth and disorder of macromolecular crystals: insights from atomic force microscopy and X-ray diffraction studies. Methods 34, 273e299. Martinez-Rodriguez, S., Gonzalez-Ramirez, L.A., Clemente-Jimenez, J.M., RodriguezVico, F., Las Heras-Vazquez, F.J., Gavira, J.A., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 2006. Crystallization and preliminary crystallographic studies of the recombinant dihydropyrimidinase from Sinorhizobium meliloti CECT4114. Acta Cryst. F 62, 1223e1226. Martinez-Rodriguez, S., Gonzalez-Ramirez, L.A., Clemente-Jimenez, J.M., RodriguezVico, F., Las Heras-Vazquez, F.J., Gavira, J.A., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 2008. Crystallization and preliminary crystallographic studies of an active-site mutant hydantoin racemase from Sinorhizobium meliloti CECT4114. Acta Cryst. F 64, 50e53. McPherson, A., 1999. Crystallization of Biological Macromolecules, Cold Spring. Harbor Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY. Moreno, A., Rondón, D., García-Ruiz, J.M., 1996. Growth of shaped single crystals of proteins. J. Cryst. Growth 166, 919e924. Ng, J.D., Gavira, J.A., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 2003. Protein crystallization by capillary counterdiffusion for applied crystallographic structure determination. J. Struct. Biol. 142, 218e231. Ng, J.D., Clark, P.J., Stevens, R.C., Kuhn, P., 2008a. In situ X-ray analysis of protein crystals in low-birefringent and X-ray transmissive plastic microchannels. Acta Cryst. D 64, 189e197. Ng, J.D., Stevens, R.C., Kuhn, P., 2008b. Protein crystallization in restricted geometry: advancing old ideas for modern times in structural proteomics. In: Methods in Molecular Biology: Structural Proteomics, vol. 426, pp. 363e376. Niimura, N., 1999. Neutrons expand the field of structural biology. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 9, 602e608. Niimura, N., Bau, R., 2008. Neutron protein crystallography: beyond the folding structure of biological macromolecules. Acta Crystallogr. A 64, 12e22. Niimura, N., Minezaki, Y., Nonaka, T., Castagna, J.C., Cipriani, F., Hoghoj, P., Lehmann, M.S., Wilkinson, C., 1997. Neutron Laue diffractometry with an imaging plate provides an effective data collection regime for neutron protein crystallography. Nat. Struct. Biol. 4, 909e914. Ostermann, A., Tanaka, I., Engler, N., Niimura, N., Parak, F.G., 2002. Hydrogen and deuterium in myoglobin as seen by a neutron structure determination at 1.5 angstrom resolution. Biophys. Chem. 95, 183e193. Otalora, F., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., Moreno, A., 1996. Protein crystal quality studies using rod-shaped crystals. J. Cryst. Growth 168, 93e98. Otalora, F., Novella, M.L., Gavira, J.A., Thomas, B.R., Ruiz, J.M.G., 2001. Experimental evidence for the stability of the depletion zone around a growing protein crystal under microgravity. Acta Cryst. D 57, 412e417. Otalora, F., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 1996. Computer model of the diffusion/reaction interplay in the gel acupuncture method. J. Cryst. Growth 169, 361e367. Otalora, F., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 1997. Crystal growth studies in microgravity with the APCF.I. Computer simulation of transport dynamics. J. Cryst. Growth 182, 141e154. Pusey, M., Witherow, W., Naumann, R., 1988. Preliminary investigations into solutal flow about growing tetragonal lysozyme crystals. J. Cryst. Growth 90, 105e111. Raghavan, N.V., Wlodawer, A., 1987. Neutron crystallography of proteins. In: Sköld, K., Price, D.L. (Eds.), Methods in Experimental Physics: Neutron Scattering, vol. 23. Academic Press, Orlando, FL, pp. 335e365. Ruiz-Martinez, C.R., Nieves-Marrero, C.A., Estremera-Andujar, R.A., Gavira, J.A., Gonzalez-Ramirez, L.A., Lopez-Garriga, J., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 2009. Crystallization and diffraction patterns of the oxy and cyano forms of the Lucina pectinata haemoglobins complex. Acta Cryst. F 65, 25e28. Salemme, F.R., 1972. A free interface diffusion technique for the crystallization of proteins for X-ray crystallography. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 151, 533e539. Salemme, F.R., 1974. Preliminary crystallographic data for cytochrome c' of Rhodopseudomonas palustris. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 163, 423e425. Sangwal, K., Wójcik, K., 2009. Investigation of metastable zone width of ammonium oxalate aqueous solutions. Cryst. Res. Technol. 44, 363e372. Sauter, C., Otalora, F., Gavira, J.-A., Vidal, O., Giege, R., Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 2001. Structure of tetragonal hen egg-white lysozyme at 0.94 Å from crystals grown by the counter-diffusion method. Acta Cryst. D 57, 1119e1126. Schoenborn, B.P., 1984. In: Schoenborn, B.P. (Ed.), Basic Life Sciences, vol. 27. Plenum Press, New York, pp. 261e281. Schoenborn, B.P., 1985. Meth. Enzymol. 114, 510. Schoenborn, B.P., 1996. In: Schoenborn, B.P. (Ed.), Basic Life Sciences, vol. 64. Plenum Press, New York, pp. 1e16. Shu, F., Ramakrishnan, V., Schoenborn, B.P., 2000. Enhanced visibility of hydrogen atoms by neutron crystallography on fully deuterated myoglobin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 3872e3877. Snell, E.H., Weisgerber, S., Helliwell, J.R., Weckert, E., Holzer, K., Schroer, K., 1995. Improvements in lysozyme protein crystal perfection through microgravity growth. Acta Cryst. D 51, 1099e1102. Snell, E., van der Woerd, M., Damon, M., Judge, R., Myles, D., Meilleur, F., 2006. Optimizing crystal volume for neutron diffraction: D-xylose isomerase. Eur. Biophys. J. 35, 621e632.

37

Snell, E.H., Helliwell, J.R., 2005. Macromolecular crystallization in microgravity. Rep. Prog. Phys. 68, 799e853. Squires, T.M., Quake, S.R., 2005. Microfluidics: fluid physics at the nanoliter scale. Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 977. Tanaka, H., Inaka, K., Sugiyama, S., Takahashi, S., Sano, S., Sato, M., Yoshitomi, S., 2004. A simplified counter diffusion method combined with a 1D simulation program for optimizing crystallization conditions. J. Synchrotron Rad. 11, 45e48. Thomas, B.R., Chernov, A.A., 2001. Acetylated lysozyme as impurity in lysozyme crystals: constant distribution coefficient. J. Cryst. Growth 232, 237e243. Thomas, B.R., Chernov, A.A., Vekilov, P.G., Carter, D.C., 2000. Distribution coefficients of protein impurities in ferritin and lysozyme crystals self-purification in microgravity. J. Cryst. Growth 211, 149e156. Thunnissen, M.M., Fusetti, F., de Boer, B., Dijkstra, B.W., 1995. Purification, crystallisation and preliminary X-ray analysis of penicillin binding protein 4 from Escherichia coli, a protein related to class A beta-lactamases. J. Mol. Biol. 247, 149e153. Timmins, P.A., 1995. Structural molecular biology: recent results from neutron diffraction. Physica B 213-214, 26e30. Tsyba, I., Bau, R., 2002. Neutron diffraction studies on proteins. Chemtracts e Inorg. Chem. 15, 233e257. Van Driessche, A.E.S., Otalora, F., Gavira, J.A., Sazaki, G., 2008. Is agarose an impurity or an impurity filter? In situ observation of the joint gel/impurity effect on protein crystal growth kinetics. Cryst. Growth Des 8, 3623e3629. Vekilov, P.G., Thomas, B.R., Rosenberger, F., 1998. Effects of convective solute and impurity transport in protein crystal growth. J. Phys. Chem. B 102, 5208e5216. Vekilov, P.G., Rosenberger, F., 1998. Protein crystal growth under forced solution flow: experimental setup and general response of lysozyme. J. Cryst. Growth 186, 251e261. Vergara, A., Lorber, B., Sauter, C., Giegé, R., Zagari, A., 2005. Lessons from crystals grown in the advanced protein crystallisation facility for conventional crystallisation applied to structural biology. Biophys. Chem. 118, 102e112. Wang, L.B., Wakayama, N.I., Tao, W.Q., 2008. The role of solutal convection in protein crystal growthea new dimensionless number to evaluate the effects of convection on protein crystal growth. J. Cryst. Growth 310, 5370e5374. Weber, B.H., Goodkin, P.E., 1970. A modified microdiffusion procedure for the growth of single protein crystals by concentration-gradient equilibrium dialysis. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 141, 489e498. Weber, P., Salemme, F.R., 1977. Preliminary crystallographic data for cytochromes c' of Rhodopseudomonas capsulata and Rhodospirillum molischianum. J. Mol. Biol. 117, 815e820. Wikoff, W.R., Duda, R.L., Hendrix, R.W., Johnson, J.E., 1998. Crystallization and preliminary X-ray analysis of the dsDNA bacteriophage HK97 mature empty capsid. Virology 243, 113e118. Wlodawer, A., 1982. Neutron diffraction of crystalline proteins. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 40, 115e159. Wlodawer, A., Walter, J., Huber, R., Sjölin, L., 1984. Structure of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor: results of joint neutron and X-ray refinement of crystal form II. J. Mol. Biol. 180, 301e331. Wlodawer, A., Savage, H., Dodson, G., 1989. Structure of insulin: results of joint neutron and X-ray refinement. Acta Crystallogr. B 45, 99e107. Wlodawer, A., Hendrickson, W.A., 1982. A procedure for joint refinement of macromolecular structures with X-ray and neutron diffraction data from single crystals. Acta Cryst. A 38, 239e247. van der Woerd, M., Ferree, D., Pusey, M., 2003. The promise of macromolecular crystallization in microfluidic chips. J. Struct. Biol. 142, 180e187. Zegers, I., Carotenuto, L., Evrard, C., Garcia-Ruiz, J., De Gieter, P., Gonzalez-Ramirez, L., Istasse, E., Legros, J.-C., Martial, J., Minetti, C., Otalora, F., Queeckers, P., Schockaert, C., Van de Weerdt, C., Willaert, R., Wyns, l., Yourassowsky, C., Dubois, F., 2006. Counterdiffusion protein crystallization in microgravityt and its observation with PROMISS (Protein Microscope for the International Space Station). Microgravity Sci. Technol. XVIII, 165e169. Zeppezauer, M., Eklund, H., Zeppezauer, E.S., 1968. Micro diffusion cells for the growth of single protein crystals by means of equilibrium dialysis. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 126, 564e573. Zheng, B., Roach, L.S., Ismagilov, R.F., 2003. Screening of protein crystallization conditions on a microfluidic chip using nanoliter-size droplets. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125, 11170e11171. Zheng, B., Gerdts, C.J., Ismagilov, R.F., 2005. Using nanoliter plugs in microfluidics to facilitate and understand protein crystallization. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 15, 548e555. Zheng, B., Ismagilov, R.F., 2005. A microfluidic approach for screening submicroliter volumes against multiple reagents by using preformed arrays of nanoliter plugs in a three-phase liquid/liquid/gas flow. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 44, 2520e2523.

