Minireview

1265

The multi-talented b-catenin makes its first appearance
Lawrence Shapiro
b-catenin plays a central part in cell adhesion as a structural component of the cadherin complex. In a seemingly disparate role, it is also important in embryo patterning, and now has emerged as a leading actor in carcinogenesis. b-catenin achieves its diverse functions by interacting with many partners. The recent structure of the core domain from b-catenin suggests how this talented molecule can achieve its many functions.
Address: Structural Biology Program, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 1425 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10029. E-mail: shapiro@convex.hhmi.columbia.edu Structure 15 October 1997, 5:1265­1268 http://biomednet.com/elecref/0969212600501265 © Current Biology Ltd ISSN 0969-2126

Wnt pathway is important in the induction of the dorsal/ventral and anterior/posterior embryonal axes. Over or under expression of -catenin can produce stunning phenotypes in vertebrate embryos [10], for example, axis duplication -- two headed frogs can result when Xenopus laevis embryos are injected with -catenin or its corresponding mRNA (Figure 2). Elements of the Wnt pathway are summarized in Figure 1. Normally, -catenin is targeted for degradation by the adenomatous polyposis coli protein (APC; [4]). APC, of course, is the infamous `colon cancer gene'. The interaction between -catenin and APC is mediated by glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3; Zest-white-3 in Drosophila) [11]. It is thought that phosphorylation of APC by GSK-3 enhances binding to -catenin, activating its degradation [4]. The activity of GSK-3 is modulated by the Wnt signal, which is transmitted through the seven-transmembrane helix receptor frizzled [12] and another intermediary of less well understood mechanism, disheveled. The take-home message is that Wnt signaling is effected through the stabilization of a cytoplasmic pool of -catenin. When a cytoplasmic pool of -catenin has formed, free -catenin molecules can bind to members of the Tcf/LEF-1 family of transcription factors [13], and enter the nucleus to activate transcription of target genes. Tcf proteins are `architectural' transcription factors that activate transcription by inducing bending of DNA; binding of -catenin to LEF-1 has been shown to substantially alter the ability of this transcription factor to bend DNA [13]. So now, -catenin's connection with colon cancer seems clear. APC functions to down-regulate -catenin by targeting it for degradation. When APC is missing or nullified by mutation, -catenin levels rise, and downstream elements of the Wnt pathway are activated -- out of context, and this can lead to malignant transformation. -catenin appears to play the same role in some melanomas [3], and truncated -catenin transcripts have also been observed in the cells of some stomach cancers [14]. Thus, it seems possible that -catenin may have a broad role in carcinogenesis, and may act in other types of cancer as well. -catenin and armadillo are each composed of an N-terminal head domain of about 130 amino acids followed by twelve tandem imperfect sequence repeats, each of about 42 amino acids (called armadillo or arm repeats, also found in many other cytoplasmic proteins) and a C-terminal tail of about 100 amino acids [1]. The three regions have distinctive charge distributions; the head and tail regions are acidic, whereas the arm repeat region is highly basic.

-catenin was first identified as a structural component of vertebrate adherens junctions, where it functions in a complex of proteins that link cadherins, the transmembrane adhesion receptors, to the cytoskeleton [1]. The primary structure of -catenin revealed ~70% sequence identity to the armadillo protein from Drosophila, which is known to function in embryo patterning and cell-fate decisions [2]. Armadillo and -catenin turn out to be true cross-species orthologues that serve the same functions in flies and vertebrates -- both have a function in cell adhesion as structural components of adherens junctions, and both proteins are important in signal transduction pathways that powerfully mediate cell-fate decisions. It has now been shown that mutations affecting the cellular level of -catenin are associated with two of the most common forms of human cancer, melanoma [3] and colorectal cancer [4,5]. The crystal structure of the core domain from -catenin recently reported by Huber et al. gives clues on how -catenin functions in these diverse roles [6]. In its cell-adhesion role, -catenin helps link cadherins to the actin cytoskeleton [7]; it binds directly to the cytoplasmic tail of cadherin molecules, and simultaneously binds to the unrelated protein -catenin, which is in turn linked to actin filaments (Figure 1). Catenin-mediated linkage to the cytoskeleton appears to be crucial to the function of adherens junctions; cadherins cannot mediate cell adhesion in cells that lack either - or -catenin. In its signaling role [8,9], -catenin/armadillo is involved in the Wnt/wingless growth factor signaling pathway (wingless is the Drosophila homologue of Wnt). In Drosophila, this pathway mediates anterior/posterior patterning within each segment of the fly embryo [2]. In vertebrates, the

1266

Structure 1997, Vol 5 No 10

Figure 1 -catenin function in adhesion and signaling. -catenin is a structural component of the cadherin cell adhesion complex, and also functions in the Wnt growth factor signaling pathway. In cell adhesion, -catenin helps link cadherin adhesion molecules to cytoskeletal actin filaments. In its signal transduction role, -catenin functions as a transcriptional co-activator of target genes involved in cell differentiation and proliferation. The Wnt signal regulates cytoplasmic levels of -catenin; only when levels are high can -catenin translocate to the nucleus to activate downstream effectors. See text for details.

Cadherins

Wnt

Frizz

led

-catenin Dsh -catenin Actin fibers GSK
Cytosol

-catenin

APC

Destruction of -catenin (in the absence of Wnt)

-catenin LEF
Nucleus

Transcription

Figure 2

Huber et al. [6] subjected -catenin to limited proteolysis and found that a stable nicked fragment was produced that approximately corresponds to the arm repeat region. An analogous recombinant protein termed 59 was constructed, and the crystal structure of this 538 residue protein was determined by MAD analysis of the selemethionine-substituted molecule. It is this region of the molecule composed of 12 armadillo repeats, encompassed by 59, that mediates the interaction of -catenin with most of its known binding partners. Deletion mutagenesis has mapped the binding sites for E-cadherin, LEF-1, and APC to -catenin's core armadillo repeat region. Notably, binding to E-cadherin and APC seems to be mutually exclusive, and -catenin bound to cadherins in adherens junctions should be therefore inaccessible to APC-mediated degradation. 59, which includes the twelve arm repeats, forms a rodlike structure composed entirely of  helices with short

The morphogenic power of -catenin is illustrated by the effect of injecting its mRNA into Xenopus embryos. This embryo was injected ventrally, earlier in development during early cleavage stage. catenin can cause dorsalization of cells that would have otherwise assumed a ventral fate. The result here is duplication of the embryonic axis -- the most striking feature being the growth of two heads.

Minireview b-catenin structure Shapiro

1267

Figure 3 The 59 structure determined by Huber et al. [6], which includes the entire -catenin armadillo repeat region, is shown as a topology (a) and a ribbon diagram (b). Helices H1, H2 and H3 are colored blue, red and green, respectively. The twelve armadillo repeat regions are numbered accordingly. The H1 helix from the first arm repeat is disordered in the 59 crystal structure. The H3 helices (green) of the first ten arm repeats define a putative binding groove for the -catenin binding partners, APC, Tcf family transcription factors and cadherins. (Reproduced from [6] with kind permission of the authors.)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

NH2

COOH

connecting loops between them (Figure 3). As was suggested by the proteolysis studies, the arm repeats are not a series of domains like beads on a string. Rather, they form a single domain with a continuous hydrophobic core formed by interactions between adjacent arm repeats. Each arm repeat is made up of three helices, H1, H2 and H3. The arm repeats pack together to form a remarkably
Figure 4 Electrostatic surface of 59. The three views are related by successive 90° rotations about the vertical axis. The long positively charged (blue) groove is the proposed binding site for many -catenin binding partners. Mutagenesis studies have implicated negatively charged regions of these molecules in their interaction with -catenin. (Reproduced from [6] with kind permission of the authors.)

regular right-handed superhelix of helices. This regular structure is created by a canonical `3 in 4' knobs into holes packing, in which every third sidechain of one helix inserts into the grooves created by every fourth sidechain of another. This leads to an average 30° rotation and 10 Å translation per arm repeat. Although deviations in the canonical topology are found in repeats 7 and 10, the

1268

Structure 1997, Vol 5 No 10

superhelix is substantially diverted only in the vicinity of repeats 8 and 9, where a 50° bend creates a kink in the molecule. H2 helices from adjacent repeats pack in parallel with one another, as do H3 helices, thus forming a two-sided spiraling ribbon with each side of the ribbon connected by orthogonal short H1 helices. The H3 side of the spiraling ribbon creates a long shallow groove, about 95 Å long and 20 Å wide, which runs along the first ten arm repeats. This groove contains a large band of positively charged residues (Figure 4). Huber et al. propose that this positively charged groove might contain the binding sites for cadherins, APC and the Tcf family transcription factors. Several lines of evidence converge to suggest that charge complementarity is important in the interaction of -catenin with its partners. Although the -cateninbinding sites on cadherins, APC and Tcf proteins are unrelated in sequence, all are highly acidic, and deletion mutagenesis studies show that the number of arm repeats roughly correlates with the strength of -catenin binding to these molecules (see references in [6]). Finally, phosphorylation of the -catenin-binding site of APC, which would increase its negative charge, enhances its interaction with -catenin [4]. All of these observations argue the importance of charge complementarity over a large surface. This is also quite satisfying as an explanation of how -catenin can bind to its multitude of structurally diverse partners. The 95 Å H3 groove could accommodate an extended polypeptide of 25­30 amino acids, or larger polypeptides in other conformations. Ultimately, co-crystal structures of -catenin in complex with its binding partners will be needed to understand the atomic-level function of -catenin in its many roles with its many partners.
Acknowledgements
Thanks are due to François Fagotto, Ursula Gluck and Barry Gumbiner for providing the Xenopus embryo figure, and to Andrew Huber and Bill Weis for the figures of the -catenin structure.

7. Aberle, H., Butz, S., Stappert, J., Weissig, H., Kemler, R. & Hoschuetzky, H. (1994). Assembly of the cadherin-catenin complex in vitro with recombinant proteins. J. Cell Sci. 107, 3655­3663. 8. Gumbiner, B.M. (1995). Signal transduction of beta-catenin. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 7, 634­640. 9. Miller, J.R. & Moon, R.T. (1996). Signal transduction through betacatenin and specification of cell fate during embryogenesis. Genes Dev. 10, 2527­2539. 10. McCrea, P.D., Brieher, W.M. & Gumbiner, B.M. (1993). Induction of a secondary body axis in Xenopus by antibodies to beta-catenin. J. Cell Biol. 123, 477­484. 11. Peifer, M., Sweeton, D., Casey, M. & Wieschaus, E. (1994). wingless signal and Zeste-white 3 kinase trigger opposing changes in the intracellular distribution of Armadillo. Development 120, 369­380. 12. Bhanot, P., et al., & Nusse, R. (1996). A new member of the frizzled family from Drosophila functions as a wingless receptor. Nature 382, 225­230. 13. Behrens, J., et al., & Birchmeier, W. (1996). Functional interaction of -catenin with the transcription factor LEF-1. Nature 382, 638­642. 14. Oyama, T., et. al., Hirohashi, S. (1994). A truncated beta-catenin disrupts the interaction between E-cadherin and alpha-catenin: a cause of loss of intercellular adhesiveness in human cancer cell lines. Cancer Res. 54, 6282­6287.

References
1. McCrea, P.D., Turck, C.W. & Gumbiner, B. (1991). A homolog of the armadillo protein in Drosophila (plakoglobin) associated with E-cadherin. Science 254, 1359­1361. 2. Wieschaus, E. & Riggleman, R. (1987). Autonomous requirements for the segment polarity gene armadillo during Drosophila embryogenesis. Cell 49, 177­184. 3. Rubinfeld, B., Robbins, P., El-Gamil, M., Albert, I., Porfiri, E. & Polakis, P. (1997). Stabilization of beta-catenin by genetic defects in melanoma cell lines. Science 275, 1790­1792. 4. Rubinfeld, B., Robbins, P., El-Gamil, M., Albert, I., Porfiri, E. & Polakis, P. (1996). Binding of gsk3 to the APC--catenin complex and regulation of complex assembly. Science 272, 1023­1026. 5. Su, L.-K., Vogelstein, B. & Kinzler, K.W. (1993). Association of the APC tumor suppressor protein with catenins. Science 262, 1734­1737. 6. Huber, A.H., Nelson, W.J. & Weis, W.I. (1997). Three-dimensional structure of the armadillo repeat region of -catenin. Cell 90, 871­881

