PROTEINS: Structure, Function, and Genetics 44:490 ­504 (2001)

Interactions of Streptomyces Griseus Aminopeptidase With Amino Acid Reaction Products and Their Implications Toward a Catalytic Mechanism
R. Gilboa,1 A. Spungin-Bialik,2 G. Wohlfahrt,3 D. Schomburg,3 S. Blumberg,2 and G. Shoham1* 1 Department of Inorganic Chemistry and the Laboratory for Structural Chemistry and Biology, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel 2 Sackler Institute of Molecular Medicine, Department of Human Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel 3 Institute of Biochemistry, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany

ABSTRACT Streptomyces griseus aminopeptidase (SGAP) is a double-zinc exopeptidase with a high preference toward large hydrophobic aminoterminus residues. It is a monomer of a relatively low molecular weight (30 kDa), it is heat stable, it displays a high and efficient catalytic turnover, and its activity is modulated by calcium ions. The small size, high activity, and heat stability make SGAP a very attractive enzyme for various biotechnological applications, among which is the processing of recombinant DNA proteins and fusion protein products. Several free amino acids, such as phenylalanine, leucine, and methionine, were found to act as weak inhibitors of SGAP and hence were chosen for structural studies. These inhibitors can potentially be regarded as product analogs because one of the products obtained in a normal enzymatic reaction is the cleaved amino terminal amino acid of the substrate. The current study includes the X-ray crystallographic analysis of the SGAP complexes with methionine (1.53 Å resolution), leucine (1.70 Å resolution), and phenylalanine (1.80 Å resolution). These three high-resolution structures have been used to fully characterize the SGAP active site and to identify some of the functional groups of the enzyme that are involved in enzyme-substrate and enzymeproduct interactions. A unique binding site for the terminal amine group of the substrate (including the side chains of Glu131 and Asp160, as well as the carbonyl group of Arg202) is indicated to play an important role in the binding and orientation of both the substrate and the product of the catalytic reaction. These studies also suggest that Glu131 and Tyr246 are directly involved in the catalytic mechanism of the enzyme. Both of these residues seem to be important for substrate binding and orientation, as well as the stabilization of the tetrahedral transition state of the enzyme-substrate complex. Glu131 is specifically suggested to function as a general base during catalysis by promoting the nucleophilic attack of the zinc-bound water/hydroxide on the substrate carbonyl carbon. The structures of the three SGAP complexes are compared with recent structures of three related aminopeptidases: Aeromo©

nas proteolytica aminopeptidase (AAP), leucine aminopeptidase (LAP), and methionine aminopeptidase (MAP) and their complexes with corresponding inhibitors and analogs. These structural results have been used for the simulation of several species along the reaction coordinate and for the suggestion of a general scheme for the proteolytic reaction catalyzed by SGAP. Proteins 2001;44:490 ­504.
©

2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

Key words: aminopeptidase; double-zinc metalloproteinase; inhibition; crystal structure; kinetics; molecular modeling; reaction mechanism INTRODUCTION Aminopeptidases catalyze the hydrolysis of aminoterminal amino acids of many peptides and proteins. These enzymes are widely distributed in all organisms from bacteria to mammals and have been found in subcellular organelles and in the cytoplasm, as both membranebound and secreted enzymes.1­3 Aminopeptidases appear in both monomeric and multimeric forms, and many of them, but not all, are zinc proteinases. Aminopeptidases have been recognized as essential participants in many biological functions such as protein maturation, degradation of proteins, hormone level regulation, and cell-cycle control. It is not surprising, therefore, that altered aminoAbbreviations: SGAP, Streptomyces griseus aminopeptidase; LAP, leucine aminopeptidase; MAP, methionine aminopeptidase; AAP, Aeromonas proteolytica aminopeptidase; PAP, proline aminopeptidase; PEG, polyethylene glycol; PIPH, p-iodo-D-phenylalanine hydroxamate; Tris, Tris[hydroxymethyl]aminomethane; LPA, L-leucinephosphonic acid; MPA, L-methioninephosphonic acid; PDB, Protein Data Bank; CCD, charge coupled diode; RMSD, root-mean-square deviation; MD, molecular dynamics; TS, transition state. Grant sponsor: German Federal Ministry of Education, Science, Research, and Technology; Grant sponsor: Israeli Ministry of Science; Grant sponsor: Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities­Israel Science Foundation. *Correspondence to: G. Shoham, Department of Inorganic Chemistry, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel 91904. E-mail: gil2@vms.huji.ac.il Received 10 August 2000; Accepted 1 May 2001

2001 WILEY-LISS, INC.

INTERACTIONS OF S. GRISEUS AMINOPEPTIDASE WITH AMINO ACID PRODUCTS

491

peptidase activity has been associated with a variety of pathological conditions, including aging, cancer, cataract, inflammation, cystic fibrosis, and leukemia, to name a few.1­3 Aminopeptidases are typically grouped into two subgroups. The first subgroup includes aminopeptidases that are capable of removing a range of hydrophobic amino acids from the N-terminus of a polypeptide chain. Enzymes of this subgroup are bovine lens leucine aminopeptidase (LAP) and the aminopeptidase from Aeromonas proteolytica (AAP). The second subgroup includes aminopeptidases that selectively remove a specific amino acid residue from the N-terminus of a polypeptide chain. Enzymes of this subgroup are methionine aminopeptidases (MAP) and proline aminopeptidases (PAP).1 Streptomyces griseus aminopeptidase (SGAP) belongs to the first subgroup. It is a double-zinc exopeptidase that cleaves the N-terminal residue from protein and polypeptide substrates with a high preference toward large hydrophobic amino-terminus residues. SGAP is one of the enzymes present in the extracellular fluid of S. griseus cultures. It is a monomer of a relatively low molecular weight (30 kDa), it is heat stable, it displays a high and efficient catalytic turnover, and its activity is modulated by calcium ions.4,5 The small size, high activity, and heat stability, make SGAP a very attractive enzyme for various biotechnological applications, among which is the processing of recombinant DNA proteins and fusion protein products.6 ­ 8 The crystal structure of SGAP has been determined for the native enzyme at 1.75 Å and 1.58 Å resolution,9,10 and its complex with the reaction product L-methionine has been determined at 1.53 Å resolution.10 The crystallographic models revealed the double-zinc active site with a distance of 3.6 Å between the two zinc ions. Each of the zinc ions has one imidazole group (His85 for Zn1 and His247 for Zn2) and one carboxylate group (Asp160 for Zn1 and Glu132 for Zn2) as ligands and a carboxylate group (Asp97) bridging the two zinc ions. There is also a hydroxide ion bound, almost symmetrically, to both zinc ions. Each of the active site zinc ions in SGAP is hence coordinated to three protein ligands and a hydroxide ligand in a distorted tetrahedral geometry. The X-ray crystal structure of the SGAP complex with L-methionine led us to propose a general catalytic mechanism that is similar, in part, to that of the monozinc proteinases thermolysin and carboxypeptidase A.10 This structure specifically emphasized the critical mechanistic role of an active site carboxylate (Glu131) that was found to be involved in a hydrogen bond to the bridging oxygen atom of the bound Lmethionine. Very little information is available regarding the specific inhibition of SGAP. Our attempts to obtain structural information on the enzyme with bound analogs started with those few compounds that exhibited some degree of inhibition with SGAP. Several free amino acids, such as phenylalanine, leucine, and methionine, were found to act as weak inhibitors of SGAP (Ki values in the range of 8 ­13 10 3 M)11 and were hence chosen for the initial

structural studies. These inhibitors can potentially be regarded as product analogs because one of the products obtained in a normal enzymatic reaction is the cleaved amino terminal amino acid of the substrate. In the framework of this study we previously reported10 the structure of the complex of SGAP with L-methionine. In this article we present the crystal structures of the complexes of SGAP with two other amino acids that show comparable inhibition of SGAP, L-leucine (Ki 12.4 mM in the presence of Ca2 ) and L-phenylalanine (Ki 12.7 mM in the presence of Ca2 ). The structural results of these complexes are compared with relevant structural data of other aminopeptidases and are used as a basis to suggest a general catalytic scheme for SGAP. MATERIALS AND METHODS Crystallization Native SGAP was purified as described previously.4,11 Single crystals of the SGAP/Met complex were originally grown in a period of 3­ 4 months by the hanging drop, vapor diffusion method. The protein solution contained 18 mg/mL SGAP in 10 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.0, 20 mM NaCl, 6 mM CaCl2, and 100 mM L-methionine. The protein crystallization drops were made of equal volumes of the protein solution mixed with a precipitant solution containing 24% (w/v) PEG-4000 and 0.1 M ammonium sulfate. These drops were equilibrated against 1 mL reservoir of the precipitant solution. Microseeding techniques were later used to speed the crystallization process to 3­ 4 days. A well-formed but small crystal was taken and moved to a drop (60 L) containing diluted precipitant solution. Once the crystal had been transferred, it was thoroughly crushed, and the drop was thoroughly mixed. The freshly made microcrystals were transferred to protein/precipitant drops. The precipitant solution contained instead of 24% PEG-4000, only 18% PEG-4000. Experiments indicated that crystals would not grow without seeding at these concentrations of PEG. The drops were equilibrated against 1 mL reservoir of the precipitant solution for 24 h before the microcrystals were transferred. In these conditions, crystals would appear in 3­ 4 days after seeding and grow to their full size (on average, 0.8 0.4 0.4 mm) in about a week. Crystals of the SGAP/Leu complex were grown under similar conditions. The protein solution contained 18 mg/mL SGAP in 10 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.0, 20 mM NaCl, 6 mM CaCl2, and 200 mM L-Leucine. Microcrystals for seeding were made by crashing native SGAP crystals (and not the complex). We were not able to get single crystals of the SGAP/Phe complex in the same crystallization conditions. Instead, a protein solution containing 18 mg/mL SGAP in 10 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.0, 20 mM NaCl, 6 mM CaCl2, and 100 mM L-Phenylalanine was mixed with a precipitant solution containing 18% (w/v) PEG-4000 and 0.1 M acetate buffer (pH 5.5) and used for crystal growth. Microseeding techniques were used here again to shorten the crystal growing period from 8 ­10 weeks to 3­ 4 days. Microcrystals for seeding were made by crashing native SGAP crystals.

492

R. GILBOA ET AL.

TABLE I. Summary of Crystallographic Data Collection and Refinement Parameters SGAP/Met a b, c (Å) Unique reflections Resolution (Å) Completeness (last shell) (%) Redundancy I/ Rsym (last shell) (%) Protein atoms Solvent molecules Rfactor (Rfree) (%) RMSD from ideal geometry Bond length (Å) Bond angles (°) 61.93, 146.64 42,800 32­1.53 97.5 (89.8) 5­6 16.6 7.3 (21.4) 2,055 294 14.8 (17.3) 0.019 1.9 SGAP/Leu 61.99, 146.87 31,106 30­1.7 95.8 (84.2) 4­5 11.3 8.3 (17.6) 2,044 208 14.7 (17.5) 0.018 1.8 SGAP/Phe 62.18, 146.98 27,246 48­1.8 98.5 (98.9) 4­5 10.6 6.1 (20.1) 2,045 295 18.7 (22.5) 0.019 1.7

Rsym ( I I )/ I, excluding single measurements. Rfactor and Rfree ( Fo Fc )/ Fo , for reflections in the working (Rfactor) and test (Rfree) sets, respectively. For the test set, 10% of the total reflections (randomly picked) were used.

Crystallographic Data Measurement High-resolution diffraction data were obtained from a single crystal of the SGAP/Met and SGAP/Leu complexes at room temperature. These data were recorded with a MAR-300 imaging plate area detector (MAR Research, Norderstedt, Germany) by using the X26C beamline at the NSLS synchrotron facility, Brookhaven National Labs (BNL). The crystal of the SGAP/Phe complex was flashcooled to 110 K under nitrogen stream after soaking the crystal for 2 min in 30% PEG-4000 solution. Diffraction data were measured with a Quantum-4 CCD area detector (ADSC) using the X26C beamline at the NSLS synchrotron facility. All imaging plate diffraction data were processed with DENZO and SCALEPACK12 to give final merged intensity data set. Representative measurement statistics for the data are shown in Table I. Structure Analysis and Refinement Because the crystals of all three SGAP complexes were found to be completely isomorphous to the crystals of native SGAP (P41212 space group and 2% difference in the unit cell dimensions), we used the 1.58 Å structure of native SGAP10 as the initial model. Difference Fourier calculations were used to locate the bound amino acids, as well as to determine the conformational changes in the active site caused by the binding. Crystallographic refinement was performed by using CNS.13 Ten percent of the measured reflections was set aside throughout all refinement steps and used to calculate the free R-factor.14 The position of the protein in the unit cell was improved by rigid body refinement. Subsequent refinement was performed by using alternating round of manual rebuilding and simulated annealing or positional minimization with individual temperature factor refinement. All model building was performed with the program O.15 Solvent molecules were included gradually from the Fo-Fc electron density maps if the peak height was stronger than 3.5 and the position was near (2.5­3.5 Å) a suitable hydrogen bonding donor or acceptor (Fig. 1).

The model for the inhibitors was included in the refinement after most of the protein was already well refined and the difference electron density (Fo-Fc) for the inhibitor was well defined. The electron density difference maps showed very clearly the bound amino acids in the SGAP active site, enabling a straightforward identification of all of their non-hydrogen atoms. Based on their relative electron density, the bound inhibitory amino acids were assigned with full occupancies and were refined as such through all the refinement cycles. No exceptional B-values were obtained for any of the regions of the enzyme/ inhibitor complexes. The atoms of the bound inhibitors showed reasonable temperature factors (average B-value of 17.3 Å2) that were also relatively similar to those of the atoms of the surrounding protein groups in the active site (average B-value of 11.6 Å2). The structure was manually inspected with simulated annealed "omit" and "weighted" electron density maps with (2Fo-Fc) and (Fo-Fc) coefficients, and progress of the refinement was confirmed by the steady decrease in both the R-value and R(free). The matrices for superposition of the different SGAP models were calculated by leastsquares distance minimization algorithm implemented inside the program O using the Ca-atoms as the guide coordinates, even the RMS difference has been analyzed for other atom types. Details of the refinement are listed in Table I. Figures 1­3 and 5­9 were prepared by using MOLSCRIPT16 and Raster3D.17 Figures 4(a) and 4(b) were prepared with the program Ligplot.18 Figures 10(a)­10(c) were prepared with the program BRAGI.19 Structural Models of Reaction Intermediates A representative substrate (Met-Ala-Ala) was modeled with BRAGI19 into the active site of the enzyme by adding two alanine residues to the C-terminus of the bound methionine inhibitor as obtained from the crystallographic structure of the SGAP/Met complex. The two alanine residues were positioned in a way that they approximately

INTERACTIONS OF S. GRISEUS AMINOPEPTIDASE WITH AMINO ACID PRODUCTS

493

tional calculations at the B3LYP/6-31G* level with GAUSSIAN 9423 using an electrostatic potential fitting method.24 The initial orientation of this gem-diolate in the active site was derived from the SGAP/Met structure and the previously published structure of the SGAP/phosphate complex.9 A recent structural analysis (1.6 Å resolution) of the SGAP/phosphate complex at controlled concentrations of the phosphate anion confirms the phosphate coordination used for the current study (Gilboa et al., 2000, unpublished results). A model for the product situation with a (doubly charged) methionine and an alanine dipeptide was constructed on the basis of the SGAP/Met structure and the modeled Michaelis complex. Each modeled complex was energy minimized and then equilibrated by molecular dynamics for 100 ps at 298 K with an integration interval of 1 fs, and the systems trajectory was analyzed for another 100 ps. Only the atoms of the residues inside a 12 Å radius around Zn1 were allowed to move during the simulations. The force-field calculations were conducted at a dielectric constant of 1. A 10 Å cutoff distance for nonbonded interactions was used. During the molecular dynamics simulations, the SHAKE algorithm25 was used to constrain the covalent bonds to their equilibrium bond length. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Structure of the Complexes of SGAP With Amino Acids As described above, the binding mode of the reaction products methionine, leucine, and phenylalanine were determined by X-ray crystallographic analysis of the complexes of SGAP with these compounds. The complexes were obtained by a cocrystallization of the amino acids with the enzyme in mother liquor solutions containing 100 ­200 mM of each of the specific amino acid. The maximum resolution of the data ranged from 1.53 to 1.80 Å and refinements resulting in final structural models of acceptable geometries and crystallographic R-factors of 14.7­18.7% (Table I). The estimated error for the coordinates in these final structures is in the range of 0.08 ­ 0.17 Å,26 a relatively small error that indicates the significance of even small structural changes. As in the previously reported structure of SGAP,9,10 there is no interpretable electron density for the seven C-terminal amino acid residues of the enzyme (residues 278 ­284), as well as for the side-chain atoms of Arg202 and Asp200. In addition to these disordered regions in all three structures, in the structure of the SGAP/Phe complex there is no interpretable electron density for residues 199 ­201. These residues belong to a flexible loop near the active site (including residues 196 ­202), which was shown to be even less ordered in the structure of the native, uncomplexed enzyme.9,10 Binding of the inhibitory amino acids to SGAP A schematic structural representation of the complete SGAP/Phe complex (Fig. 2) shows the overall structure of the enzyme together with the site and orientation of the

Fig. 1. a: Electron density difference map (Fo-Fc coefficients) for the final structure of the SGAP/Leu complex, showing the observed density (contour level of 4 , cyan) for the bound leucine (Leu) in the active site of SGAP. b: Similar map for the final structure of the SGAP/Phe complex, showing the observed density for the bound phenylalanine (Phe) in the active site of the enzyme. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at www.interscience.wiley.com.]

follow the open channel observed on the hydrophobic surface of the enzyme. The water molecule, respectively, the hydroxide ion, observed in the native SGAP structure at 1.58 Å resolution10 was introduced as a potential nucleophile. The AMBER 4.1 program package20 was used for the force-field calculations with an all-atom force field21 and additional parameters for zinc.22 The model with the hydroxide ion was simulated with Glu131 in protonated and unprotonated form. Twelve crystallographic water molecules from the active site region were added to the system, and the space within a 12 Å radius of the Zn1 was filled with water molecules. The water molecules were constrained to the center of the sphere by a harmonic potential with a force constant of 0.5 kcal/mol Å2. A model for a hypothetical transition state was built by assuming the formation of a tetrahedral gem-diolate intermediate. Atomic charges for force-field calculations with this intermediate were derived from hybrid density func-

494

R. GILBOA ET AL.

bound amino acid. The general binding modes of leucine and phenylalanine with SGAP are very similar to that of methionine,10 as shown in Figure 3. A superposition of the C coordinates of the SGAP/Leu complex and the SGAP/ Phe complex onto the C coordinates of the SGAP/Met complex (not shown here) indicates no significant difference, comparing the enzyme structure in the three com-

Fig. 2. A schematic plot of the complete structure of the SGAP/Phe complex, using a ribbon diagram for the enzyme and a stick model for the bound amino acid. The polypeptide chain of the enzyme is color coded so that it starts (amino-terminus) in dark blue and then gradually changes into blue, light blue, blue-green, light green, green, green-yellow, yellow, yellow-orange, orange, orange-red and red (carboxy-terminus), showing the overall structure of the enzyme and its secondary structure elements. The active site zinc cations are shown as pink balls (Zn1 and Zn2, middle right), the bound calcium cation is shown as an orange ball (Ca, bottom left), and the atoms of the bound inhibitory phenylalanine (Phe) are colored according to the usual atom types.

plexes. Similarly, the molecular conformation of SGAP in the three complexes shows no significant changes from that of the native enzyme.10 The RMSD in the backbone coordinates between the native enzyme and the three enzyme complexes is 0.3 Å, and the crystal packing of all four SGAP structures is very similar. The small differences in the unit cell lengths of these three SGAP/amino acid complexes (Table I) are likely to be due to subtle structural changes in each particular complex resulting from enzyme-inhibitor and enzyme-solvent interactions. The position and orientation of the bound amino acid in the active site of the enzyme is also very similar for the three amino acids, except for obvious structural and conformational changes of the amino acid side chain (Fig. 3). A quantitative value for such similarity is obtained by the RMSD between the bound amino acids after a leastsquares fit (on all C coordinates) of the binding enzyme in each of the complexes. Such RMS difference is based on the six common atoms of these amino acids (the three carboxylate atoms and C , C , and N) and gives a value of 0.07 Å difference between the coordinates of the bound methionine and leucine, a value of 0.135 Å difference between the coordinates of the bound methionine and phenylalanine, and a value of 0.120 Å difference between the coordinates of the bound phenylalanine and leucine. As for the binding enzyme, it looks like the slightly larger differences of the bound phenylalanine from the other two amino acids originate mainly from the size and spatial constrains of its aromatic side chain rather than a significant difference in its binding to the active site zinc atoms. The details of the SGAP interactions with the bound leucine and phenylalanine are shown in the corresponding SGAP active site schemes [Figs. 4(a) and 4(b)]. The three inhibitors were found to be bound to the active site zinc ions, displacing the zinc-bound water/hydroxide of the native enzyme in the solvent-accessible face of the active site. The free carboxylate group that bridges the two zinc ions conducts the most significant contacts of the inhibitors with SGAP. These two Zn-O interactions are rela-

Fig. 3. Stereoview comparison of the active site of the SGAP/Met complex (1.53 Å res., green) with the active sites of the SGAP/Leu complex (1.70 Å res., blue) and the SGAP/Phe complex (1.80 Å res., red). Note the similar binding mode of the methionine (light green), the leucine (light blue), and the phenylalanine (light orange) in the active site of SGAP.

INTERACTIONS OF S. GRISEUS AMINOPEPTIDASE WITH AMINO ACID PRODUCTS

495

atoms and the hydroxyl group of Tyr246 and a hydrogen bond between the other carboxylate oxygen and the carboxylate group of Glu131. In addition, for both complexes there are three hydrogen bonds between the amino acid amine nitrogen (present probably as a NH3 group) and the backbone carbonyl oxygen of Arg202, a carboxylate oxygen of Asp160 and the other carboxylate oxygen of Glu131 [Figs. 4(a) and 4(b)]. Specific interactions of Met, Leu, and Phe in the active site of SGAP As mentioned earlier, several free amino acids, such as phenylalanine, leucine, and methionine, act as weak inhibitors of SGAP. The Ki values of these three amino acids in the presence of calcium ions are similar. They range from 8.7 mM for methionine to 12.4 mM for leucine and 12.7 mM for phenylalanine.11 The substrate-binding pocket has a volume of 265 Å3 and its surface is 192 Å2, of which 73% are formed by nonpolar atoms as calculated with the program Cast27 (with solvent accessible surface of 114 Å2 and volume of 52 Å3). There are only nonpolar contacts between the inhibitor side chains and the protein (Fig. 4). This explains why the pocket can accommodate only nonpolar side chains up to the size of phenylalanine. Small nonpolar side chains, such as alanine, do not fill the cavity completely. Because the main difference between the three free amino acids focuses in their nonpolar side chains, the small difference in the binding constant for the three products/inhibitors is likely to be mainly due to nonpolar enzyme-inhibitor interactions and hydrophobic effects involving these side chains. The only obvious difference in the binding modes of the three complexes is the - interaction between the enzyme Phe219 side chain and the phenyl ring of the bound phenylalanine in the SGAP/Phe complex. To enable such aromatic stacking interaction for the bound phenylalanine in the hydrophobic binding pocket of the enzyme, there is a slight conformational change in the phenylalanine side chain (a rotation of 32° around the C -C bond) relative to the corresponding conformation of the other two bound amino acids. This conformational change brings the aromatic rings of the bound phenylalanine and that of the enzyme Phe219 to an enthalpically favorable "face-to-face" interaction.28,29 It is of interest that there is only little conformational change in the side chain of Phe219 in this case. The binding site geometry is recognizing specifically N-terminal amino groups, and there is only low specificity for certain side chains of the N-terminal amino acid. Comparison With Other Dizinc Aminopeptidases The three-dimensional structure of two related aminopeptidases was recently determined to high resolution, Aeromonas proteolytica aminopeptidase (AAP)30 and bovine lens leucine aminopeptidase (LAP).31,32 As for SGAP, these aminopeptidases contain a double-zinc catalytic center that is bridged by a water/hydroxide ligand in the native enzyme and are hence a relevant target for structural comparison.

Fig. 4. a: Interactions of the bound leucine with SGAP as shown in a schematic diagram of the active site region of the SGAP/Leu complex. The protein bonds are shown in orange, the bound leucine (Leu) bonds are shown in purple, the Zn atoms are shown in green, whereas the rest of the atoms have the standard atomic colors. Dashed lines indicate hydrogen bonds or ionic interactions, whereas "radiating" spheres indicate hydrophobic contacts between the bound leucine (small spheres) and the neighboring protein groups (larger spheres). b: A similar diagram showing the interactions of the bound phenylalanine with SGAP in the SGAP/Phe complex. [Figs. 4(a) and 4(b) were prepared with the program Ligplot.18] [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at www.interscience.wiley.com.]

TABLE II. Selected SGAP/Inhibitor Interactions (Å) in the Final Crystallographic Structures Enzyme atom Zn-1 Zn-2 Zn-2 Glu-131 O 1 Tyr-246 OH Glu-131 O 2 Asp-160 O 2 Arg-202 O Inhibitor atom OT O OT OT O N N N Distance (Å) Met 2.23 1.98 2.70 2.76 2.95 2.82 2.76 2.68 Leu 2.22 2.09 2.68 2.81 2.90 2.90 2.86 2.50 Phe 2.42 2.12 2.62 2.80 2.72 2.98 2.84 2.68

tively short, yet they are not symmetrical (Table II). The amino acids binding in the active site are further stabilized by a hydrogen bond between one of its carboxylate oxygen

496

R. GILBOA ET AL.

Comparison of the SGAP/Phe complex with the AAP/ PIPH complex Although SGAP and AAP have amino acid sequence homology of only 30%,33 70% of their C atoms can be superimposed with a deviation of 1.8 Å by the method of Lessel and Schomburg.34 The two enzymes contain a similar catalytic core9 and differ in topology mainly by an additional helix at the amino end of the protein (in AAP relative to SGAP) and an additional helix at the Cterminal end of the protein (in SGAP relative to AAP). Another difference between the two enzymes is the calciumbinding site that is present in SGAP (near the amino end of the protein) and absent in AAP. Both SGAP and AAP share, however, a very similar double-zinc coordination,10 including the two protein ligands to each zinc ion (His and Asp to Zn1; His and Glu to Zn2), the bridging carboxylate group of a protein Asp, and the bridging water/hydroxide ligand, which seems to be common to all double-zinc hydrolases. A structural comparison of the current SGAP complexes with amino acids to the complex of AAP with p-iodo-Dphenylalanine hydroxamate35 (PIPH) shows a general resemblance in the double-zinc environment of the two systems, as shown in the superposition of the SGAP/Phe structure and the AAP/PIPH structure (Fig. 5). In both structures the inhibitor is bound as a bidentate ligand to one of the zinc ions, whereas only one inhibitor oxygen atom is bridging between the two zinc ions. In both structures there is also a significant interaction of a nearby glutamate (Glu131 in SGAP; Glu151 in AAP) with one of the zinc-bound oxygen atoms of the analog. A significant difference in the binding interactions of the two complexes is apparent, however, in the parts of the two inhibitors that are away from the double-zinc center. Figure 5 clearly shows that the CH(NH2)-CH2-phenyl moiety of the phenylalanine in the SGAP/Phe complex binds in a completely different position and orientation, compared with the binding of the rather similar CH(NH2)CH2-(p-iodo-phenyl) moiety of the PIPH inhibitor in the AAP/PIPH complex. The different binding orientations are definitely affected from the different chirality of the two types of bound molecules (L for the phenylalanine and the other amino acids; D for the hydroxamate), which probably dictate the relative direction of the bound moiety in the active site of the enzyme. The different direction of the two types of inhibitors is best shown by the opposite orientation assumed by the free amine group in the two types of molecules (C-N bond directions, which are 180° from each other; Fig. 5). Moreover, the amino group of the phenylalanine (as well as the other amino acids) forms three strong hydrogen bonds with Asp160, Glu131, and Arg202 of SGAP, as discussed above, whereas PIPH makes only a single hydrogen bond to Tyr225 of AAP in the opposite side of the relatively similar substrate-binding site of these two enzymes. The different orientation of the phenyl ring in the AAP/PIPH complex results also in the loss of its potential face-to-face aromatic interaction with Phe244 compared with the phenylalanine/Phe219 aromatic interaction in the SGAP/Phe complex.

An important hydrogen bond between one of the phenyalanine free carboxylate oxygen atoms and the hydroxyl group of Tyr246 in SGAP (Fig. 5) is also different between the two enzyme/inhibitor complexes compared here. The corresponding hydrogen bond is missing in AAP because a nonpolar residue (Ile255) occupies the position in this enzyme, which is equivalent to Tyr246 of SGAP. The importance of Tyr246 for the catalytic mode of action of SGAP is discussed below, focusing on the specific significance of the hydrogen bond it forms with bound inhibitors. Significant differences are also found when comparing the binding of the transition-state analog L-leucinephosphonic acid (LPA) in AAP and the three amino acids in SGAP. For AAP, kinetic, optical, and EPR data on the binding of LPA to the dicobalt(II) (CoCo-AAP) substituted enzyme and the hetero-bimetallic (CoZn-AAP and ZnCoAAP) enzymes suggested that LPA interacts with both metal centers as an -1,2- -phosphonate, with one of the ligands at the second zinc ion provided by the N-terminal amine of LPA.36 In SGAP the N-terminal amine of the three amino acids is not bound to any of the zinc ions but to a distinct binding site composed of the carbonyl oxygen of Arg202, a carboxylate oxygen of Asp160 and a carboxylate oxygen of Glu131 (as discussed above). It is of interest that a potential binding site for a free amine group is present in AAP, which is very similar to the SGAP amine-binding site in its location and in the spatial arrangement of the potential binding groups of the enzyme. This site includes the carbonyl oxygen of Cys227 and the carboxylate oxygens of Glu151 and Asp179 and maps rather well onto the corresponding site in SGAP. Nevertheless, no amine binding has been observed in this site of AAP as yet. Comparison of the SGAP/Leu complex with the LAP/ LPA complex Leucine aminopeptidase (LAP),31,37 a related high molecular weight enzyme, was shown to be significantly different in both structure and sequence. LAP is a hexamer, where each monomer is built of two structural domains. One of these domains, the catalytic domain containing the double-zinc active site, has a relatively similar overall topology compared with SGAP and AAP, but it contains several additional secondary structural units. Despite this relative similarity in the overall structure, the active site of LAP differs significantly from those of SGAP and AAP, especially in the nature of the zinc ligands and the symmetry between the two active site zinc atoms. To compare the active sites of the two enzymes, they were superimposed on each other on the basis of the coordinates of the two metal ions and the metal-bridging water molecule, which is common to both structures (Fig. 6). This superposition shows the significantly different zinc environment of the two enzymes. In addition to the different coordination geometry around each of the zinc centers, the superposition underscores the two histidine ligands of SGAP that are missing in LAP (although Lys250 of LAP may partially substitute His85 of SGAP) and the different position of the bridging carboxylate group (Glu334

INTERACTIONS OF S. GRISEUS AMINOPEPTIDASE WITH AMINO ACID PRODUCTS

497

Fig. 5. Stereoview comparison of the active site of the SGAP/Phe complex (1.8 Å structure, blue) with the active site of the AAP/PIPH complex (2.3 Å structure, red). Note the significantly different binding mode of PIPH (PIPH, light orange) relative to the binding mode of phenylalanine (Phe, light blue) to the enzyme, especially the position and direction of the amino group (N) of the two inhibitors.

Fig. 6. Stereoview comparison of the active site of native SGAP (1.58 Å structure, blue) and the active site of native LAP (1.6 Å structure, green) showing a low degree of structural similarity in the double-zinc environment of the two enzymes and the interesting overlap between the carboxylate group of Glu131 in SGAP and the bicarbonate ion (CO3, light orange) found in the active site of LAP.

Fig. 7. Stereoview comparison of the active site of the SGAP/Leu complex (1.70 Å structure, blue) with the active site of the LAP/LPA complex (1.65 Å structure, green). Note the significantly different binding mode of LPA (LPA, light orange) relative to the binding mode of leucine (Leu, light blue) to the corresponding enzyme, especially the position and direction of the amino group of the two inhibitors.

498

R. GILBOA ET AL.

in LAP and Asp97 in SGAP) relative to the rest of the zinc ligands (Fig. 6). It is interesting to note, however, that the superposition of the two active sites maps the carboxylate group of Glu 131 of SGAP onto the bicarbonate (hydrogen carbonate) ion found in the LAP active site.32 Based on a similar correlation of LAP and AAP and supported by complementary kinetics and site-directed mutagenesis studies, it was proposed that the bicarbonate ion in LAP has a similar catalytic function to Glu151 in AAP,38 a residue that was previously proposed to be the general base in the enzymatic catalysis of AAP.35,39 On the basis of these results, and the previously observed correlation between the active sites of SGAP and AAP,9,10 it is suggested that the bicarbonate ion observed in LAP, the free carboxylate group of Glu151 in AAP, and the free carboxylate group of Glu131 in SGAP all have a similar role in enzymatic catalysis. It is likely that they all function as a general base that accepts a proton from the zinc bound water, which in turn functions as the catalytic nucleophile (see below). The recently reported crystal structure of LAP complexed with L-leucinephosphonic acid (LPA)40 provides an important reference for comparison between the binding modes of SGAP and LAP. This comparison is especially significant in the case of the SGAP/Leu complex, because LPA and leucine are relatively similar in both size, chirality, and chemical composition. The structure of the LAP/ LPA complex shows that the phosphonate group in LPA interacts with the double-zinc center of the enzyme active site in a very similar way to that of the carboxylate group of leucine in the SGAP/Leu complex (Fig. 7). In both cases, two oxygen atoms of the metal-binding group (phosphonate/ carboxylate) are acting as a bidentate ligand to one of the zinc ions (Zn2 according to the SGAP nomenclature), whereas only one oxygen atom of this group is bridging between the two zinc ions. More importantly, the LAP/LPA structure shows clearly that the terminal amino nitrogen of the bound LPA is directly interacting with one of the zinc ions of the active site (Zn1 according to the SGAP nomenclature). Such interaction is similar to the proposed binding of LPA in AAP (see above) but differs significantly in SGAP, where the terminal amino nitrogen of the bound leucine is not involved in interaction with any of the active site zinc ions. A superposition between the SGAP/Leu structure and the LAP/LPA structure indicates that the two terminal amino groups assume different orientations in the active site of the enzyme with an angular difference of 55° between the two corresponding C -N bonds (Fig. 7). A further support for the difference in the specific binding of inhibitors between LAP and SGAP is obtained from the structure of several other LAP complexes with inhibitors, including the LAP/bestatin,31,37 LAP/amastatin,41 and LAP/L-leucinal.32 In all of these LAP complexes, the terminal amino group is directly bound to one of the zinc ions, in contrast to all the SGAP complexes with amino acids where the terminal amino group is pointing away

from the zinc ions and tightly interacts with three other enzyme residues (see above). The superposition between the structure of the SGAP/ Leu complex and the LAP/LPA complex indicates, however, a potential correlation between Tyr246 in SGAP and Lys262 in LAP (Fig. 7). The side-chain amino group of Lys262 participates in a hydrogen bond to one of the zinc-bound oxygen atoms of the LPA phosphonate group in the LAP/LPA complex (N-O distance of 2.68 Å for subunit A and 2.74 Å for subunit B). The side-chain hydroxyl group of Tyr246 in SGAP participates in a similar hydrogen bond to the equivalent zinc-bound oxygen atom of the leucine carboxylate group in the SGAP/Leu complex (N-O distance of 2.90 Å). In LAP it was suggested that Lys262 may be involved in the polarization of the substrate carbonyl group on binding, and in the stabilization of the resulting transition state in the active site.38 Based on its similar position in the active site relative to the double-zinc center and its similar interaction with the zinc-bound carboxylate, it is likely that Tyr246 of SGAP functions, at least in part, in a similar role in the catalytic mechanism of this enzyme. It is of interest that in AAP there is no residue that is equivalent to Lys262 in LAP and Tyr246 in SGAP, as discussed above. Comparison of the SGAP/Met complex with the MAP/ Met complex Another low molecular weight aminopeptidase for which the three-dimensional structure has been determined is E. coli methionine aminopeptidase (MAP).43 MAP removes the initiator N-terminal methionine residue of proteins and peptides of at least three residues in length but is restricted to substrates containing a small and uncharged residue at the penultimate position.6 It contains two closely positioned cobalt ions in the active site corresponding to the two zinc ions in LAP, AAP, and SGAP. Nevertheless, MAP bears no resemblance to any of these enzymes at either the sequence or the structural level and hence is likely to be a part of a different class of aminopeptidases. The three-dimensional structure of MAP bound to its product, methionine, was recently reported.44 Hence, this structure can serve as a comparison reference to the SGAP/Met complex discussed here. The active sites of the two complexes (MAP/Met and SGAP/Met) have been superimposed on the basis of the coordinates of the two metal ions and the metal-bridging water molecule, making sure that the two substrate-binding pockets generally overlap (Fig. 8). Such superposition shows that in addition to the different arrangement of protein ligands around the doublemetal center, the two enzymes bind methionine in a significantly different fashion. In the SGAP/Met complex the two carboxylate oxygen atoms bind to Zn2 as a bidentate ligand while one of these oxygen atoms is also bridging between the two active site zinc ions. In the MAP/Met complex, only one of the carboxylate oxygen atoms is participating in a cobalt coordination. This oxygen atom is bridging between the two cobalt ions (O-Co1 2.2 Å, O-Co2 2.0 Å) in an almost symmetrical geometry,

INTERACTIONS OF S. GRISEUS AMINOPEPTIDASE WITH AMINO ACID PRODUCTS

499

Fig. 8. Stereoview comparison of the active site of the SGAP/Met complex (1.53 Å structure, blue) with the active site of the MAP/Met complex (1.8 Å structure, red). Note the significantly different binding mode of the amine group of the methionine (Met, light blue for SGAP/Met and orange for MAP/Met) to the two enzymes.

Fig. 9. Stereoview comparison of the active site of the MAP/MPA complex (2.0 Å structure, red; MPA in orange) with the active site of the LAP/LPA complex (1.65 Å structure, green; LPA in yellow).

whereas the other carboxylate oxygen points away from the double-cobalt center. The two structures differ also in the position, direction, and interactions of the free amino group of the bound methionine. In the MAP/Met complex, as in the crystal structure of the LAP/LPA complex and proposed model for the AAP/LPA complex, the free amino group of the bound methionine forms a tight interaction with Co1 (according to the SGAP nomenclature) of the MAP active site. This interaction completes a bidentate binding of methionine to Co1 while blocking the amino group from any other interaction in the active site of the enzyme. The special SGAP "amine-binding site," which provides three strong hydrogen bonds to the methionine free amine group in the SGAP/Met complex, is not present in MAP. In MAP, Glu204 has been suggested to act as a general base in one of the catalytic mechanisms proposed for this enzyme. It is interesting to note that the structural superposition of the MAP/Met and SGAP/Met complexes maps this residue in a general proximity to Glu131 of SGAP. Moreover, in both structures, one of the glutamate carboxylate oxygen atoms forms a tight hydrogen bond to the carboxylate oxygen of the bound methionine, which bridges between the two active site metal ions. This

general similarity is surprising considering the low degree of homology of the two enzymes and the significant differences between their binding modes, yet it may suggest some similarity between the catalytic mechanism of the two enzymes and some correlation between the roles of Glu204 in MAP and Glu 131 in SGAP. Also surprisingly similar between the two enzymes is the hydrogen bond between the nonbridging carboxylate oxygen of the bound methionine and a nearby polar side chain. In MAP it is the imidazole moiety of His178, whereas in SGAP it is the phenolic moiety of Tyr246, as discussed above. The potential role of these residues in the catalytic reaction are discussed below. Other binding features of methionine suggest indirect similarities between SGAP and MAP. In MAP, the second carboxylate oxygen atom of Glu204 is coordinated to one of the cobalt ions, whereas in SGAP there is no direct interaction between Glu131 and the metal center (Fig. 8). In MAP it is suggested, therefore, that Glu204 can potentially regulate the Lewis acidity of the metal ions and as such may play an important role in the formation of the Michaelis complex and/or in the product release. In SGAP, the second carboxylate oxygen atom of Glu131 is not coordinated to either of the zinc ions. In turn, it is bound to

500

R. GILBOA ET AL.

the terminal amine of the bound methionine (as shown above also for the SGAP/Phe and SGAP/Leu complexes) and as such, seems to play an important role in substrate binding and orientation in the active site. The recently reported crystal structure of the MAP complex with L-methioninephosphonic acid (MPA)44 shows the generality of the MAP-analog interactions discussed above, because the binding mode of MPA in the MAP/MPA complex is very similar to that of methionine in the MAP/Met complex. The only structural difference between these two complexes is the additional interaction of one of the phosphonate oxygen atoms with one of the active site cobalt ions (Fig. 9), an interaction that may reflect the slightly different characteristics of a phosphonate group, compared with a carboxylate group with respect to transition metal binding. A superposition of the active site structures of the MAP/MPA complex and the LAP/LPA complex indicates, however, that phosphonate amino acids (L-methioninephosphonic acid for MAP and L-leucinephosphonic acid for LAP) bind almost identically to the doublemetal centers in MAP and LAP. Such binding includes the bidentate interactions of two of the phosphonate oxygen atoms with one of the active site metal ions and the interaction of the free amino group with the other active site metal ion. Moreover, this superposition maps His178 of MAP onto Lys262 of LAP (Fig. 9) and supports the general catalytic role assigned to these residues and to their equivalent Tyr246 in SGAP. Mechanistic Models and Interpretations Structural models for the enzyme/substrate complex, the complex of the enzyme with a possible transition state and the complex of the enzyme with the reaction products, were created by MD simulations based on the highresolution structures of native SGAP9,10 and its complexes with inhibitory amino acids structures, as presented above. These structural data, the corresponding kinetic data, and the structural comparison with related aminopeptidases led to the proposal of a general mechanistic scheme for the catalytic pathway conducted by SGAP (see below). Model of the enzyme-substrate complex A Met-Ala-Ala pseudosubstrate was docked manually into the active site by adding two alanine residues to the C-terminus of a bound methionine (based on the SGAP/ Met crystal structure) in a way that they approximately follow the open channel on the surface of the protein. A water molecule, and in a parallel simulation a hydroxide ion, were added as potential nucleophiles in the corresponding zinc-bound water/hydroxide position observed in the native SGAP crystal structure. With a water molecule bound to the zinc ions, the substrate complex was not stable during the MD simulation, and we were not able to reproduce the general geometry of the crystallographic structure of native, uncomplexed SGAP. It was also shown that if Glu131 is originally protonated, the zinc-bound hydroxide ion is moving out of the active site, probably because its hydrogen-bonding partner is missing in such situation. This led us to the conclusion that a hydroxide

ion, rather than a water molecule, should be the potential nucleophile that attacks the carbonyl carbon of the substrate and that Glu131 is probably unprotonated in the native enzyme. The later conclusion is consistent with the reported pH optimum of 8.4 for the catalytic reaction of SGAP.45 The stability of similar enzyme/inhibitor complexes during molecular dynamics simulations was recently used by Ma et al.46 to suggest protonation states for chorismate mutase. The MD simulations indicated that the coordination number of Zn2 is increased from 4 to 5 on substrate binding. The modeling studies also suggested that the carbonyl oxygen of the substrate peptide bond to be hydrolyzed interacts with both Zn2 and the OH group of Tyr246, interactions that polarize the carbonyl group and make the carbonyl carbon more attractive for a nucleophilic attack [Fig. 10(a)]. The zinc-bound hydroxide ion, the coordinates of which were derived from the native SGAP structure, was shown to interact with both zinc atoms and to form a hydrogen bond to the O 1 atom of Glu131. A bicarbonate anion observed in the active site of bovine lens leucine aminopeptidase is thought to have an equivalent function to Glu131.38 The MD simulation of such enzyme/substrate model led to an average distance between the zinc-bound hydroxide oxygen and the carbonyl carbon in the substrate of 3.09 Å (Table III). The shortest distance observed for this interaction in the simulation was 2.76 Å, which is short enough for a nucleophilic attack by the hydroxide anion. The simulation also indicated that the interactions of the N-terminal amino acid side chain and the deep hydrophobic pocket of the enzyme are very important for the substrate specificity of this enzyme, as well as the position and interactions of the N-terminal amine group of the substrate with active site residues [see Fig. 10(a) and Table III]. Model of a tetrahedral intermediate The negatively charged oxyanion is stabilized by Zn2 and the OH group of Tyr246 [Fig. 10(b)]. The hydroxyl group of the tetrahedral intermediate is hydrogen bonded to Glu131, which already directs the hydroxyl-hydrogen toward the nitrogen of the N-terminus to be formed in the next reaction step (an average OH . . . N distance in the MD simulations of 2.16 0.12 Å). As discussed below, there is no experimental evidence for a Glu131-assisted proton transfer from the hydroxyl group to the penultimate amide nitrogen. Yet such transfer is proposed on the basis of the structural proximity of the relevant atoms in the MD simulation of this step. Model of an enzyme-product complex The methionine in this model shows only small deviations (RMSD of 0.34 Å) from its position in the X-ray structure10; protonation of the Glu131 carboxyl group in a parallel simulation even decreases the RMSD to 0.21 Å. The N-terminal amino group of the methionine is still stabilized by interactions with Glu131, Asp160, and Arg202. The carboxyl group of the methionine is interacting with both zinc ions and Tyr246 [Fig. 10(c)]. An

INTERACTIONS OF S. GRISEUS AMINOPEPTIDASE WITH AMINO ACID PRODUCTS

501

Fig. 10. Structural models of the active site during different reaction steps derived from the molecular dynamics simulations. The bound substrate is represented in thicker lines, and its atoms are colored according to the atom types. The interacting protein groups are colored in a different scheme: protein backbone atoms are gray, negative side chains are blue, positive side chains are red, and aromatic side chains are yellow. For Arg 202 of the protein (top left), only the C of the side chain (red) and the carbonyl group of the main chain (gray) are shown for clarity. a: A Michaelis type complex with Met-Ala-Ala as a substrate. The interactions of the two zinc ions with their coordination ligands are shown in gray dots, interactions of the zinc-bound hydroxide ion, which is important for the nucleophilic attack, are shown in red, polarization interactions of the substrate carbonyl group are shown in violet, and interactions stabilizing the N-terminal amine group of the substrate are shown in green. b: A model of the tetrahedral intermediate. Interactions of its newly formed hydroxyl group are shown in red, stabilization interactions of the oxyanion are shown in violet, and interactions stabilizing its N-terminal amine group are shown in green. c: A snapshot of the reaction products, a methionine and an alanine dipeptide, after 50 ps of a molecular dynamics simulation. Interactions of the newly formed carboxyl group of the methionine are shown in red and violet; interactions stabilizing its amine group are shown in green. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at www.interscience.wiley.com.]

502

R. GILBOA ET AL.

TABLE III. Important Distances (Å) in the Structural Models of Three Reaction Steps Interaction type OH­Zn1 OH­Zn2 OH­E131 OH­C(pep) N(pep)­E131 N(pep)­D160 N(pep)­R202 O(pep)­Zn2 O(pep)­Y246 Michaelis-Menten complex (Å) 2.12 2.07 2.73 3.09 2.77 2.77 2.77 2.30 2.78 0.05 0.04 0.10 0.12 0.10 0.11 0.12 0.10 0.15 Transition state (Å) 2.57 2.34 2.75 -- 3.26 2.88 2.81 2.16 2.75 0.30 0.13 0.12 0.06 0.14 3.05 2.79 2.83 2.22 2.73 0.21 0.09 0.10 Product (Å) 2.23 2.32 2.94 -- 0.19 0.08 0.12 0.08 0.14 0.08 0.11 0.19

carboxylate group with Zn2 and Tyr246). The two products eventually leave the active site, and a regeneration of the catalytic machinery is achieved on binding and deprotonation of a water molecule by the two zinc ions and Glu131. CONCLUSIONS The high-resolution crystal structures described in the present work show that the binding modes of methionine, leucine, and phenylalanine to SGAP are practically identical. The three inhibitory amino acids were found to bind to the two active site zinc ions via their free carboxylate group while displacing the zinc-bound water/hydroxide, which is present in the native enzyme. The amino acid carboxylate binding in the active site is further stabilized by close interactions with the hydroxyl group of Tyr246 and the carboxylate group of Glu131. The binding and orientation of the bound amino acids to the enzyme is also stabilized by three specific hydrogen bonds between the amino acid terminal amine group and three key residues in the active site of the enzyme, forming a specific "aminoterminus binding subsite." This type of binding of the N-terminal group of a substrate/product has not been observed in the related structural studies of Aeromonas proteolytica aminopeptidase (AAP), leucine aminopeptidase (LAP), and methionine aminopeptidase (MAP), as shown by a comparison of the present SGAP complexes to their complexes with corresponding inhibitors and analogs. The presently reported structural data were used as a basis for molecular modeling studies, attempting to simulate the Michaelis-Menten complex, the tetrahedral transition state, and the enzyme-product complex. These studies supported the relevance of the X-ray structures of the SGAP complexes with inhibitory amino acids not only for the enzyme-product stage of the catalytic reaction but also for the enzyme-substrate stage of the SGAP enzymatic catalysis. Especially important in this respect is the confirmation of the nonsymmetric interactions of the N-terminal amino acid carboxylate with the two zinc ions of the active site, the orientation of the side chain in the deep hydrophobic pocket of the enzyme, and the strong and specific interactions of the N-terminal amine group of the amino acids. The general mechanism proposed on the basis of these structural data and modeling studies suggests that Glu131 and Tyr246 are directly involved in substrate binding and orientation, as well as in the stabilization of the tetrahedral transition state of the enzyme-substrate complex. Nevertheless, final conclusions regarding a detailed mechanism and the specific role of the functional groups in the SGAP active site should await a more systematic study of specific SGAP mutants and SGAP/ analog complexes. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The coordinates of the SGAP/Leu complex structure (at 1.70 Å resolution) and the SGAP/Phe complex structure (at 1.80 Å resolution) have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank. Their accession numbers are 1F2O and 1F2P, respectively. We thank the National Synchrotron Light

 The averaged distances and standard deviations are calculated from 100 ps MD runs. X(pep) represents the corresponding atoms of the bound peptide substrate, TS, and product.

unprotonated Glu131 at the beginning of the reaction cycle would lead to a neutral newly formed N-terminus and negative C-terminus of the methionine. This would reduce the binding of the reaction products to the active site. During an MD simulation the alanine dipeptide is leaving the active site within 100 ps, whereas the methionine stays in a similar position as observed in the X-ray structure. This observation is consistent with the inhibitory effect of a number of specific free amino acids.11 Proposed catalytic mechanism A proposed scheme for the general catalytic pathway of SGAP, where the enzyme is cleaving the peptide bond between the N-terminal amino acid and the penultimate amino acid of a peptide substrate, is summarized in Figure 11. It should be noted that some of the specific details of this scheme are still speculative, yet it correlates well with the crystallographic results and the MD simulations presented above. In the first step of the proposed scheme, the binding of the substrate expands the coordination of Zn2 to five by its interaction with the carbonyl oxygen of the incoming peptide substrate. The zinc-bound hydroxide can then perform a nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl carbon of the substrate peptide bond. This carbonyl carbon is activated for a nucleophilic attack by its interactions with Zn2 and Tyr246, which polarize the carbonyl group. The resulting tetrahedral intermediate is stabilized by interactions of one of its oxygen atoms with Zn2 and Tyr246, and the interactions of its second oxygen atom (or hydroxyl group) with Zn1 and Glu131 (the later via a hydrogen bond of the hydroxyl group). During the breakdown of the tetrahedral intermediate it is suggested that this hydroxyl proton is transferred by Glu131 to the N-terminal amine group of the newly formed peptide. There is no direct experimental evidence for such proton transfer; however, this is the most reasonable route for this proton based on the structural proximity of these three groups during the MD simulation. The proton transfer is followed by the breakage of the peptide bond, resulting in a shortened peptide and a free amino acid, both of which are stabilized by active site interactions (e.g., the interactions of the newly formed

INTERACTIONS OF S. GRISEUS AMINOPEPTIDASE WITH AMINO ACID PRODUCTS

503

Fig. 11. A proposed scheme for the general catalytic pathway of SGAP based on the crystallographic results and the MD simulation. a: The initial enzyme-substrate complex (E-S). b: The complex of the enzyme with the transition state (E-TS). c: The enzyme-products complex (E-P). d: The regenerated uncomplexed enzyme (E). Dashed lines indicate stabilizing interactions and/or hydrogen bonds that are important for the catalytic pathway. "Peptide" represents the incoming peptide/protein substrate; "(Pep)" is the continuing peptide chain of the incoming peptide/protein substrate and the intermediate; "(Pep )" is the continuing peptide chain leaving the peptide/protein product. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at www.interscience.wiley.com.]

Source (NSLS), the Biology Department of Brookhaven National Laboratory, and Dr. Dieter Schneider for beam time and assistance at the X26C beamline. This work was supported in part by a grant from the German Federal Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Technology (BMBF); the Israeli Ministry of Science (MOS) under the aegis of GBF (Gesellschaft fur Biotechnologische Forschung GmbH, Braunschweig); and the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities-Israel Science Foundation. REFERENCES
1. Taylor A. Aminopeptidases, occurrence, regulation and nomenclature. In: Taylor A. editor. The aminopeptidases. Landes Bioscience Publishers, Austin, TX; 1996. p 1­20. 2. Taylor A. Aminopeptidases: structure and function. FASEB J 1993;7:290 ­298. 3. Taylor A. Aminopeptidases: towards a mechanism of action. Trends Biochem Sci 1993;18:167­172. 4. Spungin A, Blumberg S. Streptomyces griseus aminopeptidase is a calcium-activated zinc metalloprotein. Purification and properties of the enzyme. Eur J Biochem 1989;183:471­ 477. 5. Ben-Meir D, Spungin A, Ashkenazi R, Blumberg S. Specificity of Streptomyces griseus aminopeptidase and modulation of activity by divalent metal ion binding and substitution. Eur J Biochem 1993;212:107­112. 6. Ben-Bassat A, Bauer K, Chang SY, Myambo K, Boosman A, Chang S. Processing of the initiation methionine from proteins: properties of the Escherichia coli methionine aminopeptidase and its gene structure. J Bacteriol 1987;169:751­757. 7. Nagakawa S, Yamada T, Kato K, Nishimura O. Enzymatic cleavage of amino terminal methionine from recombinant human interlukin-2 and growth hormone by aminopeptidase M. Biotechnology 1987;5:824 ­ 827.

8. Ben-Meir D, Blumberg S. Retention of amino terminal authenticity in recombinant proteins by enzymatic means. In: White MD, Reuveny S, Shaffermann A, editors. Biologicals from recombinant microorganisms and animal cells: production and recovery. Weinheim, Germany: VCH; 1991. p 55­ 61. 9. Greenblatt HM, Almog O, Maras B, Spungin-Bialik A, Barra D, Blumberg S, Shoham G. Streptomyces griseus aminopeptidase: X-ray crystallographic structure at 1.75 A resolution. J Mol Biol 1997;265:620 ­ 636. 10. Gilboa R, Greenblatt HM, Perach M, Spungin-Bialik A, Wohlfahrt G, Lessel U, Schomburg D, Blumberg S, Shoham G. Interactions of Streptomyces griseus aminopeptidase with a methionine product analogue: a structural study at 1.53 A resolution. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 2000;56:551­558. 11. Papir G, Spungin-Bialik A, Ben-Meir D, Fudim E, Gilboa R, Greenblatt HM, Shoham G, Lessel U, Schomburg D, Ashkenazi R, Blumberg S. Inhibition of Streptomyces griseus aminopeptidase and effects of calcium ions on catalysis and binding-- comparisons with the homologous enzyme Aeromonas proteolytica aminopeptidase. Eur J Biochem 1998;258:313­319. 12. Otwinowski Z, Minor W. Processing of X-ray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode. Methods Enzymol 1997;276:307­ 326. 13. Brunger A, Adams PD, Clore GM, Delano WL, Gros P, GrosseKunstleve RW, Jiang JS, Kuszewski J, Nilges M, Pannu NS, Read RJ, Rice LM, Simonson T, Warren GL. Crystallography and NMR system: a new software suite for macromolecular structure determination. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 1998;54:905­921. 14. Brunger AT. Free R value: a novel statistical quantity for assessing the accuracy of crystal structure. Nature 1992;355:472­ 475. 15. Jones TA, Zou JY, Cowan SW, Kjeldgaard M. Improved methods for binding protein models in electron density maps and the location of errors in these models. Acta Crystallogr A 1991;47:110­119. 16. Kraulis PJ. MOLSCRIPT--a program to produce both detailed and schematic plots of protein structures. J Appl Crystallogr 1991;24:946 ­950.

504

R. GILBOA ET AL. mode of L-leucinal, a gem-diolate transition state analogue, by X-ray crystallography. Biochemistry 1995a;34:14792­14800. Maras B, Greenblatt HM, Shoham G, Spungin-Bialik A, Blumberg S, Barra D. Aminopeptidase from Streptomyces griseus: primary structure and comparison with other zinc-containing aminopeptidases. Eur J Biochem 1996;236:843­ 846. Lessel U, Schomburg D. Similarities between protein 3-D structures. Protein Eng. 1994;7:1175­1187. Chevrier B, D'Orchymont H, Schalk C, Tarnus C, Moras D. The structure of the Aeromonas proteolytica aminopeptidase complexed with a hydroxamate inhibitor. Involvement in catalysis of Glu151 and two zinc ions of the co-catalytic unit. Eur J Biochem 1996;237:393­398. Bennet B, Holz RC. Inhibition of the aminopeptidase from Aeromonas Proteolytica by L-leucinephosphonic acid, a transition state analogue of peptide hydrolysis. J Am Chem Soc 1998;120:12139 ­ 12140. Burley SK, David PR, Lipscomb WN. Leucine aminopeptidase: bestatin inhibition and a model for enzyme-catalyzed peptide hydrolysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991;88:6916 ­ 6920. Strater N, Sun L, Kantrowitz ER, Lipscomb WN. A bicarbonate ¨ ion as a general base in the mechanism of peptide hydrolysis by dizinc leucine aminopeptidase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999;96: 11151­11155. Chen G, Edwards T, D'Souz VM, Holtz RC. Mechanistic studies on the aminopeptidase from Aeromonas proteolytica: a two-metal ion mechanism for peptide hydrolysis. Biochemistry 1997;36:4278 ­ 4286. Strater N, Lipscomb WN. Transition state analogue L-leucinephos¨ phonic acid bound to bovine lens leucine aminopeptidase: X-ray structure at 1.65 Å resolution in a new crystal form. Biochemistry 1995b;34:9200 ­9210. Kim H, Burley SK, Lipscomb WN. Re-refinement of the X-ray crystal structure of bovine lens leucine aminopeptidase complexed with bestatin. J Mol Biol 1993;230:722­724. Kim H, Lipscomb WN. X-ray crystallographic determination of the structure of bovine lens leucine aminopeptidase complexed with amastatin: formulation of a catalytic mechanism featuring a gem-diolate transition state. Biochemistry 1993;32:8465­ 8478. Roderick SL, Matthews BW. Structure of the cobalt-dependent methionine aminopeptidase from Escherichia coli: a new type proteolytic enzyme. Biochemistry 1993;32:3907­3912. Lowther WT, Zhang Y, Sampson PB, Honek JF, Matthews BW. Insights into the mechanism of Escherichia coli methionine aminopeptidase from the structural analysis of reaction products and phosphorus-based transition-state analogues. Biochemistry 1999;38:14810 ­14819. Yang S-H, Wu C-H, Lin W-Y. Chemical modification of aminopeptidase isolated from Pronase. Biochem J 1994;302:595­ 600. Ma J, Zhen X, Schnappauf G, Braus G, Karplus M, Lipscomb WN. Yeast chorismate mutase in the R state: simulations of the active site. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998;95:14640 ­14645.

17. Merritt EA, Bacon DJ. Raster3D: photorealistic molecular graphics. Methods Enzymol 1997;277:505­524. 18. Wallace AC, Laskowski RA, Thornton JM. LIGPLOT: a program to generate schematic diagrams of protein-ligand interactions. Protein Eng 1995;8:127­134. 19. Schomburg D, Reichelt J. BRAGI--a comprehensive protein modeling program system. J Mol Graph 1988;6:161­165. 20. Pearlman DA, Case DA, Caldwell JW, Ross WS, Cheatham III TE, Ferguson DM, Seibel GL, Singh UC, Weiner PK, Kollman PA. AMBER 4.1, University of California, San Francisco, 1995. 21. Cornell WD, Cieplak P, Bayly CI, Gould IR, Merz KM, Ferguson DM, Spellmeyer DC, Fox T, Caldwell JW, Kollman PA. A 2nd generation force-field for the simulation of proteins, nucleic-acids and organic molecules. J Am Chem Soc 1995;117:5179 ­5197. 22. Hoops SC, Anderson KW, Merz KM. Force-field design for metalloproteins. J Am Chem Soc 1991;113:8262­ 8270. 23. Frisch MJ, Trucks GW, Schlegel HB, Gill PMW, Johnson BG, Robb MA, Cheeseman JR, Keith T, Petersson GA, Montgomery JA, Raghavachari K, Al-Laham MA, Zakrzewski VG, Ortiz JV, Foresman JB, Cioslowski J, Stefanov BB, Nanayakkara A, Challacombe M, Peng CY, Ayala PY, Chen W, Wong MW, Andres JL, Replogle ES, Gomperts R, Martin RL, Fox DJ, Binkley JS, Defrees DJ, Baker J, Stewart JP, Head-Gordon M, Gonzalez C, Pople JA. GAUSSIAN 94, Revision B.3, Gaussian, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA; 1995. 24. Bayly CI, Cieplak P, Cornell WD, Kollman PA. A well-behaved electrostatic potential based method using charge restraints for determining atom-centered charges: the RESP model. J Phys Chem 1993;97:10269 ­10280. 25. Ryckaert JP, Cicotti G, Berendsen HJC. Numerical integration of the Cartesian equation of motion of a system with constraints: molecular dynamics of n-alkanes. J Comput Phys 1977;23:327. 26. Kleywegt GJ, Brunger AT. Checking your imagination: applications of the free R value. Structure 1996;4:897­904. 27. Liang J, Edelsbrunner H, Woodward C. Anatomy of protein pockets and cavities: measurement of binding site geometry and implications for ligand design. Protein Sci 1998;7:1884 ­1897. 28. Burley SK, Petsko GA. Aromatic-aromatic interaction: a mechanism of protein structure stabilization. Science 1985;229:23­28. 29. Burley SK, Petsko GA. Dimerization energies of benzene and aromatic amino acid side chains. J Am Chem Soc 1986;108:7995­ 8001. 30. Chevrier B, Schalk C, D'Orchymont H, Rondeau JM, Moras D, Tarnus C. Crystal structure of Aeromonas proteolytica aminopeptidase: a prototypical member of the co-catalytic zinc enzyme family. Structure 1994;2:283­291. 31. Burley SK, David PR, Sweet RM, Taylor A, Lipscomb WN. Structure determination and refinement of bovine lens leucine aminopeptidase and its complex with bestatin. J Mol Biol 1992;224: 113­140. 32. Strater N, Lipscomb WN. Two-metal ion mechanism of bovine lens ¨ leucine aminopeptidase: active site solvent structure and binding

33.

34. 35.

36.

37. 38.

39.

40.

41. 42.

43. 44.

45. 46.

