doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2008.08.069

J. Mol. Biol. (2008) 383, 1195­1209

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Thermodynamics, Kinetics, and Salt dependence of Folding of YopM, a Large Leucine-rich Repeat Protein
Ellen Kloss and Doug Barrick
T.C. Jenkins Department of Biophysics, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N. Charles St., Baltimore, MD 21218, USA Received 4 March 2008; received in revised form 19 August 2008; accepted 22 August 2008 Available online 4 September 2008 Small globular proteins have many contacts between residues that are distant in primary sequence. These contacts create a complex network between sequence-distant segments of secondary structure, which may be expected to promote the cooperative folding of globular proteins. Although repeat proteins, which are composed of tandem modular units, lack sequence-distant contacts, several of considerable length have been shown to undergo cooperative two-state folding. To explore the limits of cooperativity in repeat proteins, we have studied the unfolding of YopM, a leucine-rich repeat (LRR) protein of over 400 residues. Despite its large size and modular architecture (15 repeats), YopM equilibrium unfolding is highly cooperative, and shows a very strong dependence on the concentration of urea. In contrast, kinetic studies of YopM folding indicate a mechanism that includes one or more transient intermediates. The urea dependence of the folding and unfolding rates suggests a relatively small transition state ensemble. As with the urea dependence, we have found an extreme dependence of the free energy of unfolding on the concentration of salt. This salt dependence likely results from general screening of a large number of unfavorable columbic interactions in the folded state, rather than from specific cation binding.
© 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Edited by F. Schmid

Keywords: repeat-protein; leucine-rich repeat; cooperative folding; electrostatics; folding kinetics

Introduction
The study of repeat protein folding has contributed substantially to our understanding of protein folding thermodynamics, cooperativity, stability distribution, and folding kinetics.1,2 Repeat proteins are constructed from individual units of supersecondary structure (e.g. , ,  for ankyrin (ANK) and tetratricopeptide (TPR) repeats, leucinerich repeats (LRR), and -prisim proteins, respectively) that pack together regularly in a roughly linear array. This simple linear architecture facilitates comparison of different regions of the polypeptide in terms of contribution to stability, cooperativity, and involvement in rate-limiting steps in folding. Compared with globular proteins, repeat proteins lack close contacts involving distant regions of the
*Corresponding author. E-mail address: barrick@jhu.edu. Abbreviations used: ANK, ankyrin; TPR, tetratricopeptide; LRR, leucine-rich repeat; ASA, accessible surface area; SVD, singular value decomposition.

polypeptide. This local and regular topology further contributes to what appears, at the structural level, to be a high degree of modularity. Given this architectural modularity, the experimental observation that many repeat proteins (in particular ANK repeat proteins with as many as six structured repeats) unfold by a cooperative two-state mechanism has been somewhat surprising.3­9 Moreover, a recent analysis of consensus ANK repeats with a nearest-neighbor Ising model confirms a very high level of cooperative unfolding,10 although similar analysis of consensus TPR repeats shows a lower level of cooperativity.1,2,11 In comparison with helical repeat proteins, there are fewer studies on the equilibrium folding and cooperativity of -sheet-containing repeat proteins, despite their widespread taxonomic distribution. Studies on InlB, which contains seven LRR units, show a cooperative two-state equilibrium and
 LRRs are, for example, the second-most common sequence motif in PFAM version 21, and are common in bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes.

0022-2836/$ - see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1196 kinetic folding mechanism.3,4,12 However, consensus-based LRRs show substantially less cooperativity in equilibrium folding.12 In addition, pelC and pertactin, two -prism repeat proteins, exhibit multistate equilbrium folding.13,14 Given the structural differences between LRR and ANK repeat proteins, especially at the interfaces between repeats, which are likely to contribute to cooperativity, a better characterization of the degree to which LRR proteins can maintain cooperative equilibrium unfolding is essential. As illustrated in studies of a large fragment of ankyrinR (D34) containing 12 ANK repeats (426 residues), one way to probe the limits of cooperativity is to characterize unfolding of large repeat proteins.15 For D34, clear multistate unfolding behavior was observed, in which the N-terminal repeats unfold at low denaturant concentrations leaving an equilibrium intermediate that retains structure over the C-terminal repeats. To better understand the thermodynamic and kinetic properties of LRR proteins, and to explore the limits of cooperativity at long chain lengths, we monitored the equilibrium unfolding of YopM, a 15 LRR-containing bacterial virulence factor from Yersinia pestis. We evaluated the equilibrium unfolding mechanism for YopM by comparing urea and thermally-induced unfolding transitions monitored with various spectroscopic methods, and by differential scanning calorimetry. We show that a high degree of cooperativity can extend over a large, elongated (80 Å) LRR protein. We find that the free energy of unfolding is extremely sensitive to salt concentration. We have examined the origin of this salt dependence by comparing the effects of two different chloride salts, NaCl and NH4Cl. Our results suggest this salt dependence arises from a large number of columbic interactions in the native state. In contrast to the simple two-state equilibrium unfolding mechanism, the kinetic mechanism of unfolding and refolding is multistate, which has been reported for several smaller repeat proteins.1 The high degree of sensitivity of the equilibrium unfolding reaction to urea is partitioned largely into unfolding kinetics, supporting a small transition state ensemble.

Folding of YopM, a Large LRR Protein

Results
The crystal structure of YopM (Fig. 1) has an extended architecture that resembles a horseshoe with a slight helical twist.16 The individual LRR units, composed of 20 or 22 residues each, form strands that contribute to a parallel sheet along the concave surface. The residues opposite the -sheet, on the convex surface, are in a combination of coil and extended polyproline II conformations, as is typical of bacterial-type LRRs (Fig. 1c).17 In addition to the -sheet, YopM contains an N-terminal helical capping motif with two tryptophans and two tyrosines. Seven additional tyrosines are distributed over the LRR domain (Fig. 1a), and

Fig. 1. The structure of YopM. (a) Ribbon diagram showing 15 LRR motifs that make up the extended -sheet, and an N-terminal -helical capping motif (1JL5.pdb).16 Tryptophan (orange) and tyrosine (pink) residues are shown in CPK representation. (b) Surface representation indicating a high density of acidic residues (red) relative to basic residues (blue). The two views are related by a 180° rotation about the long axis. (c) Typical YopM LRRs (repeats 8 and 9) contain a -strand (yellow), connected to a coil and an extended polyproline II region (green) by  I (gray) and  VII type turns (purple).72 The longer of the two repeats (repeat 8, left) contains a turn of 310-helix (red).

one tyrosine is in the unstructured C-terminus. The two tryptophans are mostly buried, with zero and 8% accessible surface area (ASA). Although the two tyrosines in the -helical motif are similarly buried, the tyrosines in the LRR domain are more exposed to solvent, with an ASA range of from 32­72% (Table S-1).

Folding of YopM, a Large LRR Protein

1197 proteins with a high -sheet content. The spectrum shows little evidence of the -helical structure, which likely reflects the relative sizes of the helical capping motif (39 residues) compared to the sheet-containing LRR domain (310 residues). A near-UV spectrum was collected to examine the extent of tertiary structure around the aromatic residues in YopM. Optical activity in the near-UV region, often resulting in multiple well-defined peaks (minima or maxima), arises from aromatic side chains, especially those clustered tightly together.18 The near-UV spectrum of YopM contains several peaks (Fig. 2b). On the basis of the high packing density of tryptophan and tyrosine side chains at the N-terminus of YopM (Fig. 1a), and the decreased signal of the spectrum when the two tryptophans are substituted with phenylalanine (Fig. S-1), it is likely that the N-terminal -helical capping motif contributes substantially to the nearUV spectrum. Thus, the -helical capping motif is likely to be well structured in solution, even though no signal from the -helices is seen in the far-UV spectrum. Overall, the far- and near-UV CD spectra show YopM to be folded in solution, with extensive -sheet structure, and tight packing in the vicinity of the aromatic side chains. To obtain a definitive probe of the N-terminal helical capping motif, we monitored fluorescence, which focuses primarily on the N-terminal tryptophan side chains. The fluorescence emission spectrum of folded YopM, following excitation at 280 nm, shows a maximum around 325 nm, with a shoulder at 310 nm (Fig. 2c). The short wavelength of the maximum is consistent with burial of the two N-terminal tryptophans in a nonpolar environment. The shoulder is likely to result from the ten tyrosine residues. In 4 M urea, where YopM is unfolded, the fluorescence near the maximum is quenched substantially and is shifted to 360 nm. However, the shoulder at 310 nm is relatively unperturbed. This difference likely reflects the high sensitivity of tryptophan to its environment compared to tyrosine, and permits us to monitor the fluorescence of the tryptophans in the N-terminal -helical capping motif, using a 320 nm cut-off filter following excitation at 280 nm. Collectively, these three spectroscopic probes provide a means to monitor various structural features during equilibrium unfolding. Urea-induced unfolding transitions of YopM monitored by far-UV CD and fluorescence To investigate the mechanism of equilibrium unfolding of YopM and to quantify the stability of this large, extended molecule, we preformed ureainduced unfolding monitored by far-UV CD and tryptophan fluorescence. This allows us to compare whether different aspects of the protein's structure (-sheet formation, and the environment surrounding the N-terminal tryptophan residues) are lost simultaneously or in distinct stages.

Structural properties of YopM in solution To confirm that the secondary and tertiary structural features described above are retained in solution, and to establish a starting point for denaturation studies, we collected far- and nearUV circular dichroism (CD) spectra of YopM. The far-UV CD spectrum of YopM contains a single minimum at 217 nm (Fig. 2a), characteristic of

Fig. 2. Solution spectroscopy of YopM. (a) Far-UV CD shows characteristic -strand signal with a minimum at 217 nm. (b) Near-UV CD shows a complex pattern of peaks, consistent with a rigid tertiary structure around at least some aromatic side chains. Near-UV ellipticities are reported per mole of protein and are not normalized to chain length. (c) Fluorescence emission spectra in buffer (continuous line) and 4 M urea (broken line).

1198

Folding of YopM, a Large LRR Protein

Fig. 3. Equilibrium unfolding of YopM. (a) Normalized urea-induced unfolding transitions monitored by far-UV CD (filled symbols, continuous lines) and tryptophan fluorescence (open symbols, broken lines). (b) Thermal unfolding transitions monitored by CD at 217 nm (open squares), CD at 280 nm (open triangles), fluorescence (open circles), and by DSC (diamonds). Initial and subsequent DSC scans (filled and open diamonds, respectively) coincide very closely, indicating remarkable reversibility. Lines in a and b result from fitting a two-state unfolding model to the data. (c) Thermal unfolding of YopM monitored by near-UV CD spectroscopy at increasing temperatures from 15 °C (pink) to 55 °C (black). (d) The first four spectral components (ii; red, green, blue, and black in decreasing contribution to the data) obtained from SVD analysis of the near-UV CD thermal unfolding series (c).

Urea-induced denaturation of YopM showed a single, sharp unfolding transition monitored by both far-UV CD and tryptophan fluorescence (filled and open symbols, respectively; Fig. 3a). The unfolding transitions monitored by CD and fluorescence are coincident, indicating that the -sheet, which extends over the entire LRR domain, is disrupted to the same extent as the N-terminal -helical capping motif. Transitions from both probes can be well-fit by a two-state (all-or-none) model. High cooperativity of unfolding is supported by the large m-value. For proteins that unfold by two-state mechanisms, m-values have been shown to correlate with change in accessible surface area (ASA),19 and thus to chain length. The m-value measured for YopM unfolding (6.5 ± 0.3 kcal mol­ 1 M­ 1) is larger than the expected value (4.5 kcal mol­ 1 M­ 1) for a protein that unfolds by such a mechanism. 19 However, a more recent method of predicting mvalues using transfer free energies for individual residues gives an m-value of 5.9 kcal mol­ 1 M­ 1, closer to the observed valuez.20,21
z http://best.utmb.edu/mvalue/index.html#Examples

Thermally-induced unfolding transitions of YopM We preformed thermal unfolding studies to further examine the mechanism of equilibrium unfolding of YopM. In addition to comparing different spectroscopic signals, we can follow thermal unfolding calorimetrically, which provides a rigorous test of the two-state model. As with urea-induced unfolding, thermally-induced unfolding shows a single, sharp transition that is coincident when monitored by farUV CD and tryptophan fluorescence (Fig. 3b). Fitting a two-state model to the unfolding transitions monitored by CD and fluorescence provides very similar fitted values of the transition midpoint, Tm, and the van't Hoff enthalpy of unfolding, HvH,Tm (Table 1). To monitor the loss of tertiary structure during thermally-induced unfolding, especially in the Nterminal -helical capping motif, we also monitored YopM by near-UV CD as a function of temperature (Fig. 3c). The intensity of the near-UV CD spectrum decreases as temperature increases from 15° to 55 °C. A two-state model fits well to the unfolding transition obtained at 280 nm (near the wavelength of maximum near-UV CD signal), and the Tm is in

Folding of YopM, a Large LRR Protein

1199

Table 1. Thermal unfolding parameters of YopM monitored by far- and near-UV CD, tryptophan fluorescence, and DSC
HvH,Tm (kcal mol­ 1) Far-UV CD Fluorescence Near-UV CD DSC 139.3 ± 3.0 140.0 ± 1.4 146.4 ± 3.4 138.3 ± 1.8 Tm (K) 316.8 ± 0.1 317.1 ± 0.1 316.6 ± 0.2 317.6 ± 0.1 Cp (kcal mol­ 1 K­ 1) n.d.a n.d.a n.d.a 5.5 ± 0.2 Hcal (kcal mol­ 1) n.d.a n.d.a n.d.a 128.8 ± 5.1 n 7 3 3 3

Unfolding enthalpies are evaluated at Tm. To obtain a reasonable estimate of HvH,Tm, the value of Cp was fixed to that obtained from DSC. Uncertainties represent standard error of the mean of n independent experiments. a Not determined.

agreement with the -sheet transition observed at 217 nm (Table 1). Although the average HvH,Tm value fitted from the near-UV CD transition is around 5% higher than that from far-UV CD or fluorescence, the decreased signal-to-noise in the near-UV CD contributes to a high level of uncertainty in HvH,Tm. Thus, this difference appears to be statistically insignificant. To test whether other regions of the near-UV CD spectrum that might result from separate chromophores in different parts of the protein are coincident with the transition at 280 nm, we used singular value decomposition (SVD) to analyze the temperature dependence of the entire near-UV CD spectrum. SVD allows the number of independent spectral components contributing to the original spectral series to be estimated and to be separated from noise, which can make a significant contribution to the near-UV CD spectra. The first two components of the decomposition (represented by the product of the singular value and corresponding spectral vector i and i, respectively) contribute significantly to the signal and correspond to spectra of the native and denatured states (Fig. 3d). The third and fourth spectral components are much smaller and are largely featureless. With only two significant spectral components, the transition at 280 nm must reflect a global transition, applicable to the entire near-UV CD spectrum, including wavelengths with a lower signal-to-noise ratio. A classic test of two-state unfolding is a comparison of HvH,Tm, which is model-dependent, to a calorimetrically determined heat of unfolding (Hcal), which is model-independent.22 We determined Hcal for YopM unfolding using DSC. The scans show a single, sharp, and well-defined transition (Fig. 3b). Analysis of the unfolding transition using a two-state model gives values of Tm and HvH,,Tm that are similar to those obtained by spectroscopy (Table 1). Moreover, Hcal is quite close to HvH,Tm, with a ratio of 1.08 ± 0.04. This calorimetric comparison indicates that YopM unfolds with only two significantly populated equilibrium species ­ the native and the denatured states.22 Refolding and unfolding kinetics of YopM To investigate whether the apparent simplicity in the equilibrium mechanism of YopM folding is maintained during kinetic refolding and unfolding, and to gain insight into the rate-limiting steps in

structure formation in this large but structurally simple protein, we have measured the time-dependence of refolding and unfolding. Refolding and unfolding reactions were initiated by rapid dilution and addition of urea using a stopped-flow apparatus, and the extent of folding was monitored by tryptophan fluorescence. Both the refolding and unfolding reactions show multiple kinetic phases. At most concentrations of urea, neither refolding nor unfolding progress curves can be described adequately by a single-exponential decay (black curves, Fig. 4a and b, and see large, non-random residuals, upper panels). However, both refolding and unfolding curves are described adequately by a doubleexponential decay (red curves, Fig. 4a and b, and see small, random residuals). The observation that YopM shows multiphasic refolding kinetics is not surprising, given the large number of prolyl residues in this protein. All 36 of the Xaa-prolyl peptide bonds seen in the crystal structure of YopM are in a trans configuration. Although each Xaa-prolyl bond should thus be biased towards the native state isomer in the denatured state (by approximately eight to one),23 the probability that all 36 residues should simultaneously adopt the native configuration is very low (approximately 0.88936 = 0.014). The observation that the rate constants for the two refolding phases have small urea dependences is consistent with a contribution from prolyl isomerization.24 To test whether prolyl isomerization in the denatured state is influencing refolding kinetics, we performed "double-jump" refolding experiments.24­26 YopM was first unfolded in 3.16 M urea for various delay times (0.75 ­ 10 s; long enough for the protein to unfold, but short enough to minimize prolyl isomerization to non-native configurations), and then refolded rapidly by dilution to a final urea concentration of 1.03 M. Double-jump refolding curves at moderate delay times (3­4 s) are accelerated significantly compared to single-jump refolding. As with single-jump refolding, double-jump refolding appears to be bi-exponential. However, the fast refolding phase in double-jump refolding is faster by a factor of 10 than the fastest phase in single-jump refolding at the same concentration of urea (Fig. 4c; Table S-2, compare kf and k2). The slow phase observed in double-jump refolding matches the fast phase in single-jump refolding (Fig. 4c; Table S-2, compare ks and k1).

1200

Folding of YopM, a Large LRR Protein

Fig. 4. Kinetics of unfolding and refolding of YopM. Fluorescence-detected refolding (a) and unfolding (b) of YopM (symbols). Black and red lines show single- and double-exponential fits, respectively; upper panels show residuals. (c) Fitted rate constants as a function of urea. Filled circles, major unfolding phase (k­ 1); open squares, minor unfolding phase at high concentrations of urea (k­ 2); filled squares, minor unfolding phase at low concentrations of urea (k­ 3); filled inverted triangles, slow refolding phase (k1, single jump); filled triangles, fast refolding phase (k2, single jump); open triangle, slow refolding phase from double-jump refolding (ks; average delay times 1­7.5 s); filled diamond, fast phase from double-jump refolding (kf; average delay times 1­7.5 s). Continuous lines are the results of linear (k1, k2) and quadratic (k­ 1) fits. (d) Absolute amplitudes of the two phases detected by interrupted unfolding double-jump assay. Open circles, fast phase amplitude (Af, Table S-2); filled circles, slow phase amplitude (As, Table S-2), which matches the rate constant for the fastest phase seen in single-jump refolding (k2, Table S-2). Final protein concentrations were 2­6 M, in storage buffer with 200 mM NaCl. For single jump refolding and unfolding, initial concentrations of urea were 3.17 M and 0 M, respectively. Double-jump refolding was started from 0 M urea, increased to 3.16 M urea for various delay times, and subsequently decreased to 1.03 M urea to monitor refolding.

This apparent increase in the overall progress of the folding reaction in the double-jump format is consistent the hypothesis that the refolding from an equilibrated denatured state (e.g. Fig. 4a) is limited by prolyl isomerization. This hypothesis is further supported by the observation that the amplitude of the fast phase in the double-jump protocol is dominant when the unfolding delay is short, but decays as the unfolded state is allowed to equilibrate (Fig. 4d). In contrast with double-jump refolding of some globular proteins that are limited by prolyl isomerization,24 the amplitude of the slow phase of YopM refolding does not show a lag in the doublejump format. We attribute the absence of this characteristic lag phase to the comparatively slow refolding rate ( 0.3 s­ 1), which is in the same range as that expected for isomerization of any number of the 36 prolyl residues, and matches the rate constant

for formation of the slow phase in the double-jump experiment (0.37 s­ 1; Fig. 4d). Kinetic simulations using experimental rate constants are consistent with this explanation.27 Unlike refolding, the heterogeneity seen in YopM unfolding is not expected to result from prolyl isomerization, especially at high concentrations of urea. Whereas the amplitudes of the two kinetic phases in refolding are in the same direction (towards higher fluorescence, as expected from the overall increase in fluorescence signal on folding), the amplitudes for the two unfolding phases at high concentrations of urea (N2.5 M) are of opposite sign. The amplitude associated with the fast unfolding rate constants (A­ 2, Table S-2) is in the folding direction. In the fitted bi-exponential, the fast phase with opposing amplitude results in an apparent lag in unfolding. As discussed below, these kinetic features

Folding of YopM, a Large LRR Protein

1201

have been seen in the unfolding of ankyrin repeat proteins, and appear to result from partly structured on-pathway unfolding intermediates.28­30 As the concentration of urea is decreased below  2.5 M, the fast unfolding phase (A ­2 , k ­2 ) diminishes in amplitude such that only a single unfolding phase is seen (corresponding to the major unfolding phase at higher concentrations of urea, k­ 1). At still lower concentrations of urea (below 2 M, near Cm), an additional phase is detected with a very small rate constant (k­ 3, Table S-2). Unlike the second unfolding phase detected at high concentrations of urea, the amplitude of this very slow phase (A­ 3, Table S-2) is in the same direction as the major unfolding phase; that is, to decreased fluorescence. This phase may result from the mixing of prolyl isomerization in the denatured state with slow unfolding, as has been described.31 Salt dependence of YopM unfolding transitions YopM has a high density of acidic ionizable groups distributed over its surface (Fig. 1b).16 This should result in a high negative charge density at pH values above the pI (calculated to be  4.5), which may be expected to destabilize the native state. If so, YopM should be stabilized by increasing concentrations of salt. Indeed, unfolding transitions of YopM in increasing concentrations of NaCl are shifted to higher concentrations of urea (Fig. 5a). The free energy of unfolding, determined from fitting a two-state model to the transitions, increases from 5.0 kcal M­ 1 to 13.4 kcal M­ 1 over a range of 20­800 mM NaCl (Table 2). Salts influence protein stability by three distinct mechanisms: cation binding, electrostatic screening, and Hofmeister effects.32 The physical basis for stabilization can be resolved by comparing different salts. Direct binding is expected to be ion specific, since the energetics of binding should depend on the precise stereochemical complementarity of the ion to the binding site. In contrast, charge­ charge screening is expected to be nonspecific for ions of the same valence, since the energetics of screening simply requires proximity of the ions to the interacting charges. Like direct binding, Hofmeister effects show ion-specific effects within the same valence, but follow a well-established trend among the ions.33 Moreover, these mechanisms manifest themselves over different ranges of ion concentration: whereas specific binding can occur at quite low concentrations of cation, Hofmeister effects extend to an ionic strength of 1 M and above.34 To determine which mechanisms contribute to the observed salt sensitivity of YopM, we compared the effects of Na+ and NH4+ , which have the same valence charge, but differ in ionic radius (0.97 Å and 1.43 Å, respectively) and hydrogen bonding potential. Both cations increase the stability of YopM dramatically, shifting the unfolding transition to higher concentrations of denaturant (Fig. 5a and b) and increasing the free energy of unfolding (Table 2). Below 500 mM, changes in the concentration of

Fig. 5. The salt dependence of the stability of YopM. Representative urea-induced unfolding transitions of YopM monitored by CD (filled symbols) and tryptophan fluorescence (open symbols) in: (a) 20 mM NaCl (circles), 78 mM NaCl (diamonds), 207 mM NaCl (squares), 577 mM NaCl (inverted triangles), and 805 mM NaCl (triangles); and (b) 20 mM NH4Cl (circles), 200 mM NH4Cl (squares), and 803 mM NH4Cl (triangles). The lines are the result of fitting a two-state unfolding model (as described in Materials and Methods) to individual transitions at each concentration of salt. (c) The relationship between YopM urea-induced unfolding transition midpoints (Cm, units of molarity), and salt concentration (NaCl, circles; NH4Cl, triangles). The similar increases in Cm at concentrations of salt less than 500 mM support cation-independent screening of unfavorable electrostatic interactions. Deviation of Cm values at higher concentrations of salt suggests stabilization by additional cation-specific Hofmeister effects. Error bars are standard errors of the mean.

1202
Table 2. Thermodynamic parameters of YopM unfolding at various concentrations of salt
[NaCl] (mM) 20.4 54.2 78.18 104.4 154 207 292.5 412.2 577.5 805.5 [NH4Cl] (mM) 20 38 64.1 130.7 200 400.3 605 803 G°H20 (kcal mol­ 1) 5.0 ± 0.1 7.3 ± 0.1 7.4 ± 0.4 8.8 ± 0.2 10.0 ± 0.2 10.7 ± 0.2 11.2 ± 0.3 12.4 ± 0.1 13.1 ± 0.6 13.4 ± 0.6 G°H20 (kcal mol­ 1) 3.9 ± 0.2 5.1 ± 0.9 3.7 ± 0.03 6.1 ± 1.1 7.3 ± 0.8 8.6 ± 1.2 6.3 ± 0.2 6.6 ± 0.2 m (kcal mol­ 1 M­ 1) 6.5 ± 0.1 6.8 ± 0.1 6.5 ± 0.3 7.0 ± 0.2 6.8 ± 0.1 6.6 ± 0.1 6.2 ± 0.2 6.2 ± 0.3 5.8 ± 0.1 5.2 ± 0.2 m (kcal mol­ 1 M­ 1) 5.2 ± 0.2 5.5 ± 1.0 3.8 ± 0.04 4.7 ± 0.8 4.8 ± 0.4 4.7 ± 0.6 3.3 ± 0.2 3.2 ± 0.1 Cm (M) 0.77 ± 0.01 1.07 ± 0.03 1.13 ± 0.02 1.26 ± 0.02 1.48 ± 0.01 1.62 ± 0.00 1.82 ± 0.02 1.99 ± 0.07 2.26 ± 0.05 2.60 ± 0.03 Cm (M) 0.75 ± 0.05 0.93 ± 0.04 0.97 ± 0.02 1.29 ± 0.02 1.52 ± 0.04 1.84 ± 0.01 1.88 ± 0.06 2.05 ± 0.06 n 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 5 5 n 3 3 3 3 3 4 3 3

Folding of YopM, a Large LRR Protein

likely to be more robust. The quality of the global fit is high (showing small and random residuals), indicating that salt and urea act independently on YopM stability, as has been seen for a number of globular proteins.36-40

Discussion
Because of their extended, open-ended structures, repeat proteins are excellent candidates for probing the origins and limits of unfolding cooperativity. Across different classes of repeat proteins, a key experimental variable that relates to cooperativity is the number of repeats over which two-state unfolding can be maintained. For -helical repeats, twostate unfolding is seen for p16INK4A (four repeats5-7), myotrophin (four repeats8), and the ankyrin domain of the Notch receptor (six folded repeats),9 but not

Uncertainties represent the standard error of the mean of n independent experiments.

NaCl and NH4Cl have identical effects on Cm values, consistent with charge­charge screening rather than direct cation binding. For concentrations of salt above 500 mM, where Hofmeister effects become pronounced, the Cm values diverge, with NaCl providing greater stability than NH4Cl (Fig. 5c), in agreement with the relative efficacies of these two cations within the Hofmeister series.33 Our results are consistent with electrostatic screening playing a major role in salt stabilization at concentrations of NaCl below 500 mM, a range that includes typical intracellular ionic strengths. As described by Wyman, the sensitivity of a conformational change to salt concentration can be quantified as a thermodynamic linkage number. In this formalism, the thermodynamic linkage is expressed as the variation of the log of the conformational equilibrium constant with the log of the salt molarity:35   AlnKu mNaCl ¼ Aln½NaCl T;P For YopM, the natural log of the equilibrium constant for unfolding is linear in ln[NaCl] below 500 mM (Fig. 6a), permitting the linkage coefficient to be evaluated by a simple linear fit: ÀlnKu ¼ ÀlnKu;1M À mNaCl ln½NaCl For YopM, 4.2 NaCl equivalents are thermodynamically linked to the folding transition (Fig. 6a). As an alternative means to analyze this linkage coefficient, the fraction of denatured YopM as a function of both NaCl and urea was analyzed by global analysis (Fig. 6b). Global analysis yields similar value for the linkage coefficient (vNaCL of ­4.1), and is

Fig. 6. Wyman linkage analysis of the unfolding reaction of YopM to NaCl molarity. (a) Linear relationship between the equilibrium constant from urea-induced unfolding and concentrations of NaCl below 0.5 M (correlation coefficient of 0.99). The line is the result of a linear fit, yielding a slope of NaCl = ­ 4.2. (b) Global analysis of fractional denaturation (monitored by CD, filled circles) as a function of the concentrations of urea and NaCl (below 0.5 M). The fitted surface gives the number of thermodynamically linked equivalents of NaCl as ­4.1, an m-value of 5.7 kcal mol­ 1 M­ 1, and an extrapolated Gibbs free energy of unfolding as 13.1 kcal mol­ 1 in 1 M NaCl, 0 M urea.

Folding of YopM, a Large LRR Protein

1203 cooperative -helical repeat proteins.2 Cooperativity in -helical ANK repeat proteins has been shown to result from a combination of strong stabilizing interfaces and intrinsically unstable single repeat units,10,42 as well as a uniform stability distribution over medium length scales.43 To begin to evaluate the relative contributions of the interfaces between LRRs and intrinsic folding of individual units, we calculated the amount of ASA buried at interfaces and the difference in ASA of individual units in the folded and unfolded states.1 The average surface area buried at the interface between neighboring LRR units in YopM is about 1470 Å2 (890 Å2 nonpolar and 580 Å2 polar), similar to values for ANK interfaces (1480 Å2; 1010 Å2 nonpolar and 470 Å2 polar1). However, ASA for folding of individual LRR units (570 Å2, mostly nonpolar) is significantly smaller than for ANK repeats (1510 Å2, both polar and nonpolar). The modest surface area buried on folding of individual LRR units may reflect greater intrinsic instability compared with single ANK repeats, which would enhance cooperativity by destabilizing partly folded states. Although intrinsically unstable repeat units can contribute to the high cooperativity in YopM, it does not explain the decreased cooperativity of other strand repeat proteins. PelC and pertactin have even more extreme ratios of intrinsic versus interfacial surface areas (around 1900 Å2 interfacial compared with to 275 Å2 intrinsic), but unfold by multistate mechanisms. However, pelC and pertactin have greater variation in repeat length, and have variable loop insertions. In pertactin these insertions are largest in the N-terminal repeats, which may decrease the stability of this region, leading to the observed multistate transition. Local stability variation has been shown to decrease cooperativity in ANK repeat proteins.43 Kinetic complexity in YopM refolding and unfolding The studies above demonstrate that equilibrium folding of YopM closely approximates the simplest mechanism imaginable: an all-or-none two-state transition. In contrast, the kinetics of the structural transitions of YopM appear to be more complicated. Both the refolding and unfolding reactions show multiple kinetic phases. Both refolding phases appear to be slowed by prolyl isomerization in the denatured state, limiting the extent to which structural insight can be obtained from refolding. However, unfolding kinetics at high concentrations of urea ( 2.5 M) show complexity that is unlikely to result from prolyl isomerization, providing insight into non-trivial aspects of kinetics, such as involvement of partly folded states and structure of the transition state ensemble. The appearance of an apparent lag in the fluorescence-monitored unfolding progress curves has been seen in two ankyrin repeat proteins, the Notch ankyrin domain (six folded repeats) and

for p19INK4d (five repeats)41 or D34 (12 repeats).15 Fewer studies have been published for -sheetcontaining repeat proteins. Although two-state unfolding is seen for InlB (seven repeats),3,4 the prism proteins pelC (seven repeats)13 and pertactin (16 repeats)14 show evidence for multistate unfolding. Consensus LRR proteins based on mammalian ribonuclease inhibitor (4­14 repeats)12 show equilibrium unfolding transitions consistent with a high population of intermediates. These findings may result from a lower cooperativity of -sheet-containing repeat proteins in general, or for pelC and pertactin, may result from the relatively large sizes. Our findings here with YopM, an LRR protein with 15 repeats, challenge both these explanations. YopM unfolds by an equilibrium two-state mechanism Despite its large size, YopM unfolds by a highly cooperative equilibrium transition. Both urea- and thermally-induced denaturation data support a twostate mechanism of unfolding. Spectroscopic probes monitoring the N-terminal -helical capping motif (tryptophan fluorescence) and the -sheet of the LRR region (far-UV CD) yield coincident unfolding transitions. The near-UV CD spectrum (monitoring tertiary structure around the aromatic residues) undergoes a temperature transition that matches the far-UV and fluorescence-monitored transitions, and can be decomposed by SVD to just two components, supporting a concerted loss of secondary and tertiary structure along the molecule. Moreover, the ratio of the model-dependent two-state enthalpy of unfolding to the model-independent calorimetric enthalpy is close to unity, indicating that partially folded states are not highly populated.22 Another indication that equilibrium unfolding of YopM is highly cooperative is the steepness of the urea-induced transition, and the large associated mvalue. This m-value (5.7 kcal mol­ 1 M­ 1 from global analysis of the salt-dependent urea transitions) is one of the largest reported for urea denaturation of a monomeric protein,19,20 and closely matches that estimated from transfer free energies.20,21 Another parameter that is correlated with the size of the cooperative unit is Cp (5.5 kcal mol­ 1 K­ 1). Like the m-value, the Cp for YopM unfolding is quite large. However, it is slightly lower than that expected for a protein of this size (6.8 kcal mol­ 1).19 This slightly lower value for Cp may reflect a lower ratio of nonpolar to polar ASA for YopM (1.08) compared to typical globular proteins (1.29). Structural origin of cooperativity in YopM Although previous studies have shown long -sheet repeat proteins to unfold by multistate equilibrium mechanisms,12,14 the present study demonstrates that multistate unfolding is not an inherent property of sheet repeat architecture in general. For YopM, the size of the cooperative unit is larger than that of the most

1204 p19INK4D (five repeats).28,30 In both cases, this lag is the result of conversion of the native state to an onpathway kinetic intermediate with native-like fluorescence. For YopM, the fluorescence signal reports on the N-terminal helix cap (Fig. 1a), where the two tryptophans are located. If an analogous kinetic intermediate is populated during YopM unfolding, the N-terminus would be expected to remain folded, whereas the C-terminus would become disordered. Analysis of C-terminal deletion constructs should help determine whether such a kinetic intermediate is formed during YopM folding. Recently, an Nterminal -helical cap has been shown to become structured in the rate-limiting step in folding of InlB, an LRR protein containing seven repeats.44 Another feature of the unfolding kinetics of YopM is the high level of sensitivity to urea of the rate constant for the major unfolding phase (k- 1). Although log k- 1 varies nonlinearly with the concentration of urea (either a result of kinetic mixing of microscopic rate constants for separate steps in unfolding, or transition state movement,45,46 the average urea dependence of this rate constant can account for most of the (steep) urea dependence of the equilibrium constant for YopM folding. This observation is consistent with substantial structural disruption in the rate-limiting step in unfolding, or alternatively, that the transition state ensemble for folding involves a small number of LRRs (and perhaps the helical cap). Electrostatics interactions destabilize YopM significantly Previous studies dissecting repeat protein stability have emphasized the importance of local interactions within repeats, as well as nearest-neighbor interfacial interactions in determining stability.1,2,47 However, the experiments reported here demonstrate that potential long-range interactions, in the form of electrostatic repulsion, can also make a major contribution to the overall stability of repeat proteins. The free energy of unfolding of YopM increases by over 8 kcal mol­ 1 upon addition of about 800 mM NaCl (Table 2). The similarity of NaCl and NH4Cl in increasing YopM stability supports a model in which the stabilizing effects of both salts result largely from electrostatic screening of unfavorable negative charges distributed over the surface of YopM (Fig. 1b). The increase in stability at low concentrations of salt is the opposite of the destabilizing effect of salt observed for many globular proteins.32,48 In general, favorable charge­charge interactions on the surface of proteins stabilize the native state.49 Increasing concentrations of salt shield these favorable interactions, decreasing protein stability. However, because YopM has very high net negative charge (­39 at pH 7.6, assuming the pKavalues of ionizable groups are unperturbed), favorable charge­charge interactions are likely to be outnumbered by unfavorable interactions, resulting in stabilization of the native protein at low concentrations of salt. One parameter that quantifies the strength of electrostatic interactions in solution is the Debye

Folding of YopM, a Large LRR Protein

length, the distance over which charge­charge interactions are significant. The Debye length depends strongly on the ionic strength of the solvent. Including the contribution of the Tris buffer to ionic strength ( 12 mM at a total concentration of 25 mM, pH 7.6) the Debye length at 20 mM NaCl is about 20 Å, and decreases to about 5 Å at 400 mM NaCl. At this distance range, unfavorable negative­negative interactions outnumber favorable positive­negative interactions. Thus, in the range of ionic strength of 20­400 mM, where our data suggest nonspecific electrostatic screening, interactions between nonnearest neighbor repeats are likely to contribute substantially to the observed salt effect. The large salt sensitivity of YopM unfolding supports the finding that many weak charge imbalances can perturb the free energy of folding significantly.50 A handful of other proteins have been reported to be stabilized by NaCl (Fig. 6). These include FynSH3 (54 residues),51 Bs-CspB (67 residues,),48 ribonuclease T1 (RNase T1, 104 residues),52 and apoflavodoxin (afd, 169 residues).53 Like YopM, all of these proteins have net negative charges at neutral pH, with similar charge densities of about ­0.1 per residue. The linkage coefficient for YopM (4.1 NaCl equivalents) exceeds values for these proteins (Fig. 7). For these proteins, the linkage number increases nonlinearly with chain length and charge, partly as a result of low linkage numbers for the shortest proteins. Although the net negative charge densities of ­0.1 per residue are consistent with the stabilizing effect of salt, the exact values of these linkage coefficients are likely to depend on the detailed arrangements of charged groups. Although linkage coefficients are well-defined thermodynamically, their underlying physical origin can be elusive. Linkage coefficients are sensitive to all types of behavior, including specific binding, electrostatic interactions, and Hofmeister effects.54 In YopM, there are 66 acidic residues distributed

Fig. 7. Wyman linkage coefficients for proteins reported to have large NaCl-dependent stabilities, as a function of predicted net charge. Net charges were calculated assuming unperturbed pKa values at pH values where stabilities were reported: FynSH3, 54 residues, ­ 7 net charge at pH 8.1;51 Bs-CspB, 67 residues, ­ 5 net charge, pH 7.0;48 RNase T1, 104 residues, ­ 9 net charge, pH 7.0;52 and afd, 169 residues, ­ 19 net charge, pH 7.0.53

Folding of YopM, a Large LRR Protein

1205
purification step, YopM-containing fractions of greater than 95% purity were dialyzed into storage buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris­HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 mM Tris(2carboxyethyl)-phosphine), passed through an 0.22 m pore size filter, flash-frozen, and stored at -80 °C. Protein concentrations were determined as described.68 Fluorescence spectroscopy Fluorescence emission spectra were collected on an Aviv ATF 105 spectropolarimeter (Lakewood, NJ), in a 1.0 cm path-length cuvette. The protein concentration was 4.5 M, in storage buffer with 0 or 4.1 M urea, at 25 °C. CD spectroscopy CD spectra were collected on an Aviv 62A DS spectropolarimeter (Lakewood, NJ) and a Jasco J-810 spectropolarimeter (Easton, MD). Far- and near-UV CD spectra were collected in 0.1 and 1.0 cm path-length cuvettes with protein concentrations of 18 M and 20 M, respectively, in storage buffer at 25 °C. Spectra were obtained by averaging five scans, each with a 5 s signal average every 1.0 nm. Two-state analysis of equilibrium unfolding transitions Equilibrium unfolding transitions induced by urea and temperature were related to the equilibrium constant for unfolding assuming a population-weighted average of the signal of the native (YN) and denatured (YD) states:     1 Ku Yobs ¼ fN YN þ fD YD ¼ YN þ YD ð1Þ 1 þ Ku 1 þ Ku where fN and fD are the fraction of native and denatured protein, respectively, and Ku is the equilibrium constant for unfolding. YN and YD are assumed to have linear dependence on urea and temperature, and are represented by lines: YN = aN + bN x, and YD = aD + bD x. The equilibrium constant for unfolding is related to the reaction free energy by the standard formula:   DGu Ku ¼ exp À ð2Þ RT where, R is the universal gas constant and T is absolute temperature. The two-state model was fit to data from CD and fluorescence signal was expressed by combining equations (1) and (2): À À Á Á ðaN þ bN xÞ þ ðaD þ bD xÞexp À DG- =RT À À Á Á u Yobs ¼ ð3Þ 1 þ exp À DG- =RT u For urea- and thermally-induced unfolding, the appropriate expressions for Gu° (see below) were substituted into Eq. (3), which was fit to the transitions by a nonlinear least-squares tool in Kaleidagraph 3.4 (Synergy Software). Urea-induced unfolding Urea-induced unfolding was monitored by CD at 217 nm and total tryptophan fluorescence on an Aviv 62A DS titrating CD spectrometer. Urea purchased from Amresco (Solon, OH) was stirred with mixed-bed resin

along the length of the molecule (Fig. 1b). In some regions, the spacing of the acidic residues is similar to that seen between the phosphates in DNA and RNA (see Fig. 1b), leading to a comparable linear charge density. This high negative charge density is common in proteins that act as DNA mimics.55 Increased charge repulsion is thought to destabilize double helix formation in DNA, and is likewise expected to destabilize the folded state of YopM.54 For DNA the addition of salt stabilizes the duplex form by a polyelectrolyte effect in which cations accumulate nonspecifically around the DNA. This preferential interaction gives rise to a linear relationship between the free energy of duplex formation and the log of the salt concentration (i.e., constant linkage coefficient) over the same broad range of salt concentration seen here for YopM.54 Like the large denaturant dependence of YopM, the large fitted linkage coefficient is consistent with a highly cooperative unfolding transition, although the mechanisms by which salt and urea affect protein stability are quite different. Salt stabilizes YopM by charge­charge screening in the native state, whereas urea destabilizes YopM by favorable interactions with the backbone in the denatured state.20 In addition to free energy of unfolding, the mvalue has a salt dependence above 500 mM NaCl, although no significant sensitivity to salt below this concentration (Table 2). Although a decrease in mvalue can result from conversion to a multistate equilibrium mechanism,56 we find CD- and fluorescence-monitored unfolding transitions to be coincident up to 800 mM NaCl (Fig. 5a), suggesting that the two-state character of the YopM unfolding transition is retained. This decrease in m-value is likely to result from a decrease in surface area upon unfolding in higher salt. A more compact denatured state would be favored by screening unfavorable electrostatic interactions at high concentrations of salt, which would decrease ASA.57,58 Electrostatic interactions have been reported to affect the denatured state in several proteins.57,59­67 The unique molecular architecture and electrostatic properties of YopM make it an attractive model system for studying both long- and shortrange electrostatics. The concave surface provides a geometry to study long-range charge­charge interactions through solvent, unlike globular proteins. The similarity between the units composing YopM provides many instances of unfavorable electrostatic interactions that can easily be manipulated experimentally and computationally to better understand charge­charge interactions on protein surfaces.

Materials and Methods
Protein expression and purification A yopM expression construct, based on the pMal-C2 vector (New England Biolabs) was a kind gift from D. Waugh. The purification was performed essentially as described,16 with only minor changes. After the last

1206
(Bio-Rad; Hercules, CA) as described,69 and the concentration was determined by refractometry70. Urea titrations were done with a computer-controlled Microlab syringe titrator (Hamilton Company, Reno, NV) to deliver buffered urea solutions (containing protein) into a buffered protein sample. At each concentration of urea, samples were equilibrated for 5 min at 25 °C, and CD and fluorescence signals were averaged for 30 s. Protein concentrations were 0.5­3.2 M. Buffers containing NH4Cl were adjusted to pH 7.6. Thermodynamic parameters were estimated using a linear extrapolation method36,70 in which the free energy of unfolding varies linearly with the concentration of urea:70,36,71 DG- ¼ DG- À m½urea u u ð4Þ

Folding of YopM, a Large LRR Protein

(Sartorius; Aubagne, France) and were scanned against thermal unfolding buffer at protein concentrations of 7.5 ­ 15 M. To obtain the calorimetric enthalpy, Hcal, numerical integration was performed on DSC transitions that had been baseline-corrected using the progress baseline tool of the Microcal Origin Software. To obtain a model-dependent van't Hoff enthalpy from the DSC data, the excess heat capacity, (Cp), was represented by the following equation: !   Ku ðTÞDCp Ku DHvH ðTÞ2 yCp ðT Þ ¼ CpN þ þ ð6Þ ð1 þ Ku ðTÞÞ RT 2 ð1 þ Ku Þ2 where CpN is the heat capacity of the native protein and is treated as a linear function of temperature. Cp is assumed to be independent of temperature. The temperaturedependence of the van't Hoff enthalpy is given by: DHvH ðTÞ ¼ DHvH;Tm þ DCp ðT À Tm Þ

Equation (4) was inserted into Eq. (3), which was then fit to the data. Thermally-induced unfolding monitored by far-UV CD Thermally-induced unfolding was monitored by far-UV CD at 217 nm from 15 °C to 60 °C, in steps of 1 °C. At each temperature, the sample was equilibrated for 1.5 min. Samples were prepared by buffer exchange to thermal unfolding buffer (20 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris­HCl pH 7.6, 0.05 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine). Protein concentrations were 0.5 ­ 1.5 M. Thermodynamic parameters for thermal unfolding were obtained by fitting Eq. (3) to the thermally-induced unfolding transitions, assuming the following temperature dependence of the free energy of unfolding:   T DG- ¼ DHvH;Tm 1 À þ DCp ðT À Tm Þ u T  m T ð5Þ À TDCp ln Tm Values of HvH,Tm, and Tm were optimized during the fit, whereas the value of Cp was fixed to that obtained from DSC. Thermally-induced unfolding monitored by near-UV CD Near-UV CD spectra were collected from 350 nm to 240 nm at a continuous scan rate of 20 nm/min, with an averaging time of 8 s. For full spectral analysis of thermal unfolding, spectra were collected every 2 °C, whereas for single-wavelength analysis (280 nm, the maximum in the near-UV spectrum), ellipticity was measured in increments of 1 °C. Samples were thermally equilibrated for 1.5 min at each temperature. Samples contained 15 M YopM in thermal unfolding buffer. CD signals were normalized by concentration and path length, but not by number of residues. Spectra were baseline-corrected and were offset to zero at 350 nm. To avoid contribution from the far-UV signal, scans were not analyzed at wavelengths shorter than 265 nm. SVD was carried out using Matlab (Mathworks; Natick, MA). Differential scanning calorimetry DSC was performed from 15 °C to 60 °C, at a scan rate of 45 degC/h with a Microcal VP-DSC (Northampton, MA). Protein samples were exchanged extensively into thermal unfolding buffer using a VivaSpin 500 microconcentrator

Equation (6) was fit to unfolding transitions using proFit (QuantumSoft, Switzerland). Kinetic unfolding and refolding studies Fluorescence was monitored on an Applied Photophysics SX.18MV-R stopped-flow rapid mixing device (Leatherhead, UK) using a 305 nm cutoff filter, following excitation at 280 nm (2.3 nm bandwidth). Final protein concentrations were 2­6 M, in storage buffer with 200 mM NaCl. For single-jump refolding and unfolding, initial concentrations of urea were 3.17 M and 0 M, respectively. Double-jump refolding was started from 0 M urea, increased to 3.16 M urea for various delay times, and subsequently decreased to 1.03 M urea to monitor refolding. Unfolding and refolding amplitudes and rate constants were determined using non-linear least-squares to fit the equation: X Yobs ¼ Yl þ DYi expÀki t
i

to individual progress curves. Y is the fluorescence signal at long times, Yi is the spectroscopic change contributed by the ith phase, and ki is the rate constant for the ith phase. As described above, two phases were generally necessary (and in all cases sufficient) to reproduce YopM refolding and unfolding kinetics. Global analysis of urea-induced unfolding in NaCl Global analysis was performed to simultaneously fit data with NaCl and urea dependence. The free energy in equation (3) was represented as: DG-u ¼ DG-H2 O À m½urea À mNaCl RTlnð½NaClÞ and was used to fit all of the unfolding transitions in the data set simultaneously.

Acknowledgements
We thank Drs. David S. Waugh for providing us with the YopM expression construct, Timothy Street

Folding of YopM, a Large LRR Protein

1207
14. Junker, M., Schuster, C. C., McDonnell, A. V., Sorg, K. A., Finn, M. C., Berger, B. & Clark, P. L. (2006). Pertactin beta-helix folding mechanism suggests common themes for the secretion and folding of autotransporter proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 103, 4918­4923. 15. Werbeck, N. D. & Itzhaki, L. S. (2007). Probing a moving target with a plastic unfolding intermediate of an ankyrin-repeat protein. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 104, 7863­7868. 16. Evdokimov, A. G., Anderson, D. E., Routzahn, K. M. & Waugh, D. S. (2001). Unusual molecular architecture of the Yersinia pestis cytotoxin YopM: a leucinerich repeat protein with the shortest repeating unit. J.¢ Mol. Biol. 312, 807­821. 17. Kajava, A. V. & Kobe, B. (2002). Assessment of the ability to model proteins with leucine-rich repeats in light of the latest structural information. Protein Sci. 11, 1082­1090. 18. Cantor, C. R. & Schimmel, P. R. (1980). The behavior of biological macromolecules. Biophysical Chemistry Part III. W.H. Freeman and Company, New York. 19. Myers, J. K., Pace, C. N. & Scholtz, J. M. (1995). Denaturant m values and heat capacity changes: relation to changes in accessible surface areas of protein unfolding. Protein Sci. 4, 2138­2148. 20. Auton, M., Holthauzen, L. M. & Bolen, D. W. (2007). Anatomy of energetic changes accompanying ureainduced protein denaturation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 104, 15317­15322. 21. Auton, M. & Bolen, D. W. (2007). Application of the transfer model to understand how naturally occurring osmolytes affect protein stability. Methods Enzymol. 428, 397­418. 22. Privalov, P. L. (1979). Stability of proteins: small globular proteins. Adv. Protein Chem. 33, 167­241. 23. Reimer, U., Scherer, G., Drewello, M., Kruber, S., Schutkowski, M. & Fischer, G. (1998). Side-chain effects on peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerisation. J. Mol. Biol. 279, 449­460. 24. Schmid, F. X. (1986). Fast-folding and slow-folding forms of unfolded proteins. Methods Enzymol. 131, 70­82. 25. Brandts, J. F., Halvorson, H. R. & Brennan, M. (1975). Consideration of the possibility that the slow step in protein denaturation reactions is due to cis-trans isomerism of proline residues. Biochemistry, 14, 4953­4963. 26. Nall, B. T., Garel, J. R. & Baldwin, R. L. (1978). Test of the extended two-state model for the kinetic intermediates observed in the folding transition of ribonuclease A. J. Mol. Biol. 118, 317­330. 27. Dang, Q. & Frieden, C. (1997). New PC versions of the kinetic-simulation and fitting programs, KINSIM and FITSIM. Trends Biochem. Sci. 22, 317. 28. Mello, C. C., Bradley, C. M., Tripp, K. W. & Barrick, D. (2005). Experimental characterization of the folding kinetics of the notch ankyrin domain. J. Mol. Biol. 352, 266­281. 29. Bradley, C. M. & Barrick, D. (2006). The notch ankyrin domain folds via a discrete, centralized pathway. Structure, 14, 1303­1312. 30. Low, C., Weininger, U., Zeeb, M., Zhang, W., Laue, E. D., Schmid, F. X. & Balbach, J. (2007). Folding mechanism of an ankyrin repeat protein: scaffold and active site formation of human CDK inhibitor p19 (INK4d). J. Mol. Biol. 373, 219­231. 31. Kiefhaber, T., Kohler, H. H. & Schmid, F. X. (1992). Kinetic coupling between protein folding and prolyl isomerization. I. Theoretical models. J. Mol. Biol. 224, 217­229.

for careful reading of the manuscript, Katie Tripp and Mark Zweifel for guidance on experimental techniques, Bertrand Garcia-Moreno and David Draper for discussions regarding electrostatics and salt effects, and Matthew Auton and Wayne Bolen for assistance in calculating an expected m-value based on transfer free energies.

Supplementary Data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/ j.jmb.2008.08.069

References
1. Kloss, E., Courtemanche, N. & Barrick, D. (2008). Repeat-protein folding: new insights into origins of cooperativity, stability, and topology. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 469, 83­99. 2. Main, E. R., Lowe, A. R., Mochrie, S. G., Jackson, S. E. & Regan, L. (2005). A recurring theme in protein engineering: the design, stability and folding of repeat proteins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 15, 464­471. 3. Freiberg, A., Machner, M. P., Pfeil, W., Schubert, W. D., Heinz, D. W. & Seckler, R. (2004). Folding and stability of the leucine-rich repeat domain of internalin B from Listeri monocytogenes. J. Mol. Biol. 337, 453­461. 4. Courtemanche, N. & Barrick, D. (2008). Folding thermodynamics and kinetics of the leucine-rich repeat domain of the virulence factor Internalin B. Protein Sci. 17, 43­53. 5. Tevelev, A., Byeon, I. J., Selby, T., Ericson, K., Kim, H. J., Kraynov, V. & Tsai, M. D. (1996). Tumor suppressor p16INK4A: structural characterization of wild-type and mutant proteins by NMR and circular dichroism. Biochemistry, 35, 9475­9487. 6. Boice, J. A. & Fairman, R. (1996). Structural characterization of the tumor suppressor p16, an ankyrin-like repeat protein. Protein Sci. 5, 1776­1784. 7. Zhang, B. & Peng, Z. (1996). Defective folding of mutant p16(INK4) proteins encoded by tumorderived alleles. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 28734­28737. 8. Mosavi, L. K., Williams, S. & Peng Zy, Z. Y. (2002). Equilibrium folding and stability of myotrophin: a model ankyrin repeat protein. J. Mol. Biol. 320, 165­170. 9. Zweifel, M. E. & Barrick, D. (2001). Studies of the ankyrin repeats of the Drosophila melanogaster Notch receptor. 2. Solution stability and cooperativity of unfolding. Biochemistry, 40, 14357­14367. 10. Wetzel, S. K., Settanni, G., Kenig, M., Binz, H. K. & Pluckthun, A. (2008). Folding and unfolding mechanism of highly stable full-consensus ankyrin repeat proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 376, 241­257. 11. Kajander, T., Cortajarena, A. L., Main, E. R., Mochrie, S. G. & Regan, L. (2005). A new folding paradigm for repeat proteins. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127, 10188­10190. 12. Stumpp, M. T., Forrer, P., Binz, H. K. & Pluckthun, A. (2003). Designing repeat proteins: modular leucinerich repeat protein libraries based on the mammalian ribonuclease inhibitor family. J. Mol. Biol. 332, 471­487. 13. Kamen, D. E. & Woody, R. W. (2001). A partially folded intermediate conformation is induced in pectate lyase C by the addition of 8-anilino-1-naphthalenesulfonate (ANS). Protein Sci. 10, 2123­2130.

1208
32. Dominy, B. N., Perl, D., Schmid, F. X. & Brooks, C. L., 3rd (2002). The effects of ionic strength on protein stability: the cold shock protein family. J. Mol. Biol. 319, 541­554. 33. Collins, K. D. & Washabaugh, M. W. (1985). The Hofmeister effect and the behaviour of water at interfaces. Q. Rev. Biophys. 18, 323­422. 34. Schleich, P. H. V. H. a. T. (1969). Ion effects on the solution structure of biological macromolecules. Acc. Chem. Res. 2, 257­265. 35. Wyman, J., Jr (1964). Linked functions and reciprocal effects in hemoglobin: a second look. Adv. Protein Chem. 19, 223­286. 36. Greene, R. F., Jr & Pace, C. N. (1974). Urea and guanidine hydrochloride denaturation of ribonuclease, lysozyme, alpha-chymotrypsin, and beta-lactoglobulin. J. Biol. Chem. 249, 5388­5393. 37. Thomson, J. A., Shirley, B. A., Grimsley, G. R. & Pace, C. N. (1989). Conformational stability and mechanism of folding of ribonuclease T1. J. Biol. Chem. 264, 11614­11620. 38. Santoro, M. M. & Bolen, D. W. (1992). A test of the linear extrapolation of unfolding free energy changes over an extended denaturant concentration range. Biochemistry, 31, 4901­4907. 39. Agashe, V. R. & Udgaonkar, J. B. (1995). Thermodynamics of denaturation of barstar: evidence for cold denaturation and evaluation of the interaction with guanidine hydrochloride. Biochemistry, 34, 3286­3299. 40. Nicholson, E. M. & Scholtz, J. M. (1996). Conformational stability of the Escherichia coli HPr protein: test of the linear extrapolation method and a thermodynamic characterization of cold denaturation. Biochemistry, 35, 11369­11378. 41. Zeeb, M., Rosner, H., Zeslawski, W., Canet, D., Holak, T. A. & Balbach, J. (2002). Protein folding and stability of human CDK inhibitor p19(INK4d). J. Mol. Biol. 315, 447­457. 42. Mello, C. C. & Barrick, D. (2004). An experimentally determined protein folding energy landscape. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 14102­14107. 43. Street, T. O., Bradley, C. M. & Barrick, D. (2007). Predicting coupling limits from an experimentally determined energy landscape. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 104, 4907­4912. 44. Courtemanche, N. & Barrick, D. (2008). The leucinerich repeat domain of internalin B Folds along a polarized N-terminal pathway. Structure, 16, 705­714. 45. Otzen, D. E., Kristensen, O., Proctor, M. & Oliveberg, M. (1999). Structural changes in the transition state of protein folding: alternative interpretations of curved chevron plots. Biochemistry, 38, 6499­6511. 46. Sanchez, I. E. & Kiefhaber, T. (2003). Evidence for sequential barriers and obligatory intermediates in apparent two-state protein folding. J. Mol. Biol. 325, 367­376. 47. Main, E. R., Stott, K., Jackson, S. E. & Regan, L. (2005). Local and long-range stability in tandemly arrayed tetratricopeptide repeats. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 102, 5721­5726. 48. Perl, D. & Schmid, F. X. (2001). Electrostatic stabilization of a thermophilic cold shock protein. J. Mol. Biol. 313, 343­357. 49. Wada, A. & Nakamura, H. (1981). Nature of the charge distribution in proteins. Nature, 293, 757­758. 50. Lee, K. K., Fitch, C. A., Lecomte, J. T. & Garcia-Moreno, E. B. (2002). Electrostatic effects in highly charged proteins: salt sensitivity of pKa values of histidines in staphylococcal nuclease. Biochemistry, 41, 5656­5667.

Folding of YopM, a Large LRR Protein

51. de Los Rios, M. A. & Plaxco, K. W. (2005). Apparent Debye-Huckel electrostatic effects in the folding of a simple, single domain protein. Biochemistry, 44, 1243­1250. 52. Pace, C. N. & Grimsley, G. R. (1988). Ribonuclease T1 is stabilized by cation and anion binding. Biochemistry, 27, 3242­3246. 53. Maldonado, S., Irun, M. P., Campos, L. A., Rubio, J. A., Luquita, A. et al. (2002). Salt-induced stabilization of apoflavodoxin at neutral pH is mediated through cation-specific effects. Protein Sci. 11, 1260­1273. 54. Record, M. T., Jr, Zhang, W. & Anderson, C. F. (1998). Analysis of effects of salts and uncharged solutes on protein and nucleic acid equilibria and processes: a practical guide to recognizing and interpreting polyelectrolyte effects, Hofmeister effects, and osmotic effects of salts. Adv. Protein Chem. 51, 281­353. 55. Dryden, D. T. (2006). DNA mimicry by proteins and the control of enzymatic activity on DNA. Trends Biotechnol. 24, 378­382. 56. Batey, S., Randles, L. G., Steward, A. & Clarke, J. (2005). Cooperative folding in a multi-domain protein. J. Mol. Biol. 349, 1045­1059. 57. Shortle, D. (1995). Staphylococcal nuclease: a showcase of m-value effects. Adv. Protein Chem. 46, 217­247. 58. Crick, S. L., Jayaraman, M., Frieden, C., Wetzel, R. & Pappu, R. V. (2006). Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy shows that monomeric polyglutamine molecules form collapsed structures in aqueous solutions. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 103, 16764­16769. 59. Pace, C. N., Laurents, D. V. & Thomson, J. A. (1990). pH dependence of the urea and guanidine hydrochloride denaturation of ribonuclease A and ribonuclease T1. Biochemistry, 29, 2564­2572. 60. Wrabl, J. & Shortle, D. (1999). A model of the changes in denatured state structure underlying m value effects in staphylococcal nuclease. Nature Struct. Biol. 6, 876­883. 61. Swint-Kruse, L. & Robertson, A. D. (1995). Hydrogen bonds and the pH dependence of ovomucoid third domain stability. Biochemistry, 34, 4724­4732. 62. Oliveberg, M., Vuilleumier, S. & Fersht, A. R. (1994). Thermodynamic study of the acid denaturation of barnase and its dependence on ionic strength: evidence for residual electrostatic interactions in the acid/thermally denatured state. Biochemistry, 33, 8826­8832. 63. Oliveberg, M., Arcus, V. L. & Fersht, A. R. (1995). pKA values of carboxyl groups in the native and denatured states of barnase: the pKA values of the denatured state are on average 0.4 units lower than those of model compounds. Biochemistry, 34, 9424­9433. 64. Tan, Y. J., Oliveberg, M., Davis, B. & Fersht, A. R. (1995). Perturbed pKA-values in the denatured states of proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 254, 980­992. 65. Kuhlman, B., Luisi, D. L., Young, P. & Raleigh, D. P. (1999). pKa values and the pH dependent stability of the N-terminal domain of L9 as probes of electrostatic interactions in the denatured state. Differentiation between local and nonlocal interactions. Biochemistry, 38, 4896­4903. 66. Whitten, S. T. & Garcia-Moreno, E. B. (2000). pH dependence of stability of staphylococcal nuclease: evidence of substantial electrostatic interactions in the denatured state. Biochemistry, 39, 14292­14304. 67. Pace, C. N., Alston, R. W. & Shaw, K. L. (2000). Charge-charge interactions influence the denatured

Folding of YopM, a Large LRR Protein

1209
and guanidine hydrochloride denaturation curves. Methods Enzymol. 131, 266­280. 71. Santoro, M. M. & Bolen, D. W. (1988). Unfolding free energy changes determined by the linear extrapolation method. 1. Unfolding of phenylmethanesulfonyl alpha-chymotrypsin using different denaturants. Biochemistry, 27, 8063­8068. 72. Chou, P. Y. & Fasman, G. D. (1977). Beta-turns in proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 115, 135­175.

state ensemble and contribute to protein stability. Protein Sci. 9, 1395­1398. 68. Edelhoch, H. (1967). Spectroscopic determination of tryptophan and tyrosine in proteins. Biochemistry, 6, 1948­1954. 69. Street, T. O., Courtemanche, N. & Barrick, D. (2008). Protein folding and stability using denaturants. Methods Cell Biol. 84, 295­325. 70. Pace, C. N. (1986). Determination and analysis of urea

