Protein Expression and Purification 27 (2003) 42≠48 www.elsevier.com/locate/yprep

Expression of a fully functional cd1 nitrite reductase from Pseudomonas aeruginosa in Pseudomonas stutzeri
Marzia Arese,a Walter G. Zumft,b and Francesca Cutruzzola,* a
a

Department of Biochemical Sciences, University of Rome ``La Sapienza,'' P.le A.Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy b Lehrstuhl fr Mikrobiologie der Universitt zu Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe, Germany u a Received 20 March 2002, and in revised form 12 September 2002

Abstract Nitrite reductases are redox enzymes catalysing the one electron reduction of nitrite to nitrogen monoxide (NO) within the bacterial denitrification process. We have cloned the gene for cd1 nitrite reductase (Pa-nirS) from Pseudomonas aeruginosa into the NiRS¿ strain MK202 of Pseudomonas stutzeri and expressed the enzyme under denitrifying conditions. In the MK202 strain, denitrification is abolished by the disruption of the endogenous nitrite reductase gene; thus, cells can be grown only in the presence of oxygen. After complementation with Pa-nirS gene, cells supplemented with nitrate can be grown in the absence of oxygen. The presence of nitrite reductase was proven in vivo by the demonstration of NO production, showing that the enzyme was expressed in the active form, containing both heme c and d1 . A purification procedure for the recombinant PaNir has been developed, based on the P. aeruginosa purification protocol; spectroscopic analysis of the purified protein fully confirms the presence of the d1 heme cofactor. Moreover, the functional characterisation of the recombinant NiR has been carried out by monitoring the production of NO by the purified NiR enzyme in the presence of nitrite by an NO electrode. The full recovery of the denitrification properties in the P. stutzeri MK202 strain by genetic complementation with Pa-NiR underlines the high homology between enzymes of nitrogen oxianion respiration. Our work provides an expression system for cd1 nitrite reductase and its site-directed mutants in a nonpathogenic strain and is a starting point for the in vivo study of recombinant enzyme variants. ” 2002 Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

Pseudomonads are well-characterised gram-negative prokaryotes among which many strains sustain denitrification. Denitrifiers use nitrogen oxianions (NO¿ ; NO¿ ) as electron acceptors in the absence of 3 2 oxygen for energy conservation. The metabolic pathway for processing N-oxianions is complex, both in redox enzymes and necessary control elements. The genes required for denitrification are considerably conserved across species in clusters, although some important differences in gene location and factor requirement were found. In recent years, denitrification has attracted increasing interest as the biochemistry and biology of this respiratory pathway are unravelled [1]. Nitrite reductase (NiR) is a key enzyme of denitrification, which catalyses the one electron reduction of nitrite (NO¿ ) to nitrogen monoxide (NO), with copper 2 or heme centres at the active site. Heme-containing NiR
* Corresponding author. Fax: +39-6-4440062. E-mail address: f.cutruzzola@caspur.it (F. Cutruzzol). a

has been purified from various sources and contains both heme c and d1 as essential cofactors. Heme d1 , a 3,8-dioxo-17-acrylate-porphyrindione, is found only in denitrifying species [2]. With cd1 NiR the only known source of d1 heme in nature, the development of a successful expression system for a functional enzyme relies upon a complex cellular background providing the machinery for heme d1 biosynthesis. Attempts in this direction have failed up to now; a step forward, achieved only for the cd1 NiR from Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PaNiR), was the production of a soluble semi-apo NiR expressed in a strain of P. putida, a non-denitrifying species, in which no endogenous nitrite reductase is synthesised [3]. This system produces a semi-apo protein, containing the covalently bound c heme but not the d1 heme, which the P. putida strain is unable to synthesise. To obtain a fully functional NiR enzyme, an in vitro reconstitution with d1 heme is required after purification and an effective protocol for reconstitution was devised by our group. However, this has the major

1046-5928/02/$ - see front matter ” 2002 Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved. PII: S 1 0 4 6 - 5 9 2 8 ( 0 2 ) 0 0 6 0 0 - 9

M. Arese et al. / Protein Expression and Purification 27 (2003) 42≠48

43

disadvantage that the cofactor has to be extracted from the native enzyme purified from the pathogenic P. aeruginosa PaoI strain [4] therefore heavily limiting enzyme production. Pa-NIR is the most extensively characterised cd1 NiR in terms of biochemical [2] and, more recently, also structural properties [5,6]. The availability of the semiapo-expression system allowed the generation of the first site-directed mutants of this enzyme and their functional characterisation in vitro [7,8]. The information thus obtained proved essential to begin to understand the complex reaction mechanism. One of the frontiers of structural biology is to obtain information on the intermediates of a biochemical reaction: crystals of NiR (wild-type and mutant enzymes) are therefore required to follow the kinetics at a structural level of resolution, using freeze quencing and/or laser photolysis techniques. As for other cofactor-containing systems, the production of high quality crystals suitable for data collection heavily relies upon the availability of homogeneous holoprotein samples; thus, the expression yield and the production of a holo-enzyme represent the limiting steps for enterprising new and powerful techniques that are able to define the characterisation of this class of enzymes. In this paper, the realisation of an alternative expression system for P. aeruginosa NiR (PaNiR) is presented, using as a host the non-pathogenic denitrifier P. stutzeri. This species was chosen since, among denitrifying pseudomonads, it can be considered as a model system for denitrification, in which several enzymes have been studied in vivo ([2] and references therein), especially those involved in NO production and consumption [9,10]. Mutants specifically disrupted in both NiR and NO reductase (NOR) are available [11,12]; the P. stutzeri MK202 strain, in which the endogenous NiR gene is disrupted by the insertion of the kanamycin resistance gene [11], represents the ideal target for the realisation of a recombinant strain that is able to produce the Pa-NiR enzyme in the holo-form. The fully functional holo-protein, containing the essential cofactors, was successfully expressed, solving the problem of d1 heme rescue. Together with this result, we were also able to study the NiR enzymatic activity under physiological conditions in the cell, providing a unique opportunity to probe in vivo the role of Pa-NiR within the denitrification chain.

pUCP19 is the 4.5 kb Escherichia-Pseudomonas shuttle vector carrying the IPTG-inducible lac promoter [13]. Production of the recombinant PaNiR-MK strain and growth conditions Basic molecular biology and biochemistry techniques were described in [14]. The pUCP-NiR construct was obtained by ligation of the 2-kb EcoRI fragment containing the nirS gene in the pUC-derived plasmid pUCP19. Selection of constructs was performed by colony PCR screening. Amplification steps were as follows: denaturation at 94 ∞C (5 min); 30 reaction cycles at 94, 60, and 72 ∞C, (1 min each) for denaturation, annealing, and extension, respectively. Transformation of the MK202 strain with pUCP-NiR was performed by electroporation of 1 ml cell suspension mixed with 1 lg DNA at 2 kV, 200 X, and 25F. Pseudomonas stutzeri strains were grown on synthetic asparagine-citrate medium (AC) at 30 ∞C [11]. An overnight culture was diluted to an optical density of about 0.1 (at 600 nm) and incubated on an orbital shaker at 240 rpm. Denitrification was induced at an OD value of 0.4 by the addition of sodium nitrate (0.1%) and by simultaneously shifting to O2 -limiting conditions by reducing the void volume and lowering the shaking speed to 120 rpm. Biosynthesis of the recombinant protein was induced by 1 mM isopropyl-b-d-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG); all media were supplemented with 0.3 mM d-aminolevulinic acid (ALA). When necessary, kanamycin, piperacillin, and streptomycin were added at final concentrations of 50, 50, and 200 lg ml¿1 , respectively. The best expression conditions were first set up on small-scale growths, by the dilution of an overnight culture in 30 ml of AC medium (ratio 1:100). The aerobic growth phase lasted 4 h (OD P 0:3 at 600 nm), followed by an O2 -limiting growth phase of 10≠20 h. Larger-scale growth for the purification of recombinant protein was carried out by diluting an overnight culture in 1 l AC medium. The aerobic phase lasted 7 h and cells were collected after 15 h of O2 -limitation. Biochemical techniques Protein concentration was measured by a commercial protein assay kit (SIGMA). Western blot analysis was carried out with polyclonal antibodies against Pa-NiR raised in rabbit; alkaline phosphatase-conjugated secondary antibody and BCIP/NBT alkaline phosphatase substrate detection kit (SIGMA) were used. NO production was measured amperometrically using a Clark-type NO electrode (ISO-NO, World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL) inserted into a 5-ml gas-tight vial sealed with a rubber septum. The electrode

Materials and methods Strains and plasmids Pseudomonas stutzeri ZoBell MK21 (ATCC14405): Smr [11] represents wild-type traits. Pseudomonas stutzeri ZoBell MK202 is a Tn5 insertion mutant, deficient in NO¿ respiration [11]. 2

44

M. Arese et al. / Protein Expression and Purification 27 (2003) 42≠48

was calibrated with NO-saturated water. After sample injection, NO concentration in the electrode chamber was recorded continuously under constant stirring at 25 ∞C. The assay was carried out anaerobically with intact cells, normalised for protein content; reaction conditions were 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6.9), 10≠100 ll cell extract, 50 mM lactate, and 0.6≠20 mM NO¿ [15]. NO production by purified NiR was carried 2 out in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6.2), adding 10 mM ascorbate and 0.1 mM tetramethyl-p-phenylenediamine (TMPD) as electron donors, 0.6 mM NO¿ , 2 and 0.87 or 1.3 nM NiR (monomer). The purification of recombinant Pa-NiR was carried out following the procedure used for the P. aeruginosa enzyme [16]. Lysis of the outer membrane and release of the periplasmic content were obtained by osmotic shock incubating cells in 0.5 M sucrose buffer and pelleting of the spheroplasts by centrifugation (25.000g) [17]. The purity of NiR was evaluated spectrophotometrically, from the ratio of the absorption peaks at 417 and 280 nm (1.2 in a pure sample) and by SDS≠PAGE.

Results and discussion Cloning of nirS in pUCP19 and expression of the recombinant protein Pseudomonas aeruginosa NiR gene (nirS) was cloned into pUCP19 (Fig. 1) [13]. The resulting construct pUCP-NiR, bearing nirS downstream of a lac promoter, was then transformed into the P. stutzeri NiRS¿ mutant MK202 [11]. The resulting recombinant strain was PaNiR-MK. Growth under denitrifying conditions of PaNiR-MK for the expression of the recombinant NiR was carried out using a biphasic mode, previously used for other engineered P. stutzeri strains [11], which involves shifting from aerobic to O2 -limiting conditions. This protocol was chosen also because it may confer a significant advantage for the expression of site-directed mutants whose activity is either poor or unknown (or uncertain in vivo), given the fact that cd1 NiR function under strict anaerobiosis is essential. As controls, MK202 (not transformed) and MK21 (native strain) were grown under the same conditions. To optimise the production of enzyme in the holo-form, 0.3 mM d-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) was added to culture. ALA is the common precursor in the biosynthesis of hemes and its addition to the growth medium had been shown to enhance the synthesis of heme, which is necessary to support heme≠ protein overproduction [18]. Growth parameters such as duration of the aerobic/anaerobic phases and time of induction as a function of culture volume were optimised to increase the yield in cell pellet, monitoring in parallel the expression peak of the recombinant protein.

Fig. 1. Construction of the pUCP-NiR plasmid. pUCP19 was digested with EcoRI and ligated with the nirS gene from P. aeruginosa. The 2 kb fragment containing the nirS gene includes 40 bp of the genomic sequence upstream the N-terminus of Pa-NiR.

Attempts to use a richer medium led to a decrease in the expression of NiR and were, thus, abandoned. The cell extract of each culture was analysed by SDS≠ PAGE and Western blot with anti-Pa-NiR antiserum. The result of this analysis is shown in Fig. 2. A specific signal in the PaNiR-MK sample induced with IPTG was observed (panel A), corresponding to a molecular weight of 60 kDa. This clearly indicated that the recombinant NiR was successfully expressed, although it did not provide information on the cofactor content of the recombinant enzyme. It is important to underline the fact that no hybridisation was observed with the strain MK21 producing the P. stutzeri NiR nor for the purified P. stutzeri enzyme (Fig. 2B). Therefore, in spite of the high sequence similarities between the two enzymes, the antibody used was specific for the NiR from P. aeruginosa. This peculiarity had been previously described

M. Arese et al. / Protein Expression and Purification 27 (2003) 42≠48

45

Fig. 2. Western blot analysis with anti-Pa-NiR antiserum. (A) Total cell extracts fractionated on SDS≠PAGE: the PaNiR-MK strain was run in parallel with wild-type MK21 and MK202 as controls. Each sample was grown with (I) and without (NI) IPTG, but only the induced samples of the controls are shown. (B) Purified Pa-NiR and P. stutzeri NiR (Ps-NiR).

[19]; noteworthy, the anti-Pa-NiR antibody used in this study recognises the NiR purified from Pseudomonas nautica (data not shown). In vivo activity of the PaNiR-MK recombinant strain The activity of P. stutzeri MK21, MK202, and PaNiR-MK strains was investigated in vivo after smallscale growths carried out under denitrifying conditions. The total amount of protein of these strains was analysed (Table 1). Comparing the MK21 strain with the mutant MK202, disrupted in the nirS gene, a clear decrease in the biosynthetic activity of the mutant was observed; this seems to be the result of accumulation of the toxic metabolite nitrite. The protein content of the recombinant PaNiR-MK strain was higher under induction conditions, reaching the level of the wild-type strain. Thus, the production of Pa-NiR is able to sustain cell growth after the switch from O2 -respiration to denitrification (Table 1). The NO production activity of PaNiR-MK and MK202 was assayed in vivo under denitrifying conditions using an NO electrode (Fig. 3A, B). The assay was carried out anaerobically with intact cells, using lactate as source of energy, and following NO production on addition of NO¿ . As a reference, NO production from 2
Table 1 Total protein content of strains grown under denitrification condition (see methods) MK21(c/ml) + IPTG )IPTG 580 720 MK202 (c/ml) 400 480 PaNiR-MK (c/ml) 700 360

Fig. 3. NO production assay. The reaction was carried out with cell suspensions of the following strains: (A) PaNiR-MK recombinant strain; (B) MK202 strain (NiRS¿ ). NO production from purified proteins: (C) native NiR purified from P. aeruginosa; (D) recombinant Pa-NiR purified from P. stutzeri. Arrows indicate NO¿ additions at 2 the following concentrations: (A) from 4.8 to 19.2 mM; (B) 12 and 36 mM; (C) and (D) 0.6 mM. In C and D, the assay was carried out in the presence of 1.3 and 0.87 nM NiR, respectively.

MK21: native P. stutzeri strain. MK202: nirS ¿ P. stutzeri strain, disrupted in the endogenous NiR gene. PaNIR-MK: MK202 transformed with the Pa-NIR coding sequence. Error is ∆20% in all measurements.

purified native Pa-NiR was measured, using ascorbate and TMPD as electron donors (Fig. 3C). The measured turnover number was found to be 7 s¿1 , in good agreement with published data [2]. The PaNiR-MK strain is active in nitrite reduction, as indicated in Fig. 3A from the increase in NO production after addition of NO¿ . 2 The amount of NO produced was proportional to NO¿ 2 concentration, as shown by multiple additions of NO¿ 2 to the same reaction mixture. The activity of the extract of the recombinant PaNiR-MK strain was found to be 30 nmol NO produced/mg protein/min. In the disrupted MK202 strain, no significant NO production was observed (Fig. 3B). These results indicate that the recombinant strain expresses Pa-NiR in the native form, which functions in the physiological reduction of nitrite to NO to restore the denitrification process. Furthermore, we found that NO production was not detectable with MK21, which is probably due to its NO reductase activity. In MK21, NiR is produced in physiological amounts, lower than those obtained under overexpres-

46

M. Arese et al. / Protein Expression and Purification 27 (2003) 42≠48

sion conditions in the recombinant system. NO production is counterbalanced in this strain efficiently by NO scavenging carried out by NO reductase, the enzyme downstream of NiR in the denitrification chain. This effect is illustrated by the net NO consumption observed in this strain after addition of increasing amounts of NO (not shown). Purification and characterisation of recombinant Pa-Nir from P. stutzeri The purification procedure of Pa-NiR from the recombinant PaNiR-MK strain was based on the procedure used for P. aeruginosa strain [16]. A modification was introduced, considering the periplasmic location of NiR and that the protein is released in solution by the breakage of the outer membrane. In lieu of the sonication step, a lysis by osmotic shock was carried out, as described in [17]. The yield of pure protein is about 0.2 mg/g cell wet weight (corresponding to 0.4 mg/l culture). Although the yield is not as high as that reported for other proteins using the more popular E. coli systems, it is evident that in our system a tight regulation between the expression of the apo-protein and production of the cofactor is operative, the last one being probably the limiting step for the production of the holo-enzyme, as indicated by our observations that no apo-protein could be detected at any purification step. The presence of the two chromophores, heme c and heme d1 , confers to cd1 NiR distinct spectroscopic features, which have been well characterised for the native enzyme in the different redox states [17]. Fig. 4 shows the spectra of recombinant Pa-NiR in the oxidised, ascorbate reduced, and NO-bound form. In the oxidised form the spectroscopic contribution of heme d1 can be observed at 460 and 640 nm, while the absorption maxima of heme c are at 420 and 520≠550 nm. The spectra obtained were found to be indistinguishable from those of

native Pa-NiR [20], both in shape and relative absorbance, indicating that the correct ratio between heme c and d1 is present in the recombinant protein. The spectrum of the NO-bound form was obtained by reaction of the reduced enzyme with NO¿ , which yields the reduced 2 species with the reaction product, NO, bound at the heme d1 [2]. The nitrite reductase activity of the purified Pa-NiR produced in the P. stutzeri strain was assayed, monitoring the NO production at the electrode. Fig. 3D shows the activity of the recombinant enzyme (turnover number º 7 s¿1 ); this activity agrees well with that of native NiR (Fig. 3C), confirming the fact that the two enzymes show the same specific activity of nitrite conversion to NO.

Concluding remarks Heterologous expression of heme-containing enzymes and proteins often proves difficult because a balance between protein and cofactor synthesis has to be accomplished. Moreover, unusual heme groups require specific biosynthetic pathways, which exist only in parent strains. This is clearly the case for cd1 NiR, bearing the distinct heme d1 found only in denitrifiers. Here, we describe the first successful heterologous expression of a fully active form of NiR in a cd1 free background using P. stutzeri. The study of this class of enzymes will greately benefit from this new expression system due to its practical outcomes. The utilisation of a non-pathogen host and the possibility to avoid the in vitro reconstitution step bypass the critical points for the expression and purification of cd1 NiR, which have heavily limited the production of high quality protein available for biochemical characterisation. It is known how structural studies at high resolution are strictly dependent on the homogeneity of the sample analysed;

. . . . . . . . . .

Fig. 4. Absorption spectra of purified Pa-NiR. (R) Oxidised, (----) reduced, and (≠≠ ≠≠) NO-bound derivatives.

M. Arese et al. / Protein Expression and Purification 27 (2003) 42≠48

47

the possibility to obtain a holo-protein is therefore overwhelmingly the key result of this work. We have also shown that the recombinant NiR is able to complement cell growth under denitrification conditions, indicating that the metabolic pathway is fully restored by the heterologous enzyme, which takes over the role of the endogenous one. Our results show that it is feasible to study the reaction catalysed by NiR in the cell during denitrification, with the unique opportunity of testing in vivo the catalytic activity of site-directed NiR mutants, already fully characterised in vitro. The success in the heterologous expression of NiR was not foreseen for several reasons. Structural and functional characterisation of NiR proteins from different species (P. aeruginosa, P. stutzeri, P. nautica, and Paracoccus pantotrophus) carried out in the past years has shown that this class of enzymes, although sharing common features, is surprisingly heterogeneous. From the structural viewpoint, remarkable differences were found both in the type of ligands coordinating the redox centres (heme c and d1 ) and in the overall structural organisation [2,21]; a surface property such as the isoelectric point differs as much as 3 pH units [2] and epitopes are also not identical (see text). Considering the functional properties, it seems clear that, at least in vitro, nitrite reduction is carried out by the various enzymes by different catalytic strategies [8,22]. In vivo relevant differences have been found both in the type of physiological electron donor employed and in the organisation of the operons coding for NiR and the d1 heme biosynthetic enzymes [1]. Therefore, our study demonstrates that the heterologously expressed Pa-NiR not only is fully functional in the exogenous background, but can be purified from this non-pathogen as a holo-enzyme with good yields.

[2] F. Cutruzzol, Bacterial nitric oxide synthesis, Biochim. Biophys. a Acta 4730 (1999) 1≠19. [3] M.C. Silvestrini, F. Cutruzzol, R. D’Alessandro, M. Brunori, a N. Fochesato, E. Zennaro, Expression of Pseudomonas aeruginosa nitrite reductase in Pseudomonas putida and characterisation of the recombinant protein, Biochem. J. 285 (1992) 661≠ 666. [4] T.A. Walsh, M.K. Johnson, D. Barber, A.J. Thompson, C. Greenwood, Studies on heme d1 extracted from Pseudomonas aeruginosa nitrite reductase, J. Inorg. Biochem. 14 (1980) 15≠ 31. [5] D. Nurizzo, F. Cutruzzol, M. Arese, D. Bourgeois, M. a Brunori, M. Tegoni, C. Cambillau, Conformational changes occurring upon reduction and NO binding in nitrite reductase from Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Biochemistry 37 (1998) 13987≠ 13996. a [6] D. Nurizzo, M.C. Silvestrini, M. Mathieu, F. Cutruzzol, D. Bourgeois, V. F lop, J. Hajdu, M. Brunori, M. Tegoni, C. u  Cambillau, N-terminal arm exchange is observed in the 2.15 A crystal structure of oxidised nitrite reductase from Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Structure 5 (1997) 1157≠1171. F. Cutruzzol, M. Arese, S. Grasso, A. Bellelli, M. Brunori, a Mutagenesis of nitrite reductase from Pseudomonas aeruginosa: tyrosine-10 in the c heme domain is not involved in catalysis, FEBS Lett. 412 (1997) 365≠369. F. Cutruzzol, K. Brown, E.K. Wilson, A. Bellelli, M. Arese, M. a Tegoni, C. Cambillau, M. Brunori, The nitrite reductase from Pseudomonas aeruginosa: essential role of two active-site histidines in the catalytic and structural properties, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 98 (2001) 2232≠2237. K.U. Vollack, W.G. Zumft, Nitric oxide signaling and transcriptional control of denitrification genes in Pseudomonas stutzeri, J. Bacteriol. 183 (2001) 2516≠2526. A. Jngst, S. Wakabayashi, H. Matsubara, W.G. Zumft, The u nirSTBM region coding for cytochrome cd1 -dependent nitrite respiration of Pseudomonas stutzeri consists of a cluster of mono-, di-, and tetraheme proteins, FEBS Lett. 279 (1991) 205≠ 209. W.G. Zumft, C. Braun, H. Cuypers, Nitric oxide reductase from Pseudomonas stutzeri primary structure and gene organisation of a novel bacterial cytochrome bc complex, Eur. J. Biochem. 219 (1994) 481≠490. W.G. Zumft, K. D hler, H. K rner, S. L chelt, A. Viebrock, K. o o o ¿ Frunzke, Defects in cytochrome cd1 dependent nitrite respiration of transposon Tn5-induced mutants from Pseudomonas stutzeri, Arch. Microbiol. 149 (1988) 492≠498. H.P. Schweizer, Escherichia-Pseudomonas shuttle vectors derived from pUC18/19, Gene 97 (1991) 109≠112. J. Sambrook, E.F. Fritsh, T. Maniatis, Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 1989. H. Arai, T. Kodama, Y. Igarashi, Cascade regulation of the two CRP/FNR-related transcriptional regulators (ANR and DNR) and the denitrification enzymes in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Mol. Microbiol. 25 (1997) 1141≠1148. S.R. Parr, D. Barber, C. Greenwood, B.W. Phillips, J. Mellings, Purification procedure for the soluble cytochrome oxidase and some other respiratory proteins of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Biochem. J. 157 (1976) 423≠430. J.B. Moir, D. Baratta, D.J. Richardson, S.J. Ferguson, The purification of a cd1-type nitrite reductase from, and the absence of a copper-type nitrite reductase from, the aerobic denitrifier Thiosphaera pantotropha; the role of pseudoazurin as an electron donor, Eur. J. Biochem. 212 (1993) 377≠ 385. F. Cutruzzol, C. Travaglini Allocatelli, A. Brancaccio, M. a Brunori, Aplysia limacina myoglobin cDNA cloning: an alterna-

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

Acknowledgments This work was supported by funds from the CNR of Italy (Target Project on Biotechnology). Prof. M. Brunori is gratefully acknowledged for his continuous support and for a critical reading of the manuscript. We express our special thanks to Dr. G. Stubauer and Dr. E. K. Wilson for help with the NO electrode. We also thank Dr. Nicolini and Mr. Da Gai (Istituto Superiore di Sanit, Rome, Italy) for their assistance in large-scale a bacterial growth. M.A. was supported by the ``Consorzio Interuniversitario Biotecnologie,'' Urbino, Italia.

[13] [14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

References
[1] W.G. Zumft, Cell biology and molecular basis of denitrification, Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 61 (1997) 553≠616. [18]

48

M. Arese et al. / Protein Expression and Purification 27 (2003) 42≠48 [21] J.W.A. Allen, N.J. Watmough, S.J. Ferguson, A switch in heme axial ligation prepares Paracoccus pantotrophus cytochrome cd1 for catalysis, Nat. Struct. Biol. 7 (2000) 885≠888. [22] S.J. George, J.W. Allen, S.J. Ferguson, R.N. Thorneley, Timeresolved infrared spectroscopy reveals a stable ferric heme-NO intermediate in the reaction of Paracoccus pantotrophus cytochrome cd1 nitrite reductase with nitrite, J. Biol. Chem. 275 (2000) 33231≠33237.

tive mechanism of oxygen stabilisation as studied by active-site mutagenesis, Biochem. J. 314 (1996) 83≠90. [19] M.S. Coyne, J.M. Tiedje, in: J. Sorensen, N.P. Revsbech (Eds.), Denitrification and Soil and Sediment, Plenum Publishing Company, New York, 1990, pp. 21≠35. [20] M.C. Silvestrini, S. Falcinelli, I. Ciabatti, F. Cutruzzol, M. a Brunori, Pseudomonas aeruginosa nitrite reductase (or cytochrome oxidase): an overview, Biochimie 76 (1994) 641≠654.

