doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2006.01.049

J. Mol. Biol. (2006) 357, 1605­1618

Room to Move: Crystallizing Membrane Proteins in Swollen Lipidic Mesophases
Vadim Cherezov1,2, Jeffrey Clogston3, Miroslav Z. Papiz4 and Martin Caffrey1,2*
College of Science and Materials and Surface Science Institute, University of Limerick Limerick, Ireland
2 Chemistry Department, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA 1

Chemical Engineering Department, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA CCLRC Daresbury Laboratory Daresbury, Warrington, WA4 4AD, United Kingdom
4

3

The cubic phase or in meso crystallization method is responsible for almost 40 solved integral membrane protein structures. Most of these are small and compact proteins. A model for how crystals form by the in meso method has been proposed that invokes a transition between mesophases. In light of this model, we speculated that a more hydrated and open mesophase, of reduced interfacial curvature, would support facile crystallization of bigger and bulkier proteins. The proposal was explored here by performing crystallization in the presence of additives that swell the cubic phase. The additive concentration inducing swelling, as quantified by small-angle X-ray diffraction, coincided with a "crystallization window" in which two, very different transmembranal proteins produced crystals. That the swollen mesophase can grow structure-grade crystals was proven with one of these, the light-harvesting II complex. In most regards, the structural details of the corresponding complex resembled those of crystals grown by the conventional vapour diffusion method, with some important differences. In particular, packing density in the in meso-grown crystals was dramatically higher, more akin to that seen with water-soluble proteins, which accounts for their enhanced diffracting power. The layered and close in-plane packing observed has been rationalized in a model for nucleation and crystal growth by the in meso method that involves swollen mesophases. These results present a rational case for including mesophase-swelling additives in screens for in meso crystallogenesis. Their use will contribute to broadening the range of membrane proteins that yield to structure determination.
q 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

*Corresponding author

Keywords: cubic phase; light harvesting complex II; sponge phase; vitamin B12 transporter; X-ray crystallography

Introduction
Lipidic mesophases are integral to the so-called in meso or cubic phase method for growing structuregrade 3-D crystals of membrane proteins.1 A survey of records in The Membrane Protein Data Bank (MPDB)2 shows that the method is responsible for 38
Abbreviations used: bR, bacteriorhodopsin; BOG, b-octyl glucoside; BtuB, vitamin B12 receptor; GndCl, guanidine hydrochloride; LDAO, lauryl dimethylamine oxide; LH2, light-harvesting complex II; MAG, monoacylglycerol; MPD, 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol; MPDB, Membrane Protein Data Bank; PDB, Protein Data Bank; PPO, pentaerythritol propoxylate. E-mail address of the corresponding author: martin.caffrey@ul.ie  http://www.lipidat.chemistry.ohio-state.edu/ MPDB/index.asp

membrane protein structures. These include such proteins as bacteriorhodopsin (bR), halorhodopsin, the photosynthetic reaction center from Rhodobacter sphaeroides, sensory rhodopsin II (SRII), and an SRII/ transducer fragment complex.2 The highest resolution associated with the in meso method was ° achieved with bR at 1.43 A (PDB ID: 1M0K, 1M0M). Such detailed structural information has enabled a mechanistic understanding of the bR photocycle and light-driven proton pumping. In addition to the above structures the in meso method has produced crystals or microcrystals of several other membrane proteins that include the BtuB cobalamin receptor,3 the light-harvesting II complex (LH2),1,4 the photosynthetic reaction center from Blastochloris (formerly Rhodopseudomonas) viridis,4 the acetylcholine receptor/ a-bungarotoxin complex,5 cytochrome P450 (I.A. Pikuleva, C.D. Stout, O. Slattery & M.C.,

0022-2836/$ - see front matter q 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1606 unpublished data), a cytochrome c oxidase (S. Ferguson-Miller, O. Slattery & M.C., unpublished data), and the outer membrane protein OpcA (V.C., J. Moore & M.C., unpublished data). It would appear therefore that this mesophase-based approach to crystallizing membrane proteins is quite general in regard to the type of proteins with which it works. However, conspicuous by their absence on the lists above are proteins that have more than w1500 residues and that bear large extramembranal domains. A mechanism for how membrane proteins form crystals by the in meso method has been proposed.6 It posits that the protein reconstitutes into the highly curved membrane of the cubic phase. The latter can be viewed as a molecular sponge consisting of a pair of interpenetrating but noncontacting aqueous channels separated from one another by a continuous lipid bilayer (Figure 1). Upon the addition of a "precipitant" of suitable composition, changes occur in the mesophase and/ or the protein that facilitate protein­protein contacts and stable nuclei formation that eventually produce crystals. The model includes a lamellar conduit between the bulk cubic phase acting as a protein reservoir and the face of the crystal. To date, all crystal packing observed with in meso-grown crystals are of the lamellar or layered type consistent with this portal feature of the model. Proteins must move laterally in the bilayer of the mesophase for effective nucleation and crystal growth. Diffusion is clearly evident with colored membrane proteins where colorless, proteindepleted zones develop in the bathing cubic phase that surrounds the growing, highly chromatic crystal. However, mobility can be restricted and crystal growth slowed, or even halted, if the protein's extramembranal domain is large relative to the dimension of the aqueous channel into which

Crystallogenesis in Swollen Mesophases

it protrudes. In a related study, we have shown that transport of water-soluble proteins in the cubic phase is sensitive to the size of the protein and that the protein diffusion rate drops dramatically as channel diameter is reduced.7 With this as background, we hypothesized that the range of the in meso method could be increased to include larger membrane proteins and that the crystallization of smaller proteins would accelerate in a cubic phase with larger aqueous channels. This amounts to inducing a "swelling" of the mesophase whilst retaining its bicontinuous nature, an integral feature of which is a continuous lipid bilayer. Aspects of this hypothesis are tested in the current investigation. In a separate study, we have demonstrated that the cubic phase can be swollen by altering the chain character of the monoacylglycerol (MAG) lipid used to form it.3 Accordingly, a short-chained MAG was designed, tested and shown to support the in meso crystallization of bR and BtuB. However, in this case, both the bilayer thickness and the aqueous channel diameter of the cubic phase changed relative to the values observed with the reference MAG, monoolein, with which the in meso method was developed.8 Since the purpose of the current study was to explore mesophase channel size and its relationship to membrane protein crystallogenesis, we chose a separate tack for altering cubic phase microstructure. This made use of small, water-soluble organic molecules and inorganic salts, several of which are ingredients of screening solutions employed in crystallization trials. Using low-angle X-ray diffraction, mesophase swelling was quantified as a function of additive concentration in the aqueous medium. Indeed, many of the additives studied induced swelling to the point where the cubic phase lost its ordered structure while retaining a bicontinuous character, and transformed into what is

Figure 1. Temperature-composition phase diagram of the monoolein/water system determined under "conditions of use" in the heating and cooling directions from 20 8C. Redrawn from Qiu & Caffrey.26 A cartoon representation of the various phase states is included in which colored zones represent water.

Crystallogenesis in Swollen Mesophases

1607 (GndCl) and arginine that we knew from separate work would induce cubic phase swelling.1 The corresponding X-ray diffraction data are shown in Figure 3. As expected, the first six additives examined caused the cubic phase to swell at relatively low concentrations. However, beyond some limit, which changed depending on the additive, the cubic-Pn3m phase transformed into what we call a sponge phase. The latter is characterized by diffuse low-angle scattering that evolved out of the sharp reflections from the cubicPn3m phase (Figure 4). The sponge phase continued to swell with additive concentration and transformed to the lamellar liquid crystal (La) phase upon further additive loading. In the case of MPD, the latter lamellar phase converted to the fluid isotropic (FI), a true liquid, at even higher additive concentration. Representative diffraction patterns and how they change with butanediol and MPD concentration are shown in Figure 4(a) and (b), respectively. Urea and GndCl are interesting because they both swell the cubic-Pn3m phase and continue to do so without destabilizing it up to the remarkably high concentration of R6 M (Figure 5(a) and (b), respectively). In contrast, arginine induced mesophase swelling but the cubic phase formed was of the Im3m type (Figure 5(c)). At higher concentrations, this basic amino acid induced hexagonal phase formation. With the exception of arginine, the additives described above caused the cubic-Pn3m phase to swell. In the interests of completeness, we wished to include in the study water-soluble additives that induce it to shed water and to shrink. To this end, sucrose and glycerol were used and the corresponding data are shown in Figure 5(d) and (e). Characterizing the sponge phase As noted, the sponge phase can be described as a swollen, disordered cubic phase.9,10 It is characterized by diffuse, low-angle X-ray scattering. In addition, it is optically isotropic like the cubic phase, but unlike the latter, which is extraordinarily stiff and viscous, it has a viscosity akin to that of a liquid. These properties have been verified for the various sponge phases encountered in the current study (Figure 3; and data not shown). The crystallization window Crystallization trials were performed on two membrane proteins using the in meso method. These included BtuB and LH2. Trials were performed with 192 different screen conditions that included the cubic phase swelling and/or spongeinducing additives identified above. Remarkably, crystals were found to form consistently in the concentration range (hereinafter referred to as the crystallization window) where the cubic phase is swollen or has entered the sponge phase in the simple monoolein/lyotrope system (Figure 3,

referred to as a sponge phase.9,10 Most interesting is the finding that conditions supporting cubic phase swelling and sponge phase formation correlate highly with those that support membrane protein crystallogenesis. LH2 from Rhodopseudomonas (Rps.) acidophila was investigated in some detail and was shown to form structure-grade crystals from the sponge phase. Its 3-D structure compares favorably with that of its detergent-grown crystal counterpart11,12 although crystal packing is very different. These results are rationalized in terms of a working hypothesis for how membrane proteins crystallize in meso and suggest ways for improving membrane protein crystallogenesis.

Results and Discussion
Mesophase sensitivity to additives The focus of the current work is on water-soluble additives that cause the cubic phase to swell. Swelling refers to an increase in the lattice parameter of the cubic phase with rising additive concentration in the lyotrope (aqueous solution that supports liquid crystal phase formation and stability). A larger lattice parameter corresponds to an increase in the aqueous channel diameter (dw) since bilayer thickness (dl) does not change dramatically with additive concentration. Small-angle X-ray diffraction was used to characterize the mesophase with regard to phase type and microstructure (lattice parameter, aqueous channel diameter (dw), bilayer thickness (dl)). Measurements were made on samples prepared at 60% (w/w) lyotrope to mimic the conditions that prevail during crystallization trials. The phase diagram for the monoolein/water system shows that the cubicPn3m phase exists in equilibrium with an excess aqueous phase at w40% (w/w) water and 20 8C (Figure 1). Thus, 60% (w/w) lyotrope is in the range where the cubic phase is fully hydrated, at least at low additive levels. Several additives were chosen for investigation as follows: KSCN, butanediol, pentaerythritol propoxylate (PPO), t-butanol, Jeffamine, and 2-methyl-2,4pentanediol (MPD) (Figure 2). These additives are commonly used in crystallization screens. We also included in the study urea, guanidinium chloride
 At 0% (v/v) additive, the water channel diameter is ° ° 47.6 A and the bilayer thickness is 34.7 A. At 25% (v/v) ° butanediol, the corresponding values are 83.4 A and ° ° ° 31.1 A, and at 10% (v/v) MPD, 76 A and 29.1 A.  It is important to note that the above discussion applies to the simple monoolein/water system as illustrated in Figure 1. We selected 60% (w/w) lyotrope as a compromise. It provided a concentrated enough sample with which to collect small-angle X-ray diffraction patterns in a reasonable time period whilst mimicking the condition of excess precipitant used during crystallization trials.

1608

Crystallogenesis in Swollen Mesophases

Figure 2. Molecular structures of the lipid and additives used in this study.

Table 1). The shaded zone in each panel in Figure 3 highlights the correspondence of the window with model system phase behavior. The slight mismatch between the window and the region of sponge phase stability in the case of t-butanol is attributed to its volatility (see footnote a in Table 1). Examples of the crystals formed under such conditions are shown in Figure 6. These results are consistent with the proposal that a mesophase with bilayers that are relatively far apart, as in the swollen cubic and sponge phases, supports crystallization by the in meso method. Presumably the protein is reconstituted into the lipid bilayer and has the mobility needed to support facile nucleation and crystal growth under such conditions. Crystallization trials were conducted with GndCl, which also causes the cubic phase to swell. However, it did not support the crystallization of any of the proteins investigated. This may well be explained by the fact that GndCl is a powerful denaturant. In addition to extensively hydrogen bonding to the extramembranal parts of the proteins it is likely to induce, at the very least, local unfolding. Both effects would work against protein­protein association and thus, crystallogenesis despite the ability of GndCl to swell the mesophase. Sucrose and glycerol were also included in the crystallization trials. Both shrink the cubic phase (Figure 5). As expected, neither supported crystal-

lization in the range studied (5­40% (w/v) sucrose; 6­48% (v/v) glycerol). A mechanism for mesophase swelling Here we show that PPO, MPD, butanediol, t-butanol, Jeffamine, and KSCN cause the cubic phase to swell. In what follows, we propose a mechanism for this effect. The first five in the group are small amphiphiles (Figure 2). They incorporate at least one hydroxyl or amino group per molecule that is attached directly, or indirectly by way of several propyloxylate groups, to an apolar hydrocarbon moiety between three and six carbon atoms long. Each amphiphile incorporates hydrogen bond donors and acceptors. Thus, extensive interaction with water is likely. It is probable too that the amphiphiles partition at the polar/apolar interface of the lipid bilayer that traverses the cubic phase. The exact nature of this interaction with the bilayer interface is not known but it must surely involve hydrogen bonding to the glycerol/ester linkage part of the monoolein molecule (Figure 2). A hydrophobic interaction with the apolar region of the bilayer is also possible, given that the amphiphiles are themselves part hydrocarbon. The net effect of these combined interactions is to cause the polar/apolar interface of the water channels to become less highly curved. This is possible only by enlarging the aqueous channel,

Crystallogenesis in Swollen Mesophases

1609

Figure 3. Dependence of mesophase identity and microstructure of the monoolein/water system on additive concentration. Measurements were made at 40% (w/w) lipid and 60% (w/w) lyotrope. Additive concentration refers to that in the lyotrope solution used for mesophase preparation. The shaded areas correspond to the additive concentration range or window in which crystallization was observed for the two test membrane proteins, BtuB and LH2 (Table 1). It is likely that the position of the window has been shifted to higher concentrations in the case of t-butanol (b) due to its volatility (see footnote b in Table 1 for more details). The "lattice" parameter of the sponge phase was calculated assuming continuous disordering of the cubic-Pn3m phase where the first two reflections (110, 111) broaden and merge into a single diffuse ring.

which amounts to a swelling of the cubic phase. Beyond some limit of imbibition the bending flexibility of the bilayers increases such that the cubic phase becomes disordered and the sponge phase emerges. The latter can support in meso crystallization by the proposed mechanism because of its bicontinuous nature, consisting as it does of a single continuous lipid bilayer. Eventually, the interface loses its curvature and the planar lamellar phase emerges as the stable phase. As a chaotrope, KSCN has the capacity to weaken hydrogen bonds in and to lower the structural order of water. This contributes to a destabilizing effect on proteins and membranes. The chaotrope itself is weakly hydrated and as a result tends to associate more with proteins, and by extension membranes, than with water.13 It seems reasonable therefore that KSCN will interact with the polar/apolar interface of the lipid bilayer in the cubic phase. This will induce an increase in the headgroup area making the lipid molecules less wedge-shaped, which, in turn, flattens the interface. The attendant swelling of the cubic phase continues with KSCN concentration and eventually gives way to the sponge and lamellar phases.

The above is presented by way of rationalizing how sponge-inducing additives cause the cubic phase to swell and to form the sponge phase. A looser but continuous lipid bilayer with the reconstituted and more mobile/less constrained membrane protein is presumably now in a position to facilitate nucleation and crystal growth. It is not known at this point if these additives participate directly in the latter processes. It may well be that they serve double duty to swell the cubic phase for enhanced mobility and to favor protein­protein contacts that lead to stable nuclei and crystal formation. Sponge phase produces structure-grade LH2 crystals Crystallogenesis that involves the swollen cubic and/or sponge phases has been described above for the two integral membrane proteins, LH2 and BtuB. However, we felt it important to demonstrate that the crystals grown from these disordered mesophases were of diffraction quality and suitable for structure determination. LH2 was chosen for further structural investigation because it is

1610

Crystallogenesis in Swollen Mesophases

The inner and outer rings each contain nine a and nine b-peptides, respectively. The structure of in meso-grown LH2 crystals was ° solved by molecular replacement to 2.45 A (Figure 7). Refinement statistics are reported in ° Table 2. A 2.0 A structure is available for LH2 that was obtained using vapor diffusion-grown crystals of the detergent-solubilized complex.11 A comparison between the two structures is presented in Figure 7. The major differences between them are summarized below. Crystal The in meso-grown crystals used in data collection had dimensions 200 mm!30 mm!10 mm and diffract ° to 2.45 A resolution in the orthorhombic space group P212121. The crystal cell dimensions are ° ° ° aZ81.44 A, bZ126.38 A, and cZ129.71 A. The crossrotation function shows that the asymmetric unit comprises a single nonameric LH2 complex. This differs from the in surfo-grown crystals, which are of the rhombohedral space group H32 with cell ° ° dimensions aZ117.0 A, cZ298.5 A. In the latter case, the nonamer is incorporated into a crystallographic 3-fold axis and hence the asymmetric unit is a third of the complex. The in meso LH2 structure was refined (Table 2) using REFMAC5 to a resolution of ° 2.45 A. The crystal volume per unit protein mass (Vm) ° of the in meso-grown crystals is 2.57 A3/Da which ° compares to a Vm of 4.56 A3/Da for the in surfo crystals and indicates denser packing in the in meso crystals. Whereas the in surfo crystals pack loosely in sheets that are polar with each molecule within a plane pointing in the same direction, complexes in the in meso-grown crystals alternate in direction due to the 2-fold screw symmetry elements (Figure 7). Surprisingly, the closer packing of LH2 in in meso crystals is typical of what is observed for soluble proteins. Single crystal neutron diffraction experiments with in surfo LH2 crystals14 reveal the presence ° of a 15­20 A wide ring of detergent around each complex. This explains the open nature of the lattice compared to in meso-grown crystals; approximately half of the w70% "solvent" content of the cell can be accounted for by detergent. The close packing of in meso-grown crystals suggests that there is very little detergent or lipid present in the structure. Crystal contacts In surfo crystals The crystal packing can be thought of as a dimer of complexes formed by a crystallographic 2-fold rotation axis parallel with the C-terminal surface. The dimer interface is formed by
 A partial specific volume of 0.81 cm3/g was used to calculate the solvent content of the LH2 unit cell. This value takes into account the high chromophore content of the complex.

Figure 4. Small-angle X-ray diffraction patterns of the monoolein/water system at increasing concentrations of (a) butanediol and (b). MPD Patterns were recorded using (a) a rotating anode and (b) a synchrotron source at room temperature. In (a) the classic cubic-Pn3m diffraction behaviour up to 15% (v/v) additive gives way to a "spotty" pattern at 20% (v/v) additive, which was indexed in the Pn3m space group. The disordered cubic or sponge phase is observed at 30% (v/v) butanediol. In the latter case, the low-angle region of the pattern is dominated by a single diffuse band. In (b) the patterns were identified as belonging to the cubic-Pn3m (0% (v/v)), sponge (12% (v/v)), and co-existing sponge and La phases (18% (v/v)). The first two low-angle rings in (b) at 0% (w/w) MPD correspond to the 110 and 111 reflections of the cubic-Pn3m phase referred to in the legend to Figure 3.

a large protein complex that crystallized preferentially in the swollen cubic or sponge phases. The LH2 complex consists of 18 peptides, 27 bacteriochlorophylls a (BChl a) and R9 carotenoids.11 It consists of two concentric rings of transmembranal ° ° peptide subunits with diameters of 36 A and 68 A.

Crystallogenesis in Swollen Mesophases

1611

Figure 5. Dependence of mesophase identity and microstructure of the monoolein/water system on the concentration of additives that neither formed the sponge phase nor supported in meso crystallogenesis. Measurements were made at 40% (w/w) lipid and 60% (w/w) lyotrope. Additive concentration refers to that in the lyotrope solution used for mesophase preparation.

extensive van der Waals interactions of C-terminal a-peptide residues (a-Lys51-Ala52Ala53) with a-Tyr44 on a neighbouring complex. The extended conformation at the C terminus is partially disordered and therefore does not make well-defined contacts with a neighbouring complex apart from a possible weak hydrogen ° bond (3.55 A) between a-Thr39 and a-Gln46. At the N terminus, the surface is mostly exposed to solvent and makes only tenuous contact with three complexes related to one another by a 3-fold rotation axis. These complexes are well separated due to the intervening detergent bands and make contacts with a central complex in the ° layer below through a single salt-bridge (2.97 A) between b-Lys13 and b-Glu6. These are therefore the only well-defined lattice contacts made in the entire structure. In meso crystals By comparison, the packing of in meso-grown crystals is compact with LH2 complexes arranged in layers with alternating in-plane orientation arising from the crystallographic 2-fold screw axis. The difference in the two crystal forms lies

primarily in the solvent content (52% in meso, 73% in surfo), which effect the closest distance the complexes can associate to form well-defined lattice contacts. In in meso crystals the closer packing gives
Table 1. The range of additive concentrations that support in meso crystallogenesis of LH2 and BtuB
Additive MPD (%) PPO (%) Jeffamine M-600 (%) 1,4-Butanediol (%) t-Butanola (%) KSCN (M) Guanidine­HCl Arginine Sucrose Glycerol LH2 8­10 10­34 6­8 26­34 18­30 None None None None None BtuB 8­18 10­22 6­22 30­42 Noneb 0.6­2.2 None None None None

a t-Butanol is a volatile organic solvent. While setting up crystallization trials the 1 ml drop of precipitant solution is left exposed to the atmosphere for !10 min. In this time, evaporation of t-butanol will undoubtedly occur. Thus, the concentration range in which crystallization takes place is an upper bound to the actual t-butanol concentration that prevails during crystallogenesis. The latter is certainly going to be less than the nominal concentrations reported in the Table. b None refers to the fact that with these additives crystals did not grow in the concentration range studied.

1612

Crystallogenesis in Swollen Mesophases

hydrophilic protein and explains why, although these crystals are smaller than their in surfo-grown counterparts, they diffract strongly and appear to be better ordered: we estimate that the in meso crystals used in diffraction measurements are at least 100 times smaller in volume than the in surfo crystals. The data resolution that can be obtained from these crystals is therefore limited by the diffracting power due to the small size of the crystals. Peptide structure The LH2 structure is composed of two concentric rings of nine small peptides, which provide scaffolding for the pigments. The a-peptide has 53 amino acid residues forming the internal ring while the 41 residue b-peptide forms the outer ring (Figure 7). The central portion of each peptide forms a trans-membrane a-helical segment. The C termini are all located on the periplastmic side of the membrane with the last three residues of the a-peptide forming an extended conformation. The details of peptide structure are practically identical in the two models apart from the last three residues of the a-peptide, which exhibit more disorder in the in meso model. Compared to the in surfo structure this surface is more separated from its neighbour and is less involved in forming lattice contacts. The a-peptide has three tryptophan residues (a-Trp7, a-Trp40, a-Trp45) and b has one (b-Trp39) at the putative membrane polar/apolar interface that are oriented in the direction of the apolar core of the membrane. In each case, the plane of the ring is aligned approximately parallel with where the lipid acyl chains are expected.15 However, in the complex, the tryptophan residues also form extensive contacts between neighboring peptides. As it is assumed that the a/b chromophore monomer is created prior to complex formation, their exposed and interfacial location may be relevant to peptide insertion into the membrane prior to complex formation. Chromophores Bacteriochlorophylls The bacteriochlorophyll pigments are arranged in rings. These are the B800 and B850 pigments responsible for absorption at approximately 800 nm and 850 nm. The B850 pigments lie close to the periplasmic side of the membrane between the a and b-peptides and ligate to residues a-His31 and b-His30. The B850 pigments associated with an a/b pair of peptides are related by an approximate 2-fold axis parallel with the 9-fold axis and have an average ° Mg­Mg distance of 9.41 A while the distance between B850 pigments of neighbouring repeating ° units is 8.92 A. Both of these distances are slightly ° ° shorter than the 9.44 A and 9.00 A observed in in surfo-grown crystals. The B800 pigments are located close to the N terminus and are ligated to a carboxyl group of a carboxy-modified a-Met1 residue. B850

Figure 6. Crystals of (a) BtuB and (b) of LH2 grown in the sponge phase of hydrated monoolein by the in meso method. The precipitants used included (a) 0.2 M ammonium formate, 10% (v/v) MPD, 0.1 M Mes (pH 6.5) and (b) 20% (v/v) PPO, 0.1 M potassium acetate, 0.1 M Tris­HCl (pH 8.0).

rise to many more contacts and there are around 20 hydrogen bonds connecting a complex to its neighbours and many more van der Waals contacts. Due to the high symmetry of the complex the same residue on as many as three different repeating units may form contacts. However, these are not identical because of the non-commensurate nature of 9-fold symmetry embedded in an orthorhombic lattice. Of particular note is a hydrogen bond ° (3.16 A) formed by one of only two charged residues found in the trans-membrane region: b-Asp17 OD1 and b-Leu40 O. The van der Waals contacts made by residues with neighbouring complexes in the trans-membrane region are b-Arg20, b-Val21, b-Leu25, b-Phe31 and b-Phe34. The lattice contacts impose orthorhombic symmetry on the crystal causing the 9-fold symmetry axis of the complex to be out of alignment with respect to a neighbouring complex. However, complexes do form distorted hexagonal sheets. The striking feature of the in meso crystal packing is that the solvent content and the number of lattice contacts made are those that would be expected of a typical

Crystallogenesis in Swollen Mesophases

1613

Figure 7. Comparison of in meso ((a) and (c)) and in surfo ((b) and (d)) models for LH2. Views along the plane of the membrane are shown in (a) and (b). Views perpendicular to the membrane from the periplasmic side are shown in (c) and (d). The lilac annuli around the complexes in (d) represent the volume occupied by aliphatic chains of BOG detergent micelles as observed in single crystal neutron diffraction experiments.14 (d) This diagram excludes the polar glucoside head groups that would make close contact between neighbouring annuli. The maximum diameter of each ° complex is 80 A. The periplasmic surfaces in (a) and (b) are marked P: this surface is also the C-terminal surface of the peptides. The a-peptides form the inner and b-peptides the outer ring of peptides.

and B800 phytyl groups in each repeating unit intertwine, stabilising the pigment triad with the a/b peptide repeating unit. The B850­B800 distances are ° ° 17.7 A and 18.5 A while the B800­B800 distances are ° . The first B850­B800 separation is slightly 21.2 A ° longer at 17.8 A in the in surfo-grown crystals, otherwise the other values are identical. There is disorder in the b-B850 phytyl chains, which show two conformers: the first is assumed to be the native conformation and covers the surface of a B800 pigment while the second passes outwards between b-peptides and interacts with a molecule that has previously been assigned as a second carotenoid but which we now believe to be a multiple occupancy of detergents (see below). This kind of disorder was found in one repeating unit of the in surfo-grown crystals but was less obvious due to crystallographic averaging of this feature. Carotenoid The predominant carotenoid in LH2 of Rps. acidophila is rhodopsin glucoside. The glucoside head group is found at the N-terminal surface and the isoprene tail adopts a shallow S-conformation and at its tip bends around the inner surface of the a-B850 porphyrin group. The orientation and

Table 2. Data collection and refinement statistics of an in meso-grown LH2 crystal
A. Data collection Space group ° Unit-cell parameters (A) Mosaicity (deg.) ° Resolution limits (A) Total reflections Unique reflections Rejected reflections (%) Redundancy Completeness (%) I/s Rsym (%) B. Refinement ° Refinement resolution (A) R-factor (%) Rfreeb (%) Number of reflections ° RMSD bond lengths (A) RMS bond angles (deg.) ° RMS chiral volume (A3) NCS constraints Correlation coefficient ° ML coordinate error (A) Number of atoms
a b

P212121 aZ81.44, bZ126.38, cZ129.71 0.5 50­2.45 (2.54­2.45)a 194,078 49,795 0.15 3.9 (3.7)a 99.8 (99.9)a 20.9 (2.3)a 6.6 (56.5)a 10­2.45 18.6 25.4 48,989 0.03 1.41 0.781 9 0.95 0.21 9754

Numbers in parentheses refer to the highest resolution shell. Rfree was calculated using 5.1% of data randomly excluded from refinement.

1614

Crystallogenesis in Swollen Mesophases

Figure 8. Electron density in the region of the LDAO detergent molecule contoured at 1.5s. The LDAO head group lies at the periplasmic surface and its aliphatic chain between the trans-membrane helix of a b-peptide and a b-B850 pigment.

conformation is the same as for the in surfo-grown crystals and although in the in meso structure they are close to other complexes they are not involved in lattice contacts. In a previous paper,11 a second carotenoid was assigned, which had the glucoside head group at the C-terminal surface and the isoprene tail kinked half-way, extended out into the detergent torus. The last third of the carotenoid was not visible and was assumed to be disordered. In the present in meso structure, the isoprene chain has straightened and the glucoside head group has disappeared. Although weak, the electron density (Figure 8) now resembles that of an LDAO detergent molecule. It is less likely to be a monoolein molecule, used to make the in meso crystals, because the density is too short although part of a disordered monoolein molecule cannot be ruled out. The in meso crystals were grown from protein purified in LDAO while the in surfo-grown crystals were from protein purified in LDAO and exchanged with b-octyl glucoside (BOG). This may account for the observed differences in the electron density. The absence of any indication of a carotenoid at this position in the in meso-grown crystals suggests strongly that in the detergent crystal this site is occupied by a mixed occupancy of BOG and LDAO molecules due to incomplete detergent exchange, while only LDAO is present in the in meso-grown crystals. Recent resonance Raman measurements also suggest that there may be only one carotenoid present.16 Detergent/lipid In addition to the LDAO detergent molecules noted above, in the core of the complex repeat unit there are putative detergent or lipid molecules in the central hole enclosed by the ring structure. LDAO was used to fit the density as it appears to be

best modeled as a single-chain aliphatic molecule, although other possibilities cannot be excluded at this stage. Two concentric rings of nine molecules each form a bilayer structure with the amine groups on the membrane surface sides. The amine-toamine distance spanning the membrane is approxi° mately 30 A. The LDAO chains have thermal ° parameters in the region of 60 to 100 A2 and are related by approximate 9-fold non-crystallographic symmetry but, in general, have different chain conformations. A second ring of density, closer to the center of the hole, can be made out and is staggered relative to the outer ring of LDAO molecules giving the impression of hexagonal packing. This density is too weak to be modeled but provides an interesting clue to the packing nature of these molecules. A clearer picture of detergent packing is seen in the in meso structure compared to its in surfo counterpart. This may be ascribed to two factors: the presence in the in meso structure of a single detergent type and averaging out of electron density in the in surfo structure due to the imposition of crystallographic 3-fold symmetry in a region where it does not hold. Rationalizing crystallogenesis via the sponge phase A reasonable question to ask at this stage is, How do crystals of LH2 form in a process that presumably uses the sponge phase? Our working hypothesis is as follows (Figure 9). A mixed micelle solution consisting of detergent and LH2 is combined with lipid by mechanical mixing under conditions that produce the cubic phase. Spontaneously, the complex reconstitutes into the bilayer where lipid replaces detergent at the apolar periphery of the protein. Vectoral orientation of

Figure 9. Cartoon representation of how the swollen cubic and sponge phases partake in the crystallization of membrane proteins by the in meso method. The protein used in this example is the LH2 complex. The cartoon is drawn to scale. The evolution from cubic to sponge and lamellar type structures and on into the in meso-grown crystal takes place from left to right in the Figure. The aqueous phase is shown in blue and light blue, the membrane is shown with lollipop figures representing the lipid and has a dark cream coloured surface while the protein is purple. "Stress" lines have been added to convey a sense of flexibility and dynamism in the hosting mesophase.

Crystallogenesis in Swollen Mesophases

1615 orthorhombic space group, which arises when a 50:50 polar mixture migrates within a bilayer to form a regular repeating lattice.

Conclusions
The capacity of hydrated monoolein in the cubic phase to swell and to form a sponge phase in the presence of a variety of small molecule and ionic additives has been characterized by small-angle X-ray diffraction. An explanation for this effect, which involves additive association with the polar/ apolar interface of the cubic phase membrane, has been given. The tendency of the additives to effect mesophase swelling correlates with their ability to support in meso crystallization of membrane proteins. The observed effect may prove quite general given the disparate nature of the two test proteins, BtuB and LH2. The former is a monomeric, 22-stranded b-barrel while the latter is a nonameric complex of a-helical heterodimers liganded to at least four chromophores. The data reported herein present a rationale for including additives that swell the cubic phase in solutions used to screen for membrane protein crystallization. Here, we have identified several such additives. There are others that are undergoing testing and that are in development in the laboratory. Some of these include polyethyleneglycol-modified and charged lipids. As noted with the set described here, the optimum concentration range will depend on the identity of the additive, and the protein and other components (lipid, detergent, precipitant, pH, etc.) of the crystallization mix. Swelling the cubic phase is likely to be most beneficial in the case of proteins with large extramembranal domains. The approach should also find application with complexes. A G-proteincoupled receptor in association with its cognate G-protein or a membrane protein/antibody complex serve as examples. The crystals of LH2 grown from the swollen mesophase were of diffraction quality. The structure of the complex in in meso-grown crystals was found to be virtually identical with that of in surfo-grown crystals in many respects. However, they present distinctly contrasting packing densities. The tight inplane packing observed in the former has been rationalized in the context of a model for nucleation and crystal growth that occurs in a fluid lipid bilayer where transport and exchange are possible. By virtue of their high packing density, where direct side-to-side protein association is possible, these crystals have enhanced diffracting power. This should allow for structure determination with comparatively small crystals and may prove to be one of the more attractive features of the in meso method. The comparison of in meso and in surfo-grown crystal structures has resulted in the assignment of a lobe of electron density seen in both models to a detergent molecule. This is in contrast to a (second)

Figure 10. Absorption spectrum of LH2 in detergent solution (broken line; 0.035 mg/ml) and in the lipidic cubic phase (continuous line; 50% (w/w) monoolein, 0.07 mg/ml). Spectra were recorded 15 min after protein dilution or reconstitution in the cubic phase.

the complex across the bilayer is more than likely random. Because the complex is large in comparison with the cubic phase microstructure, reconstitution introduces strain into and locally distorts the cubic phase. It likely also strains the complex. Some evidence in support of this comes from the UVvisible absorption spectrum of the reconstituted LH2 (Figure 10). Precipitant is added that causes the cubic phase to swell and to evolve into the sponge phase. The latter, with its enhanced flexibility and reduced curvature, more comfortably accommodates the bulky complex, and strain in the bilayer and in the complex is relieved. LH2 can diffuse more readily within the bilayer of the sponge phase, regions of which may transiently flatten. Under the right conditions (lipid, detergent, salt/precipitant concentration, pH, temperature, etc.) complex­ complex association can occur within a bilayer and between bilayers leading to a stable 3-D nucleus. The latter grows into a macroscopic crystal by being fed complex from the bulk cubic/sponge phase, which acts as a protein reservoir. The above hypothesis is consistent with the high packing density observed with in meso-grown LH2 crystals. Upon reconstitution into the cubic phase the complex sits in a lipid bilayer. This means that direct protein­protein contact within the apolar region of the bilayer is possible as a result of lipid and protein mobility within the membrane. This facilitates dense crystal packing and contributes to higher diffracting power. Contrast this with vapor diffusion-grown crystals where a toroidal band of ° detergent, 15­20 A wide, rings the complex (Figure 7). It has been shown by neutron diffraction that the latter tracks with the micellarized protein into the crystal.14 The detergent torus keeps the complexes apart such that side-to-side protein contact is simply not possible. As a result, crystal packing density and diffracting power is reduced. The initial random polar orientation of the complex in the bilayer accounts for the observed

1616 carotenoid of the rhodopin glucoside type, which was identified in an earlier report.

Crystallogenesis in Swollen Mesophases

Materials and Methods
Materials Monoolein (MO) (Mr 356 g/mol, lot M-239-JA12-O) was purchased from Nu Chek Prep Inc. (Elysian, MN) and was used as received. L-Arginine (Mr 174.2 g/mol, lot 52H02915), 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol (MPD, M r 118.18 g/mol, lot 103K3655), urea (Mr 60.06 g/mol, lot 015880), and guanidinium chloride (GndCl, Mr 95.53 g/ mol, lot 11K5404) were from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Glycerol (Mr 92.10 g/mol, lot 970742) and sucrose (Mr 342.30 g/mol, lot 015384A) were obtained from Fisher (Fair Lawn, NJ). 1,4-Butanediol (Mr 90.12 g/mol, lot 11705K3) was purchased from Aldrich (Milwaukee, WI). 8 M potassium thiocyanate in water (KSCN, Mr 97.18 g/ mol, lot 224501) and 50% (v/v) pentaerythritol propoxylate (PPO) in water (Mr 426 g/mol, 5/4 PO/OH, lot 27902) were from Hampton Research (Aliso Viejo, CA). t-Butanol (Mr 74.14 g/mol, lot 2998KVLY) was purchased from Mallinckrodt (Paris, KY). Water was purified by using a Milli-Q Water System (Millipore Corporation, Bedford, MA) consisting of a carbon filter cartridge, two ion-exchange filter cartridges, an organic removal cartridge, and a final 0.25 mm filter (Millipak 40, Sterile Millipore). Light-harvesting complex II (LH2, Mr 129 kDa) from Rps. acidophila in 20 mM Tris­HCl (pH 8.0), 0.05% (w/v) LDAO was prepared as described17 and was stored at K70 8C. The concentration of LH2 used for crystallization trials was estimated at 10 mg protein/ml using the extinction coefficient of bacteriochlorophyll a at 858 nm of 123 mMK1 cmK1,18 and a chlorophyll/complex molar ratio of 27/1.11 This corresponds to an absorbance of w260 at 858 nm. The outer membrane b-barrel cobalamin receptor (BtuB, Mr 66 kDa) from Escherichia coli was obtained from Professor W. Cramer at a concentration of 12 mg protein/ml in 10 mM Tris­HCl (pH 8.0), 0.1 M NaCl, 0.1% (w/v) LDAO and was kept frozen at K70 8C for several months before being used. Sample preparation Samples for use in small-angle scattering measurements were prepared by mechanically mixing molten monoolein (w20 mg, fused at 40 8C) with additive solutions (lyotrope) using a syringe-based mixing device, as described.19 The final concentration of lyotrope in these samples was either w40% or 60% (w/w). Stock lyotropes consisted of 66% (w/w) sucrose, 1 M arginine, 8 M urea, 8 M potassium thiocyanate, 50% (v/v) PPO, and 6 M GndCl, and were diluted with water as appropriate. Spectroscopy Samples of LH2 were prepared at w0.07 mg protein/ ml (A858Z1.8) in 20 mM Tris­HCl (pH 8.0). A fraction of the solution was diluted twofold and used directly in spectroscopic measurements. A separate fraction was combined with monoolein in a lipid-mixing device19 for cubic phase preparation. Clear homogenous lipid/ protein dispersions were injected into 3 mm quartz cuvettes, sealed with Parafilm, and spun for 5 min at 9000 rpm and 20 8C using a Jouan MR 14.11 centrifuge.

Absorption spectra were recorded (Uvikon XL spectrometer, Bio-Tek Instruments Inc., Winooski, VT) from 900 nm to 250 nm in 1 nm steps at room temperature (22­ 24 8C). Protein-free blanks were prepared for background subtraction. Small-angle X-ray diffraction X-ray diffraction was used to characterize the phase properties of lipid dispersions, as described.20 Briefly, samples were transferred to 1 mm diameter quartz capillaries (Charles Supper, Natick, MA), flame-sealed and glued with Extra Fast Setting Epoxy (Hardman Inc., Belleville, NJ). Diffraction measurements were made using a rotating anode X-ray generator (18 kW, RU-300, Rigaku USA Inc., Danvers, MA) operating at 42 kV and ° 220 mA generating CuKa X-rays (1.542 A, nickel-filtered). Sample-to-detector distance (340­360 mm) was deter° mined using silver behenate (d00lZ58.4 A).21 Measurements (30 min exposure) were made in a temperatureregulated sample holder at 20 8C. For some weakly scattering sponge phase samples exposure time was 2 h. A limited number of diffraction measurements (MPDcontaining samples) were made using the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) beamline A1 ° (0.976 A). Patterns were recorded (2 min exposure) while the sample was rotated through 3608 along the capillary long axis at a sample-to-detector distance of 604 mm and at room temperature (25­27 8C). Crystallization trials Low-viscosity screen solutions were prepared using the liquid dispensing capability of an in meso crystallization robot.22 Solutions contained 0.1 M Tris­HCl (pH 8.0) and varying concentrations of sucrose, glycerol and of precipitants known to swell the monoolein cubic phase. Viscous solutions (PPO, MPD, 1,4-butanediol, sucrose, glycerol) were pipetted manually. Some screens contained 0.1 M potassium or ammonium formate. A total of 192 screen solutions were used. Samples for use in crystallization trials were prepared with 60% (w/w) monoolein and 40% (w/w) protein solution using a lipid mixing device.19 Each well in a home-made, 96-well glass crystallization plate was loaded by in meso robot with 50 nl of lipid/protein dispersion followed by 1 ml of precipitant solution at room temperature (20­22 8C), as described.22 Screens were performed in duplicate. Incubation was carried out in a temperature-regulated dark chamber at 20 8C. Crystallization progress was evaluated several times in a two week period using an automatic imager (RockImager RI24, Formulatrix Inc., Waltham, MA) and manually by microscope (Eclipse E400-POL, Nikon Inc., Melville, NY). Macromolecular crystallography LH2 crystals were grown in meso using 72-well MicroWell MiniTrays (cat. no. 448698, Nalge Nunc International, Rochester, NY). Crystallization was set up manually as described3,23 using 200 nl of protein-laden cubic phase (60% (w/w) monoolein) and 2 ml of precipitant solution (20% (w/v) PPO, 0.1 M potassium formate, 0.1 M Tris­HCl (pH 8.0)). Wells were sealed with transparent tape (Manco Crystal Clear sealing tape, Hampton Research cat. no.HR4-506, Aliso Viejo, CA). Crystals grew to their full size w200 mm!30 mm!10 mm within three to seven days and began to visually

Crystallogenesis in Swollen Mesophases

1617
2. Raman, P., Cherezov, V. & Caffrey, M. (2006). The Membrane Protein Data Bank. Cell. Mol. Life Sci, 63, 36­51. 3. Misquitta, L. V., Misquitta, Y., Cherezov, V., Slattery, O., Mohan, J. M., Hart, D. et al. (2004). Membrane protein crystallization in lipidic mesophases with tailored bilayers. Structure, 12, 2113­2124. 4. Chiu, M. L., Nollert, P., Loewen, M. C., Belrhali, H., Pebay-Peyroula, E., Rosenbusch, J. P. & Landau, E. M. (2000). Crystallization in cubo: general applicability to membrane proteins. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 56, 781­784. 5. Paas, Y., Cartaud, J., Recouvreur, M., Grailhe, R., Dufresne, V., Pebay-Peyroula, E. et al. (2003). Electron microscopic evidence for nucleation and growth of 3D acetylcholine receptor microcrystals in structured lipid-detergent matrices. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 100, 11309­11314. 6. Caffrey, M. (2000). A lipid's eye view of membrane protein crystallization in mesophases. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 10, 486­497. 7. Clogston, J. & Caffrey, M. (2005). Controlling release from the lipidic cubic phase. Amino acids, peptides, proteins and nucleic acids. J. Control Release, 107, 97­111. 8. Landau, E. M. & Rosenbusch, J. P. (1996). Lipidic cubic phases: a novel concept for the crystallization of membrane proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 14532­14535. 9. Engstroem, S., Alfons, K., Rasmusson, M. & LjusbergWahren, H. (1998). Solvent-induced sponge (L3) phases in the solvent-monoolein-water system. Prog. Colloid Polym. Sci. 108, 93­98. 10. Beck, R. & Hoffmann, H. (2005). Novel L3 phases and their macroscopic properties. In Bicontinuous Liquid Crystals, Surfactant Science Series vol. 127, pp. 131­ 167, CRC Press, Cleveland, OH. 11. Papiz, M. Z., Prince, S. M., Howard, T., Cogdell, R. J. & Isaacs, N. W. The structure and thermal motion of the B800-850 LH2 complex from Rps.acidophila at 2.0 A resolution and 100 K: new structural features and functionally relevant motions. J. Mol. Biol. 326 1523­ 1538. 12. McDermott, G., Prince, S. M., Freer, A. A., Hawthornthwaite-Lawless, A. M., Papiz, M. Z., Cogdell, R. J. & Isaacs, N. W. (1995). Crystal structure of an integral membrane light-harvesting complex from photosynthetic bacteria. Nature, 374, 517­521. 13. Mason, P. E., Neilson, G. W., Dempsey, C. E., Barnes, A. C. & Cruickshank, J. M. (2003). The hydration structure of guanidinium and thiocyanate ions: implications for protein stability in aqueous solution. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 100, 4557­4561. 14. Prince, S. M., Howard, T. D., Myles, D. A., Wilkinson, C., Papiz, M. Z., Freer, A. A. et al. (2003). Detergent structure in crystals of the integral membrane lightharvesting complex LH2 from Rhodopseudomonas acidophila strain 10050. J. Mol. Biol. 326, 307­315. 15. Granseth, E., von Heijne, G. & Elofsson, A. (2005). A study of the membrane-water interface region of membrane proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 346, 377­385. 16. Gall, A., Henry, S., Takaichi, S., Robert, B. & Cogdell, R. J. (2005). Preferential incorporation of colouredcarotenoids occurs in the LH2 complexes from nonsulphur purple bacteria under carotenoid-limiting conditions. Photosynth. Res. 86, 25­35. 17. Papiz, M. Z., Hawthornthwaite, A. M., Cogdell, R. J., Woolley, K. J., Wightman, P. A., Ferguson, L. A. & Lindsay, J. G. (1989). Crystallization and characteriz-

deteriorate after 10­14 days of incubation at 20 8C. Accordingly, harvesting was done no later than seven days after setup using Hampton cryo-loops and crystals preserved in liquid nitrogen. Lipidic cubic phase that had swollen in the presence of PPO and that had likely transformed into a sponge phase had the consistency of a viscous liquid, which did not interfere with harvesting. PPO and lipid served as cryoprotectants and no additional cryoprotectant was used. Attempts to completely dissolve the lipidic mesophase by increasing the concentration of PPO above 30% (w/v) typically led to poorer diffracting crystals. Diffraction measurements were performed on the F1 beamline at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS, Ithaca, NY) using a 100 mm diameter and ° 0.9124 A wavelength beam, and an ADSC Quantum-4 detector. Several datasets were collected at a sample-todetector distance of 230 mm using a 0.58 oscillation and a 30 s exposure per image. Data reduction and scaling were performed with HKL2000.24 The structure was solved by molecular replacement using 1NKZ as a starting model. Refinement was done with REFMAC5 from the CCP4 suite.25 Data collection and refinement statistics are shown in Table 2. The statistics of the Ramachandran plot show that 97.8% of phi/psi angles are in favoured regions and 98.4% in allowed regions. The 13 outliers arise from only three residues found in the C-terminal region of five of the nine a-peptide chains. The C-terminal region forms an extended structure that projects into the aqueous space between complexes and is disordered with poor electron density. Protein Data Bank accession number Structure factors and coordinates have been submitted to the RCSB Protein Data Bank under the accession number 2FKW.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Profesor W. Cramer and Dr M. Zhalnina for the BtuB protein and Drs A. Lawless and C. Law for the LH2 used in the early stages of this work. We are indebted to K. Kadyshevskaya for the artwork in Figure 9. This work was supported, in part, by Science Foundation Ireland (02-IN1B266), the National Institutes of Health (GM61070, GM075915), and the National Science Foundation (IIS0308078). This work is based upon research conducted at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS), which is supported by the National Science Foundation under award DMR 0225180, using the Macromolecular Diffraction at CHESS (MacCHESS) facility, which is supported by award RR-01646 from the National Institutes of Health, through its National Center for Research Resources.

References
1. Caffrey, M. (2003). Membrane protein crystallization. J. Struct. Biol. 142, 108­132.

1618
ation of two crystal forms of the B800-850 lightharvesting complex from Rhodopseudomonas acidophila strain 10050. J. Mol. Biol. 209, 833­835. Clayton, R. K. & Clayton, B. J. (1981). B850 pigmentprotein complex of Rhodopseudomonas sphaeroides: extinction coefficients, circular dichroism, and the reversible binding of bacteriochrorophyll. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 78, 5583­5587. Cheng, A., Hummel, B., Qiu, H. & Caffrey, M. (1998). A simple mechanical mixer for small viscous lipidcontaining samples. Chem. Phys. Lipids, 95, 11­21. Cherezov, V., Qiu, H., Pector, V., Vandenbranden, M., Ruysschaert, J. M. & Caffrey, M. (2002). Biophysical and transfection studies of the diC(14)-amidine/DNA complex. Biophys. J. 82, 3105­3117. Blanton, T. N., Huang, T. C., Toraya, H., Hubbard, C. R., ¨ Robie, S. B., Louer, D. et al. (1995). JCPDS--International Centre for Diffraction Data round robin study of silver behenate. A possible low-angle X-ray diffraction calibration standard. Powder Diffr. 10, 91­95.

Crystallogenesis in Swollen Mesophases

18.

19. 20.

21.

22. Cherezov, V., Peddi, A., Muthusubramaniam, L., Zheng, Y. F. & Caffrey, M. (2004). A robotic system for crystallizing membrane and soluble proteins in lipidic mesophases. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 60, 1795­1807. 23. Cherezov, V. & Caffrey, M. (2003). Nanovolume plates with excellent optical properties for fast, inexpensive crystallization screening of membrane proteins. J. Appl. Crystallog. 36, 1372­1377. 24. Otwinowski, Z. & Minor, W. (1997). Processing of X-ray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode. Methods Enzymol. 276, 307­326. 25. Collaborative Computational Project, Number 4. (1994). The CCP4 suite: programs for protein crystallography. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 50, 760­763. 26. Qiu, H. & Caffrey, M. (2000). Phase properties of the monoolein/water system: metastability and equilibrium aspects. Biomaterials, 21, 223­234.

Edited by I. Wilson (Received 2 December 2005; received in revised form 10 January 2006; accepted 10 January 2006) Available online 2 February 2006

