doi: 10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00242-5 available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

w B

J. Mol. Biol. (2002) 319, 807­821

The Crystal Structure of the Olfactory Marker Protein ° at 2.3 A Resolution
Paul C. Smith, Stuart Firestein and John F. Hunt*
Department of Biological Sciences, 702A Fairchild Center MC 2434, Columbia University New York, NY 10027, USA Olfactory marker protein (OMP) is a highly expressed and phylogenetically conserved cytoplasmic protein of unknown function found almost exclusively in mature olfactory sensory neurons. Electrophysiological studies of olfactory epithelia in OMP knock-out mice show strongly retarded recovery following odorant stimulation leading to an impaired response to pulsed odor stimulation. Although these studies show that OMP is a modulator of the olfactory signal-transduction cascade, its biochemical role is not established. In order to facilitate further studies on the molecular function of OMP, its crystal structure has been determined ° at 2.3 A resolution using multiwavelength anomalous diffraction experiments on selenium-labeled protein. OMP is observed to form a modified b-clamshell structure with eight antiparallel b-strands. While OMP has no significant sequence homology to proteins of known structure, it has a similar fold to a domain found in a variety of existing structures, including in a large family of viral capsid proteins. The surface of OMP is mostly convex and lacking obvious small molecule binding sites, suggesting that it is more likely to be involved in modulating protein­ protein interaction than in interacting with small molecule ligands. Three highly conserved regions have been identified as leading candidates for protein ­protein interaction sites in OMP. One of these sites represents a loop known to mediate ligand interactions in the structurally homologous EphB2 receptor ligand-binding domain. This site is partially buried in the crystal structure but fully exposed in the NMR solution structure of OMP due to a change in the orientation of an a-helix that projects outward from the structurally invariant b-clamshell core. Gating of this conformational change by molecular interactions in the signal-transduction cascade could be used to control access to OMP's equivalent of the EphB2 ligandinteraction loop, thereby allowing OMP to function as a molecular switch.
q 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved *Corresponding author

Keywords: olfactory signal transduction; protein structure; X-ray crystallography; b-clamshell fold; protein ­protein interactions

Introduction
In olfactory sensory cells, signal transduction begins with the interaction of odorant molecules with the transmembrane domain of a G-protein coupled receptor.1 ­ 3 The cascade then proceeds through G-protein activation of adenylate cyclase, leading to elevated cAMP levels which in turn
Abbreviations used: OMP, olfactory marker protein; EOG, electro-olfactogram; MIPS, myoinositol-phosphate synthetase; MAD, multiwavelength anomalous diffraction; DM, density modification; NCS, noncrystallographic symmetry; NOE, nuclear Overhauser effect. E-mail address of the corresponding author: hunt@sid.bio.columbia.edu

trigger activation of camp-gated transmembrane channels, cation influx, and action potential generation.4 This process can be captured in real time with the use of electro-olfactograms (EOGs) which use electrodes placed directly on the surface of the nasal epithelium to record the transmembrane potential changes associated with odorant stimulation.2,5 In wild-type mice, the duration of the electrophysiological response to a single dose of odorant is typically on the order of half a second. However, in transgenic mice in which the gene encoding the olfactory marker protein (OMP) has been knocked out,6,7 the onset and decay of the electrophysiological response are both reduced approximately twofold, resulting in strongly retarded recovery following odorant

0022-2836/02/$ - see front matter q 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved

808

Crystal Structure of OMP

Table 1. Diffraction and refinement statistics
Space group P3221 A. Data collection statistics Radiation source ° Wavelengths (A) ° Limiting resolution (A) Redundancy Mean I/sI Completeness (all data) Rsym B. Phasing statistics Figures of merit by resolution ° ° ° 87.3 A £ 87.3 A £ 164.1 A (908,908,1208) at 100 K NSLS X12C 1.0781/0.9785/0.9788/0.939 2.3/2.4/2.4/2.4 17.42/8.34/19.62/8.46 30.9/22.0/36.2/18.7 100/100/100/100 9.3%/8.4%/8.3%/10.9% ° 11.48 A 0.89 ° 7.45 A 0.93 ° 5.52 A 0.90 ° 4.38 A 0.87 ° 3.63 A 0.79 ° 3.10 A 0.67 ° 2.71 A 0.46 ° 2.40 A 0.33 Overall 0.68 ° 30.0­2.30 at 1.0781 A 88.0/71.8 (F $ sF) 20.3%/31.2% 24.2%/34.1% (5% of data) 2 324 protein residues (2 monomers) 1 cacodylate ion 9 Zn2þ 280 water molecules 94.5% 5.5% ° 0.008 A/1.48

C. Refinement statistics ° Data range (A) Completeness (total/last shell) R-work (total/last shell) R-free (total/last shell) Molecules per asymmetric unit Model contents

Ramachandran plot Favored Allowed RMSD for bonds (lengths/angles)

Data collection statistics are reported from SCALEPACK39 for data with I $ sI for individual observations. Anomalous pairs were separated for the calculation of Rsym but merged for the calculation of redundancy and mean I/sI. MAD phasing statistics are reported from MLPHARE.12,13 Refinement statistics are reported from X-PLOR 3.81,14 and the Ramachandran statistics are reported from PROCHECK.13,45 Standard definitions were used for all parameters.

stimulation.5 In addition, the overall magnitude of the electrophysiological response in OMP knockout animals appears to be reduced by 75% from that in typical wild-type animals.6 OMP is a small cytoplasmic protein expressed in virtually every vertebrate species.8 Currently, there are five known OMP sequences: one each from human, mouse, and rat and two from Xenopus laevis. Of these, mouse and rat are 98% identical, mouse and human are 89% identical, and the two Xenopus sequences are 54% and 55% identical to murine OMP (Figure 1). Very few proteins show any sequence homology to OMP. Myoinisitolphosphate synthetase (MIPS) proteins from various species show up to 19% identity to murine OMP over 154 residues in a PSI-BLAST alignment,9 while cortexillin I and II from Polysphondylium pallidum show approximately 27% identity but only over the first 87 residues of the 163 in OMP. However, the tertiary structure of MIPS is not similar to that of OMP (see below), so that the significance of these matches is uncertain given the modest level of similarity. With at best remote sequence homology between OMP and other proteins of known structure or function, sequence comparison offers little insight as to the role OMP in the olfactory signal-transduction cascade.8

The unambiguous alteration in olfactory sensory electrophysiology in OMP-knockout mice5 indicates that this abundant cytoplasmic protein plays a significant role in the olfactory signal transduction pathway. However, to date, it has not been possible to identify its exact biochemical function. With this problem in mind, we set out to determine the crystal structure of murine OMP in order to guide future studies aimed at elucidating its biochemical function.

Results and Discussion
Structure determination Crystal of OMP were grown in 10%(w/v) PEG 8000, 200 mM zinc acetate, 100 mM sodium cacodylate (pH 6.5). The crystals grew in three space groups and varied considerably in their diffraction power and mosaicity. Two of these were trigonal crystal forms that differed primarily by a doubling in the length of the c-axis, while one was a tetragonal form possessing similar unit cell dimensions to the trigonal form with the longer c-axis. The long-axis trigonal form consistently yielded the best diffraction data and was employed

Crystal Structure of OMP

809

Figure 1. Secondary structure of murine OMP. The secondary structure elements41 observed in the murine OMP crystal structure are shown on top of a sequence alignment containing the five known OMP sequences (mouse, rat, human, and two from X. laevis ), four sequence homologues of OMP identified in a PSI-BLAST search,9 and three representative structural homologues identified using the DALI program.20 The secondary structure elements are colorcoded for consistency with Figure 2(a); the b-clamshell core is shown in brown, the a-helical projection is shown in red, and the Eph2B-receptor-like loop is shown in cyan. The proteins showing sequence homology to OMP are myoinositol-phosphate synthetase (MIPS) from Nicotiana paniculata and S. cerevisiae and cortexillin I and II from P. pallidum. The structural homologues are chain A of the cowpea chlorotic mottle virus major coat protein23 (PDB, 1CWP), chain B of cucumber mosaic virus major coat protein22 (PDB, 1F15), and the Ephrin-binding domain from the Eph2B receptor25 (Eph2B Rcpt.; PDB, 1NUK). In the sequence alignment, identical residues are shaded in black, while similar residues are shaded in gray. The row in the alignment entitled Site # indicates the residues participating the three proposed protein ­ protein interaction sites in OMP (Table 2). The black box outlines the Ephrin-interaction loop in the Eph2B receptor.

for phase determination using multiwavelength anomalous diffraction (MAD) experiments on selenium-substituted protein10 (Table 1). Following density modification in DM,11 the MAD map from MLPHARE12,13 was readily traced from Ala2 to the C terminus in of OMP in the two molecules in the asymmetric unit of the crystal lattice. Mass spectrometric results suggest that the N-terminal

methionine is removed following heterologous expression of OMP in Escherichia coli (data not shown). Refinement of the structure14 yielded a working R-factor of 20.3% and a free R-factor15 of 24.2% at ° 2.3 A resolution. The resulting model has 94.5% of its residues in the most favored regions of the Ramachandran plot and the remaining residues in

810

Crystal Structure of OMP

Figure 2. The crystal structure of OMP. (a) Stereo ribbon diagram of OMP. The "a-helical projection" (red) forms a tower above the eight-stranded b-clamshell core (brown), giving the protein its overall "tripod" appearance; this tower structure is absent in the protein domains sharing a similar fold with OMP. The "Eph2B receptorlike loop" (cyan) is structurally homologous to a known protein­ protein interaction loop in the Ephrin-binding domain of the Eph2B receptor, a b-sandwich domain with a similar fold to that of OMP. (b) Stereo diagram showing a superposition of the two monomers of OMP found in the long axis trigonal crystal form. The color of the backbone encodes the refined thermal B-factors of the Ca atoms in the two molecules, with the color ramp running from blue ° to yellow for low (, 35 A2) and ° high (, 70 A2) B-factors, respectively. The well-ordered Zn2þ (green) or cacodylate ions (magenta) are shown at the site(s) of binding to either monomer. The presence and identity of these ions were verified based on the presence of a peak in the appropriate difference Fourier map (see Materials and Methods). The acidic sidechains that interact with the Zn ions are shown in red.

allowed regions. The structures of the other crystal forms of OMP were solved by molecular replacement13,16 and deposited in the RCSB PDB (unpublished results). In the short axis trigonal crystal form, a slight rearrangement in the packing between monomers transforms the non-crystallographic symmetry (NCS) into crystallographic symmetry, thus cutting the length of the c-axis in half, but the intersubunit packing is substantially different in the tetragonal crystal form.

Molecular structure of OMP The secondary structure observed in the crystal structures of OMP is shown above the sequence alignment in Figure 1, while a ribbon diagram of a representative monomer color-coded according to secondary structure is shown in Figure 2(a). The two crystallographically observed monomers of OMP are shown superimposed in Figure 2(b), where the ribbon diagrams are color-coded by the isotropic thermal B-factors of the Ca atoms. The surface properties of OMP are explored in Figure 3, which shows five different views of the molecule with its surface color-coded according to either electrostatic potential (a), hydrophobicity (b),

sequence conservation (c), or isotropic atomic thermal B-factors (d). The OMP protein is an acidic eight-stranded b-clamshell with a prominent a-helical projection that comprises the vertex of the structure (shown in red in Figure 2(a)). The protein monomer has overall dimensions of approximately ° ° ° 58 A £ 42 A £ 26 A. The a-helical projection is formed by a-helix 1, which is inserted between b-strands 1 and 2 of the b-clamshell core (Figures 1 and 2(a)). This a-helix combined with the 15 residue loop that reconnects it to the core form a tower structure comprising residues 18 ­47 that gives the protein a tripod-like appearance, as viewed in Figure 2. A second a-helix follows b-strand 6 but is packed intimately into the folding core. (This a-helix replaces a continuation of b-strand 6 that occurs in the structurally homologous proteins; see below.) This core structure is very well ordered as evidenced by the low thermal B-factors (Figures 2(b), 3(d), and 6(b), below) and forms a compact, cavity-free structure (Figure 3). However, the a-helical projection and adjacent loop are more loosely packed and show elevated B-factors, particularly in the segment most distant from b-clamshell core. The first eight residues at the N terminus of OMP and the short loop between

Crystal Structure of OMP

811

Figure 3. Surface properties of OMP. Rendering of the molecular surface was performed using GRASP.46 Five orthogonal views are shown related by successive 908 rotations. For reference, the uppermost row shows ribbon diagrams of OMP color-coded as for Figure 2(a). (a) Molecular surface color-coded by electrostatic potential with blue representing positive potential (þ20 kT ) and red representing negative potential (2 20 kT ), assuming an ionic strength of 100 mM.46 (b) Molecular surface color-coded by polarity. Aspartate and glutamate carboxylate oxygen atoms and covalently attached atoms are shown in red; lysine, arginine, and histidine nitrogen atoms and covalently attached atoms are shown in blue; other carbon atoms are shown in green; and polar atoms are shown in white. (c) Molecular surface color-coded by sequence conservation among the five known OMPs. The color ramp runs from dark blue (100% sequence identity) through magenta to white (0% sequence identity). (d) Molecular surface color° ° coded by atomic thermal B-factors with the color ramp running from blue (, 35 A2) to yellow (, 70 A2); B-factors from the refined structure of the long axis trigonal crystal form were used.

b-strands 5 and 6 also show elevated B-factors, indicative of enhanced static or dynamic disorder. The structure of OMP varies only slightly in the two different crystallographically observed monomers (Figure 2(b)), showing a root-mean-square ° (RMS) deviation of 0.25 A for all Ca atoms. The largest displacement between the two chains ° involves a 1.6 A movement of a segment of the loop between b-strands 4 and 5 (named the "Eph2B-receptor-like loop" below). This difference

is probably caused by the interaction of Asp90 in this loop with an ordered Zn2þ /cacodylate ligand in one OMP monomer but not the other. Zinc ions (Zn2þ) make numerous interactions with acidic residues on the surface of the protein (Figure 2(b)), and many of the crystal packing contacts are made by bridging Zn2þ ligands, sometimes in combination with cacodylate ions. Consistent with these observations, a minimum concentration of 80 mM Zn2þ was required for

812 crystal formation. This concentration is 104 ­105 times higher than the physiological concentration of free Zn2þ in mammalian cells.17 Crystal formation was not supported by any other divalent cation other than cadmium at equivalently high concentrations. Given the fact that no Zn ions are ligated by more than four oxygen atoms from two acidic side-chains on any single OMP molecule, none of the protein side-chains interacting with the Zn atoms appears to be part of a canonical Zn2þ-binding motif.18,19 (There are no Cys residues in murine OMP, and none of the ordered Zn ions were bound to the single His residue.) In this context, all of the observed Zn ions are probably associated with low affinity, non-specific binding sites that are required for crystal lattice formation but are unlikely to represent physiological Zn2þ-binding sites. However, there are two sites where an ordered Zn ion is observed to be bound between a pair of acidic side-chains in all OMP monomers (in both the published and unpublished crystal structures). One of these occurs at residues Asp18 and Asp20 and the other occurs at residues Asp116 and Glu119 (Figure 2(b)); while these sites both involve additional ligands coming from another OMP monomer in all crystal forms, their consistent occupancy by Zn2þ suggests that they might interact with other cations under physiological conditions. Although crystallization was clearly Zn2þ-dependent, tryptophan fluorescence experiments revealed only a small change in total fluorescence intensity or fluorescence anisotropy upon the addition of 200 mM ZnCl2 (data not shown). (The details of this experiment are described below in Comparison to Solution NMR Structure.). The minimal change in the total protein fluorescence in this experiment makes it unlikely that Zn2þ interaction causes a major conformational change in OMP given the presence of five Trp residues in the relatively small protein molecule, while the invariance of the fluorescence anisotropy indicates that the protein does not form stable oligomers in solution in the presence of Zn2þ. Furthermore, there was no change in OMP fluorescence upon the addition of millimolar concentration of various other cations (calcium, magnesium, cadmium, or cobalt) or various small-molecule ligands potentially involved in the olfactory signal-transduction cascade (cAMP, IP3, or myoinisitol). Titration of OMP with PIP2-containing phosphatidylcholine vesicles similarly had no effect on OMP fluorescence intensity or anisotropy (data not shown). Homology to previously determined structures While the sequence of OMP appears to be unique, its three-dimensional structure is not. A systematic search for homologous structures in the Protein Data Bank using the DALI20 program indicates that numerous protein domains contain a

Crystal Structure of OMP

tertiary structure similar to that of OMP. These domains come from two closely related fold classes in the SCOP database,21 the "viral coat and capsid proteins" fold and the "galactose-binding domainlike" fold, both of which fall under the "all beta" protein classification. The latter fold class includes domains from a diverse set of proteins including the extracellular region of the Eph2B receptor, the enzymes b-galactosidase and b-glucuronidase, and various lectins. While the level of structural homology is modest, the fold of the b-sheets at the cores of these protein domains is all very similar. The strongest homology is observed with chain B of the major capsid protein from the cucumber mosaic virus22 (PDB 1F15), which gives a Z-score ° of 4.8 and an RMS deviation of 3.7 A for 102 Ca atoms (Figure 4(a)). However, there is only 10% sequence identity between the two proteins in the region of structural correspondence. Similarly significant levels of structural homology but low levels of sequence identity are observed in the major capsid proteins from other viruses such as cowpea mottle virus23 (chain A of PDB, 1CWP; Z ¼ ° 4:0; RMS deviation ¼ 3.8 A for 98 Ca atoms with 8% sequence identity) and satellite Panicum mosaic virus24 (chain A of PDB, 1STM; Z ¼ 4:2; RMS deviation ¼ 4.2 for 94 Ca atoms with 7% sequence identity). The homology to the EpH2B tyrosine kinase receptor is limited to its ligandbinding domain25 (Figure 4(c)) (PDB, 1NUK; Z ¼ 4:1; RMS deviation ¼ 3.5 for 99 Ca atoms with 6% sequence identity), which represents approximately 20% of the extracellular region of the protein. The homology to the enzymes b-galactosidase26 (PDB, 1BGL; Z ¼ 3:6; RMS deviation ¼ 3.6 for 96 Ca atoms with 5% sequence identity) and b-glucuronidase27 (PDB, 1BHG; Z ¼ 4:1; RMS deviation ¼ 3.2 for 99 Ca atoms with 4% sequence identity) is likewise confined to small domains within much larger enzymes. The eight-stranded b-clamshell fold present in OMP represents a slight modification of the eightstranded b-sandwich fold present in many of the structurally homologous domains (Figure 4(b)). However, there are three significant structural differences between OMP and the homologous domains. First, the b-core of OMP forms a single extended sheet that folds back on itself, rather than two separate antiparallel b-sheets, as seen in the topology of both the cowpea mottle virus major capsid protein23 and the EpH2B tyrosine kinase receptor ligand-binding domain25 (Figure 4(a) and (c)). In the case of these two structural homologues, the two b-sheets are stacked directly on top of one another in b-sandwich fashion, with a roughly parallel alignment of their b-strands. In OMP, each half of the single b-sheet resembles one of the two b-sheets in the b-sandwich domains, but b-strand 1 follows a different trajectory and twists around to make antiparallel hydrogenbonding interactions with both b-strand 8 and b-strand 2 (Figures 2(a) and 4(b)). This interaction

Crystal Structure of OMP

813

Figure 4. Comparison of OMP to structural homologues. (a) Stereo pair showing structural superposition of OMP (transparent brown, red, and cyan) and the b-clamshell domain from chain B of the major capsid protein from the cucumber mosaic virus22 (opaque blue). The superposition is based on leastsquares alignment of 92 Ca atoms from eight b-strands. (b) Topology of OMP compared to that of the structurally homologous viral capsid proteins. OMP is shown of the left while the b-clamshell domain of chain B of the major capsid protein from the cucumber mosaic virus is shown on the right. (c) Stereo pair showing structural superposition OMP (transparent brown, red, and cyan) and the ligand binding domain of the EphB2 ephrin receptor25 (opaque green) based on least-squares alignment of 96 Ca atoms from seven b-strands. Side-chains from the residues mediating ephrin interaction in Eph2B are shown in ball-and-stick representation (opaque green), as are the side-chains of the equivalent residues in the structurally homologous loop in OMP (transparent cyan).

bridges the two halves of the b-sandwich and fuses them into single curved b-sheet in OMP. As a result, the core of OMP resembles a clamshell rather than a sandwich.

The second significant structural difference between OMP and the homologous domains concerns the location and extent of b-strand 6. In the homologous domains, this b-strand comprises the

814

Crystal Structure of OMP

near edge of the lower b-sheet in the b-sandwich, as viewed in Figure 4(a) and (c). In OMP, most of b-strand 6 is replaced by a-helix 2, which packs into the interface between the upper and lower b-sheets at the open face of the b-clamshell, and the segment of b-strand 6 that remains extends the near edge of the upper b-sheet rather than being incorporated into the lower b-sheet. Although this represents a minor shift in the spatial location of b-strand 6, it does produce a small change in the topology of the protein, which is reflected in the transfer of this b-strand from extreme right side of the topology diagram for OMP to extreme left side of the topology diagram for the related structures (Figure 4(b)). The final significant structural difference in OMP is the existence of the a-helical projection between b-strands 1 and 2 that forms the tower protruding from the top of the protein (as viewed in Figures 1 and 4). No equivalent structure is present in any of the homologues, which all have a relatively short turn between b-strands 1 and 2 (Figure 4). Although there is unambiguous structural similarity between OMP and a number of other protein domains, none of the functional motifs found in the homologous domains appears to be preserved in OMP, with the possible exception of a ligandinteraction loop in the Eph2B receptor ligandbinding domain (see the next section). Given that there is minimal sequence homology (Figure 1) and no evidence of functional similarity between OMP and the related protein domains, the observed structural homology is likely to be the result of convergent evolution in almost all cases. Although the MIPS protein shows 19% sequence identity over the entire length of OMP (Figure 1), neither the secondary structure nor the tertiary structures of MIPS from Saccharomyces cerevisiae bears any resemblance to that of OMP (J. Geiger, personal communication). The dissimilarity in their structures makes it unlikely that there is either a functional relationship or even a significant evolutionary relationship between these proteins. A potential protein­ protein interaction site based on structural homology to the Eph2B receptor The ligand interaction domain of the Eph2B receptor25 is the only structural homologue in which the similarity to OMP extends outside of the b-sandwich folding core of the domain. The Eph2B receptor is a tyrosine kinase that is activated by interaction with B-type ephrins, a family of closely related axonal guidance factors.28 Structurebased mutational studies of the ligand-binding domain of the Eph2B receptor have identified 17 residues in a surface loop located between b-strands 8 and 9 of the b-sandwich as being required for interaction with ephrin; these residues are likely to interact directly with the protein cofactor based on their ability to determine the specificity for different ephrin ligands.25 There is

structural homology between 11 of the 17 residues in this ephrin-interaction loop in the Eph2B ligand-binding domain and the loop at residues 88 to 99 in OMP, which occurs at the equivalent topological position in the b-core of the protein (Figure 1). Figure 4(c) shows a least-squares superposition of the ligand-binding domain of the EphB2 receptor and OMP with the established ephrin-interacting residues in the receptor and the corresponding residues in OMP shown in ball-and-stick representation. All of these residues are 100% conserved among the five known OMP sequences. Based on the structural homology in this region, we have called this segment of OMP the "Eph2B-receptorlike loop" (Figures 1, 2, 4, and 6). It corresponds approximately to the segment called the "V-loop" by Baldiserri et al.29 While the level of sequence homology between the Eph2B receptor and OMP (Figure 1) is so low as to make an ancestral relationship between these proteins dubious, the use of a similar structure to mediate protein ­ protein interactions in a structurally homologous domain suggests that convergent structural evolution could also favor the use of this segment to mediate protein­ protein interactions in OMP. Although the left surface of this loop (as shown in Figure 4(c)) is solvent-exposed in the crystal structure of OMP, the top of the loop and its right surface are buried under the a-helical projection at residues 18 ­47 that represents the unique structural feature in OMP that is not present in any of the structural homologues. In contrast, the ephrininteraction loop in the Eph2B receptor ligandbinding domain is almost completely solventexposed25 given the absence of the a-helical projection in that structure (Figure 4(c)). However, the solvent-exposed surface of the Eph2B-receptor-like loop lies beneath residues from the loop connecting the a-helical projection to the b-clamshell core; these residues together with those in the Eph2B-receptor-like loop form a continuous epitope, which is the most highly conserved region on the surface of OMP (Figure 3(c)). This epitope represents a region of the structure that we designate the "vertex ridge" because it covers the upper half of the ridge on the left-hand side of the structure in the standard view (i.e. as shown in Figures 2 and 4). An en face view of the vertex ridge is shown in the center column of Figure 3. Based on the almost perfect sequence conservation in this region of OMP, the vertex ridge represents a leading candidate to mediate protein­ protein interactions in the olfactory signaltransduction cascade, independent of any consideration of structural homology. On this basis, we designate the vertex ridge as potential protein ­ protein interaction site I in OMP (Table 2 and Figures 1, 3, 4(c), 5, and 7). This highly conserved surface could potentially bind to target proteins in the conformation observed in the crystal structure. Alternatively, a change in the orientation of the a-helical projection a-helix 1 plus the subsequent

Crystal Structure of OMP

815

Table 2. Candidate protein­protein interaction sites in OMP
Site I. Vertex ridge II. Vertex clamp III. Basal groove EphB2-like loop between b-strands 4 and 5 and loop at the C terminus of a-helix 1 Interface between a-helix 1 and b-clamshell core Amphipathic groove under b-strands 1, 3, 6, 8, and a-helix 2 Residues K38, K39, Q40, D41, G42, S84, N86, W87, T88, P89, D90, L91, T92, N93, L94, N95, T96, R97, Q98, L99, L100 L17, Q19, T22, Q23, R26, L27, V29, E30, K33, Q34, L45, R47, P48, A49, S51, T144, F145, E147, G148, E150, P151 E12, Q64, F65, D66, H67, W68, N69, V70, V71, F106, D113, A114, M115, D116, W117, E119, A120, A122, L123, E127, K155, S157, V159

Underlined residues are 100% conserved in the five known OMP sequences.

loop, could result in complete solvent exposure of the Eph2B-receptor-like loop. The gross topographical features of the surface exposed as a result of such a conformational change would be very similar to that of the known protein­ protein interaction surface in the Eph2B receptor.25 Given the very high B-factors observed for the a-helical projection in all of the crystal forms of OMP (Figures 2(b) and 6(b)), a conformational change in this region of the proteins seemed possible (even before the availability of the NMR structure; described in the next section). The conformation of the a-helical projection observed in the crystal structure is specified by a small subsidiary packing-core involving interactions between residues on one face of a-helix 1 with residues on the subsequent loop (at residues 38­ 49) and also on the Eph2B receptor-like loop (Figure 5). This packing core involves a single layer of hydrophobic van der Walls contacts between Val29, Leu32, Leu45, and aliphatic carbon atoms from the ° side-chain of Lys38 plus a 2.8 A salt bridge between Arg28 and Glu43 that is partially buried by the side-chain of Asn93. All seven of these residues are 100% identical in the five known OMP sequences. The partially buried salt-bridge seems to play a central role in stabilizing the conformation of the high B-factor residues at the relatively mobile C terminus of a-helix 1. Dissociation of this salt bridge would likely result in a change in the conformation of the entire a-helical projection.

Comparison to solution NMR structure The NMR solution structure of rat OMP29 (accompanying paper) is consistent with the occurrence of such a conformational change in the a-helical projection comprising the vertex of the crystal structure. The NMR structure is closely similar to the X-ray structure except for a dramatic reorientation of a-helix 1 and the adjacent loop connecting its C terminus to b-strand 2 (Figure 6(a)). In the NMR structure, this a-helix has rotated downward (as shown in Figure 6(a)) to contact the exterior of the b-clamshell core, changing the overall tripod appearance which characterizes the crystal structure. The partially buried salt bridge between Arg28 and Glu43 (Figure 5) is disrupted in the course of this conformational transition, which is also accompanied by a minor reorientation of the Eph2B receptor-like loop (referred to as the "V-loop" by Baldisseri et al. )29 located under the a-helix projection in the crystal structure. This reorientation involves a mostly rigid-body movement towards the position occupied by a-helix 1 in the crystal structure. As previously observed for other proteins,30 there is a close correspondence between the backbone thermal B-factors in the crystal structure and the RMS deviation of the Ca coordinates in the NMR ensemble (Figure 6(b)); both techniques show the a-helical projection to be the most mobile region of OMP. The position of a-helix 1 is loosely constrained in the NMR structure due to the small number of

Figure 5. Stereo GRASP image of the partially buried salt bridge under a-helical projection. The molecular surface44 is shown in partially transparent form, and the backbone worm is color-coded by the atomic thermal B-factors of the ° ° ° Ca atoms with the color ramp running from blue (, 35 A2) to yellow (, 70 A2). The 2.9 A salt bridge between Arg28 and Glu43 is partially buried by Asn93 and is bracketed by Val29, Leu32, Leu45, and Lys38. The side-chains of the aliphatic residues and the hydrophobic b and g-carbon atoms of Lys38 form a subsidiary packing core behind the buried salt bridge. The Roman numerals indicate the locations of the proposed protein ­ protein interactions sites (Table 2). Two of these sites flank the a-helical projection, with the "vertex ridge" (site I) on the right and the "vertex clamp" (site II) on the left as shown here.

816

Crystal Structure of OMP

Figure 6. Comparison to the NMR solution structure of rat OMP. (a) Stereo pair showing structural superposition of the crystal structure of murine OMP (transparent) with the best model from the NMR solution structure of rat OMP29 (opaque). The eight b-strands and a-helix 2, which form the b-clamshell core (brown), have the same conformation in both structures, while the a-helical projection adopts different conformations in the two structures (red). (b) The thermal B-factors from the Ca atoms in the X-ray structure (green trace) are compared to the root-mean-square deviations of the same atoms in an ensemble of 13 accepted NMR structures (blue trace). A schematic of the secondary structure is shown at the top of the graph color-coded as for Figures 1 and 2.

long-range NOEs between the b-clamshell core and the distal regions of this helix-loop segment. There are four weak, long-range NOE's that are only satisfied with a-helix 1 in the alternate conformation shown in the NMR structure in Figure 6(a).29 However, there is a prior example of the orientation of a projecting a-helix having been incorrectly defined in an NMR solution structure31 ­ 33 due to the paucity of NOE restraints combined with some degeneracy in chemical shift values for backbone protons.34,35 Nonetheless, the NMR data show evidence of exchange broadening and also rapid backbone proton exchange in the loop following a-helix 1, indicating that this region of OMP is dynamically mobile and therefore likely to be undergoing substantial breathing motions in solution.29 It is unlikely that the different protein conformation observed in the X-ray structure is caused by crystal packing interactions because there are no intersubunit contacts to a-helix 1 or the adjacent loop. Moreover, the conformation of these segments observed in the NMR structure can be

accommodated in the crystal lattice without producing any steric clashes or any new intersubunit contacts (in both the published and unpublished crystal forms). Therefore, assuming that the difference in the location of a-helix 1 in the two structures is real, it is likely to be attributable to differences in the solvent environments in the two experiments. Although both structure determinations were nominally performed at pH 6.5, the NMR structure was determined in 10 mM phosphate buffer with no additional salt, while the crystal structure was determined in a high-salt environment including 100 mM cacodylate buffer plus 200 mM Zn(OAc)2. As discussed above, ordered molecules of both Zn2þ and cacodylate are observed bound to both OMP molecules in the long axis trigonal crystal lattice (Figure 2(b)). One Zn ion is ligated by the carboxylates of Asp16 and Asp19 near the N terminus of a-helix 1 (i.e. at its base as shown in Figure 2(b)) in all of the crystallographically observed monomers (in both the published and unpublished crystal structures). This Zn ion in

Crystal Structure of OMP

817

particular could have influenced the location of a-helix 1 in the crystal structure. In order to explore this possibility, we measured the tryptophan fluorescence of OMP as the solution environment was changed in two steps from that present in the NMR sample to that present in the crystal lattice (two steps were necessary due to the precipitation of phosphate by Zn2þ). Given the fact that Trp87 is completely buried in the crystal structure of OMP but partially solvent-exposed in the NMR structure, an appreciable change in tryptophan fluorescence would be expected to accompany the inferred conformational change.36 A 7.5% quenching was observed upon adding cacodylate buffer to the low salt NMR condition and an additional 12.5% quenching was observed upon adding 200 mM Zn(OAc)2 to the cacodylate buffer (data not shown). Given these modest changes in tryptophan fluorescence, it seems unlikely that the differences in the buffer or salt conditions in the two experiments is responsible for the conformational difference observed between the structures. However, the high concentration of polyethylene glycol required for crystallization (, 10%, w/v) could still influence the conformation of a-helix 1 consistently observed in the three crystal structures. However, even in this case, the conformation observed in the crystal must be energetically accessible, whether or not it is the preferred equilibrium conformation for OMP in solution. The conformational differences between the crystal and solution structures are intriguing because they could potentially correspond to a physiological conformational change allowing OMP to function as a molecular switch. Specifically, access to the Eph2B-receptor-like loop could be controlled by the interaction of OMP with another protein molecule if it drove the inferred reorientation of a-helix 1 (i.e. by stabilizing the protein in one of the two alternative conformations). This binding interaction could thereby gate the interaction of OMP with a second proteinbinding partner that interacts with the Eph2Breceptor-like loop. In this case, OMP could act as a

molecular switch integrating sequential protein interactions in the olfactory signal-transduction cascade. Other potential protein ­ protein interaction sites The surface of the crystal structure of murine OMP does not have any obvious binding pockets or clefts. This observation, combined with the generally convex nature of the protein, suggests that OMP does not have any small-molecule binding sites in this conformation. The surface of the NMR structure of rat OMP does contain a shallow depression underneath the Eph2B-receptor-like loop in a location near that binding a carbohydrate ligand in a structurally related lectin.37 The fact that many of the structural homologues of OMP are either enzymes with carbohydrate substrates or lectins suggests the possibility that OMP could interact with a carbohydrate ligand, although its cytoplasmic localization makes it unlikely to have lectin activity. However, OMP's activity in modulating the olfactory signal-transduction cascade is most likely to be based on the modulation of protein­ protein interactions,5 a conclusion that is reinforced by the absence of obvious smallmolecule ligand-binding sites in the structure. In this context, we identify three surface features of OMP that represent our leading candidates for potential protein­ protein interaction sites (Table 2 and Figures 1, 3, 4(c), 5 and 7). The selection of these sights is based on subjective judgments related to sequence conservation and surface topography. Site I, the vertex ridge, was discussed above and spans the Eph2B-receptor-like loop plus segments of the loop following a-helix 1. The other two sites represent slightly concave regions on the surface of the protein which could allow interlocking interactions with a target protein (Figure 3); while these sites have less stringent sequence conservation than the vertex ridge, they are still dominated by residues that are 80% ­ 100% conserved in the five known OMP sequences (Table 2, Figures 1 and

Figure 7. Stereo GRASP image of the basal groove. This region represents potential protein ­ protein interaction site number III. The molecular surface44 is color-coded by polarity as for Figure 3(b). The groove is characterized by a hydrophobic floor (green), which is flanked by charged and polar residues. An idealized polyalanine a-helix is shown in stick representation to illustrate the scale.

818

Crystal Structure of OMP

3(c)). Site II is on the opposite face of the protein from the vertex ridge and represents a small depression in the surface lined by residues from a-helix 1, the distal segment of the loop at the C terminus of this a-helix, b-strand 7, and the loop immediately following this b-strand (Figures 3 and 5). We call this site the "vertex clamp" based on its location and overall morphology. Site III is an amphipathic groove lined by residues from b-strands 1, 3, 6, 8, and a-helix 2 (Figures 3 and 7). We call this site the "basal groove" because of its location on the bottom surface of OMP, as shown in Figures 2, 4, and 6. This groove contains a pocket of strongly conserved hydrophobic residues at its base but mostly polar and charged residues on its rim. The overall dimensions of the basal groove are approximately appropriate for it to interact with an amphipathic a-helix (Figure 7). This site corresponds approximately to that demonstrated by NMR chemical shift perturbation experiments to interact with a peptide from the Bex1 protein that was identified in a screen for proteins interacting with OMP.29 Summary Although the location of some small-molecule ligand binding sites can be obvious, given the atomic coordinates for a protein molecule, other sites can be difficult to find in the absence of direct experimental data. Binding sites comprising surface depressions rather than deep cavities can be particularly difficult to identify. In this context, it is impossible to exclude the existence of a binding site for a small-molecule ligand based on inspection of the molecular structure of OMP. However, the surface of OMP is generally convex and there are no deep cavities observed in either the crystal structure or the NMR structure. In this context, we believe that OMP is more likely to modulate the olfactory signal-transduction cascade by participating in protein ­ protein interactions than by binding one of the small molecule components of the cascade. Here, as a guide for future mutational studies of OMP function, we have identified three sites on the surface of the protein as leading candidates for participation in protein­ protein interactions (Table 2). OMP could potentially modulate the kinetics of the signal-transduction cascade while adopting a static conformation by binding to one of the membrane proteins or enzymes in the cascade and acting as an allosteric modulator of its activity. Alternatively, comparison of the crystal structure of OMP to its solution NMR spectrum reinforces the inference drawn from analysis of its structural features that the protein could undergo a significant conformational change involving reorientation of the a-helical projection. In this manner, OMP could act as a dynamic switch in the signaltransduction cascade. This conformational change would produce a substantial change in the surface topography of OMP, including complete solvent-

exposure of the Eph2B receptor-like loop which is partially buried in the crystal structure, and could alter the ability of OMP to interact with different protein partners. Interaction of OMP with one protein cofactor would be likely to stabilize the protein in one of the two different conformational states and could thereby control its ability to make other protein ­protein interactions involving a different region on the surface. Given such a role as conformationally controlled molecular adaptor protein, OMP could be a site for regulation of the signal-transduction cascade if the regulatory protein were to induce a conformational change in OMP altering its interaction with other active components in the cascade. However, the existence of such a conformational change in OMP remains hypothetical, and additional experimentation will be needed to evaluate whether such a conformational change occurs and, if so, to establish its exact role in the olfactory physiology.

Materials and Methods
Protein expression and purification Murine OMP was cloned into the T7 expression plasmid pET28a plasmid (Novagen) using the N-terminal Nco I and C-terminal Bam HI endonuclease sites. Residue 2 was mutated from alanine to serine during the cloning process. Protein was expressed in E. coli BL21(DE3) and B834(DE3) (Novagen) for native and selenomethioninelabeling, respectively. Cells were grown overnight in LB for expression of native protein or LeMaster medium38 supplemented with the Kao and Michayluk vitamin mixture (Sigma) for expression of Se ­ Met-labeled protein and diluted 1:100 in fresh medium the subsequent morning. Protein expression was induced with 1 mM IPTG in mid-log phase (A600 , 0.6). Following three hours further growth at 37 8C, cells were harvested by centrifugation prior to freezing in liquid nitrogen pending purification. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (1 mM aminoethyl benzenesulfonyl fluoride (AEBSF), 2 mM PMSF, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT (10 mM for Se ­ Met), 25 mM Tris ­ HCl (pH 8.0)) and lysed by three passes at 16,000 psi through a French press. The lysate was spun for 30 minutes at 100,000 rpm in a Beckman TLA100.4 rotor and the resulting supernatant was then filtered through a 0.45 mm cellulose acetate filter prior to application to a DEAE Sepharose FF column (Pharmacia). The column was equilibrated with buffer A (lysis buffer without protease inhibitors), and the protein was eluted with a linear gradient to 1 M NaCl in the same buffer. OMP-containing fractions were pooled and concentrated to 5 ml volume using a Centriprep YM-10 (Amicon) prior to purification on a Sephacryl S-300HR gel filtration column (Pharmacia) in 100 mM NaCl, 4 mM DTT (10 mM DTT for Se ­ Met protein), 50 mM Tris ­ HCl (pH 8.0). OMP containing protein fractions were again pooled and concentrated prior to desalting on a HiPrep 26/10 column (Pharmacia) equilibrated in 10 mM Tris ­ HCl (pH 8.0). No DTT was present in the desalting buffer (see below). Desalted protein was then concentrated to a final concentration of about 15 mg/ml. Typically, 15 ­ 20 mg of purified OMP were obtained per liter of culture.

Crystal Structure of OMP

819

Mass spectrometry Mass measurements of purified OMP were taken with MALDI-TOF mass spectroscopy on a Voyager DE Pro system (PE Biosystems) using an a-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (Sigma) matrix solution (10 mg/ml in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)) mixed 1:1 with a 1 mg/ml solution of desalted OMP. Horse myoglobin at the same concentration was used as a calibration standard. Initial mass measurements were ,150 Da lower than expected, indicating removal of the N-terminal methionine. Selenomethionine occupancy was assessed by comparing the masses of derivatized and native protein. Derivatized protein showed as mass elevation of 236 Da, suggesting 100% occupancy of five methionine sites. Protein crystallization Crystals were grown by hanging-drop vapor-diffusion using 1 ml protein stock (, 15 mg/ml) with either 1 or 2 ml well solution containing 200 mM zinc acetate, 10% (w/v) PEG 8000 (Fluka), 100 mM cacodylate (pH 6.5). ° Crystals generally grew to useful size (, 100 A on a side) in less than 24 hours. Although the crystals continued to grow, their diffraction quality deteriorated within two days of setup if not frozen. For Se­Met protein, 10 mM DL -selenomethionine (Sigma) was added as a reducing agent. Reductants such as DTT and tris-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) could not be used due to precipitation of the zinc ion in the mother liquor. Prior to freezing in liquid propane, crystals were transferred to cryo-protective solutions similar to the mother liquor, but containing first 16% total PEG 8000, 5% ethylene glycol and second 20% total PEG 8000, 10% ethylene glycol. Total exposure to ethylene glycol containing solutions was kept under 60 seconds. Data collection and processing Native data were collected at both the selenium and ° zinc anomalous peak wavelengths (0.9785 A and ° 1.276 A, respectively) on beamline X12B at the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) using a Quantum-4 CCD detector. No significant anomalous signal was observed in the native crystals at the selenium peak, indicating that the zinc anomalous signal was not significant at that wavelength. A complete four wavelength MAD10 dataset was collected from a single selenomethionine-derivatized crystal was collected on beamline X12C at the NSLS using a Brandeis-2k CCD detector (Table 1). All diffraction data were collected at 130 K and processed with DENZO and SCALEPACK.39 Structure determination methods The selenium site pattern was determined by the program SOLVE40 using all four wavelengths of MAD data. The data had originally been indexed in the enantiomorphic space group P3121 and the resulting electron density maps, despite the appearance of a clear solvent envelope, were uninterpretable. The heavy-atom site coordinates from SOLVE were then inverted and the phasing calculations repeated using MLPHARE12,13 in space group P3221. Following solvent flattening with DM11,13 assuming a solvent content of 74%, the resulting maps were easily traced. Initial modeling confirmed the presence of two monomers in the asymmetric unit.

Refinement procedures Refinement was performed using X-PLOR 3.8114 with bulk-solvent correction, individual B-factor refinement, and overall anisotropic B-factor refinement. Initially, NCS restraint was applied to the two monomers during refinement, but certain sections of the structure were freed from restraint in later models. In the long axis trigonal crystal form, ordered zinc ions were identified in anomalous difference Fourier maps from data collected at the peak zinc anomalous wavelength. Similarly, ordered cacodylate ions in this structure were identified by their small but detectable anomalous signal in anomalous difference Fourier maps from data collected at the peak selenium anomalous wavelength. Coordinates and structure factors have been deposited in the RCSB Protein Data Bank under accession code 1F35 for the published structure (and codes 1JOB and 1JOD for the unpublished structures). Figure preparation Secondary structure assignment was done with the program DSSP.41 Images were produced using the program MOLSCRIPT42 with either postscript output or Raster3D43 output. Images showing the molecular surface of OMP were prepared with the program GRASP.44

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Lidija Ivic for advice and Anand Saxena, Malcolm Capel, and Tom Langdon of the NSLS for support during synchrotron data collection. This work was supported by a start-up grant from Columbia University (to J.F.H.) and grants from the NIDCD (to S.F.).

References
1. Buck, L. & Axel, R. (1991). A novel multigene family may encode odorant receptors: a molecular basis for odor recognition. Cell, 65, 175­ 187. 2. Zhao, H., Ivic, L., Otaki, J. M., Hashimoto, M., Mikoshiba, K. & Firestein, S. (1998). Functional expression of a mammalian odorant receptor. Science, 279, 237­ 242. 3. Mombaerts, P. (1999). Molecular biology of odorant receptors in vertebrates. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 22, 487 ­509. 4. Zufall, F., Firestein, S. & Shepherd, G. M. (1994). Cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channels and sensory transduction in olfactory receptor neurons. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 23, 577­ 607. 5. Ivic, L., Pyrski, M. M., Margolis, J. W., Richards, L. J., Firestein, S. & Margolis, F. L. (2000). Adenoviral vector-mediated rescue of the OMP-null phenotype in vivo. Nature Neurosci. 3, 1113 ­ 1120. 6. Buiakova, O. I., Baker, H., Scott, J. W., Farbman, A., Kream, R., Grillo, M. et al. (1996). Olfactory marker protein (OMP) gene deletion causes altered physiological activity of olfactory sensory neurons. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 9858­ 9863. 7. Youngentob, S. L. & Margolis, F. L. (1999). OMP gene deletion causes an elevation in behavioral threshold sensitivity. Neuroreport, 10, 15 ­19.

820

Crystal Structure of OMP

8. Buiakova, O. I., Krishna, N. S., Getchell, T. V. & Margolis, F. L. (1994). Human and rodent OMP genes: conservation of structural and regulatory motifs and cellular localization. Genomics, 20, 452­ 462. 9. Altschul, S. F., Madden, T. L., Schaffer, A. A., Zhang, J., Zhang, Z., Miller, W. & Lipman, D. J. (1997). Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search programs. Nucl. Acids Res. 25, 3389­ 3402. 10. Hendrickson, W. A. (1991). Determination of macromolecular structures from anomalous diffraction of synchrotron radiation. Science, 254, 51 ­ 58. 11. Cowtan, K. & Main, P. (1998). Miscellaneous algorithms for density modification [In Process Citation]. Acta Crystallog. sect D, 54, 487­ 493. 12. Otwinowski, Z. (1991). MLPHARE. In Isomorphous Replacement and Anomalous Scattering (Wolf, W., Evans, P. R. & Leslie, A. G. W., eds), pp. 80 ­ 86, SERC Daresbury Laboratory, Warrington, UK. 13. Collaborative Computational Project, No 4 (1994). The CCP4 suite: programs for protein crystallography. Acta Crystallog. 50, 760­763. 14. Brunger, A. T. (1992). X-PLOR, Version 3.1, A System for Crystallography and NMR, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT. 15. Brunger, A. T. (1993). Assessment of phase accuracy by cross validation: the free R value. Methods and applications. Acta Crystallog. 49, 24 ­ 36. 16. Navaza, J. (1994). AMoRe: an automated package for molecular replacement. Acta Crystallog. sect A, 50, 157­ 163. 17. Outten, C. E. & O'Halloran, T. V. (2001). Femtomolar sensitivity of metalloregulatory proteins controlling zinc homeostasis. Science, 292, 2488­ 2492. 18. Berg, J. M. & Godwin, H. A. (1997). Lessons from zinc-binding peptides. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 26, 357­ 371. 19. Coleman, J. E. (1998). Zinc enzymes. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2, 222­234. 20. Holm, L. & Sander, C. (1993). Protein structure comparison by alignment of distance matrices. J. Mol. Biol. 233, 123­ 138. 21. Murzin, A. G., Brenner, S. E., Hubbard, T. & Chothia, C. (1995). SCOP: a structural classification of proteins database for the investigation of sequences and structures. J. Mol. Biol. 247, 536­ 540. 22. Smith, T. J., Chase, E., Schmidt, T. & Perry, K. L. (2000). The structure of cucumber mosaic virus and comparison to cowpea chlorotic mottle virus. J. Virol. 74, 7578­ 7586. 23. Speir, J. A., Munshi, S., Wang, G., Baker, T. S. & Johnson, J. E. (1995). Structures of the native and swollen forms of cowpea chlorotic mottle virus determined by X-ray crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy. Structure, 3, 63 ­78. 24. Ban, N. & McPherson, A. (1995). The structure of ° satellite panicum mosaic virus at 1.9 A resolution. Nature Struct. Biol. 2, 882­ 890. 25. Himanen, J. P., Henkemeyer, M. & Nikolov, D. B. (1998). Crystal structure of the ligand-binding domain of the receptor tyrosine kinase EphB2. Nature, 396, 486­ 491. 26. Jacobson, R. H., Zhang, X. J., DuBose, R. F. & Matthews, B. W. (1994). Three-dimensional structure of beta-galactosidase from E. coli. Nature, 369, 761­ 766. 27. Jain, S., Drendel, W. B., Chen, Z. W., Mathews, F. S., Sly, W. S. & Grubb, J. H. (1996). Structure of human

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34. 35.

36. 37.

38.

39. 40. 41.

42. 43. 44.

beta-glucuronidase reveals candidate lysosomal targeting and active-site motifs. Nature Struct. Biol. 3, 375­ 381. Mellitzer, G., Xu, Q. & Wilkinson, D. G. (2000). Control of cell behaviour by signalling through Eph receptors and ephrins. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 10, 400­ 408. Baldisseri, D.M., Margolis, J.W., Koo, J.-H. & Margolis F.L. (2002) OMP exhibits a beta-clam fold in solution: implications for target peptide interaction and olfactory signal transduction. J. Mol. Biol. 319, 823­ 837. Chen, Y. W. & Clore, G. M. (2000). A systematic case study on using NMR models for molecular replacement: p53 tetramerization domain revisited. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 56, 1535­ 1540. Clore, G. M., Omichinski, J. G., Sakaguchi, K., Zambrano, N., Sakamoto, H., Appella, E. & Gronenborn, A. M. (1994). High-resolution structure of the oligomerization domain of p53 by multidimensional NMR. Science, 265, 386­ 391. Lee, W., Harvey, T. S., Yin, Y., Yau, P., Litchfield, D. & Arrowsmith, C. H. (1994). Solution structure of the tetrameric minimum transforming domain of p53. Nature Struct. Biol. 1, 877­ 890. Jeffrey, P. D., Gorina, S. & Pavletich, N. P. (1995). Crystal structure of the tetramerization domain of ° the p53 tumor suppressor at 1.7 A. Science, 267, 1498­ 1502. Clore, G.M., Omichinski, J.G., Sakaguchi, K., Zambrano, N., Sakamoto, H., Appella, E. & Gronenborn, A. M. (1995). Science, 267, 1515­ 1516. Tashiro, M., Tejero, R., Zimmerman, D. E., Celda, B., Nilsson, B. & Montelione, G. T. (1997). Highresolution solution NMR structure of the Z domain of staphylococcal protein A. J. Mol. Biol. 272, 573­ 590. Lakowicz, J. R. (1983). Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Plenum Press, New York. Delbaere, L. T., Vandonselaar, M., Prasad, L., Quail, J. W., Wilson, K. S. & Dauter, Z. (1993). Structures of the lectin IV of Griffonia simplicifolia and its complex with the Lewis b human blood group determinant ° at 2.0 A resolution. J. Mol. Biol. 230, 950­ 965. Hendrickson, W. A., Horton, J. R. & LeMaster, D. M. (1990). Selenomethionyl proteins produced for analysis by multiwavelength anomalous diffraction (MAD): a vehicle for direct determination of threedimensional structure. EMBO J. 9, 1665­ 1672. Otwinowski, Z. & Minor, W. (1997). Processing of X-ray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode. Methods Enzymol. 276, 307­ 326. Terwilliger, T. C. & Berendzen, J. (1999). Automated MAD and MIR structure solution. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 55, 849­ 861. Kabsch, W. & Sander, C. (1983). Dictionary of protein secondary structure: pattern recognition of hydrogen-bonded and geometrical features. Biopolymers, 22, 2577­ 2637. Kraulis, P. J. (1991). MOLSCRIPT: a program to produce both detailed and schematic plots of proteins. J. Appl. Crystallog. 24, 946­ 950. Merritt, E. A. & Bacon, D. J. (1997). Raster3D photorealistic molecular graphics. Methods Enzymol. 277, 505­ 524. Nicholls, A. (1992). GRASP: Graphical Representation and Analysis Surface Properties, Columbia University, New York.

Crystal Structure of OMP

821

45. Laskowski, R. A., MacArthur, M. W., Moss, D. S. & Thornton, J. M. (1993). PROCHECK: a program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures. J. Appl. Crystallog. 26, 283­ 291.

46. Nicholls, A., Sharp, K. A. & Honig, B. (1991). Protein folding and association: insights from the interfacial and thermodynamic properties of hydrocarbons. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 11, 281­ 296.

Edited by M. F. Summers (Received 10 December 2001; received in revised form 14 March 2002; accepted 18 March 2002)

