Vol. 22, No. 1, 1966

BIOCHEMICAL

AND BIOPHYSICAL RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS

COOPEFfATIVEINTERACTION RI!XWEW THE GTPRIRDINGSITRS OFGWl!AM4TRDERFDROGRtiASE+

Roberta F. CoSrmanand Carl Frieden Department of Riological Chemistry Uashington University School of Medicine St. lam, MISSOW 631.1.0

ReceivedNovember29,

1965 (GTP) is hnoun to inhibit to a specific the beef liver f&m the

Guanosine triphosphate glutamate active kinetic

dehydrogenase by binding

site distinct

site for coenzyme or substrates. studies (Frieden, 1963) indicates

Furthermore,

evidence from bound

that GTP is more tightly

to the enzyme in the presence than in the absence of the coenzymes, DPRH or TPNH. The present the binding vith study was undertaken in order to measure directly added DPNH for cctznparison studies. It was to enzyme

of %!-labeled

GTP with and without obtained

the dissociation

aonstants

from kinetic

observed that molecules homotropic observation not detected reaction

in the presence of coenzyme, GTP binds more readily

which already contain interaction was ccqletely in kinetic
1963).

bound GTP; that is, there IS cooperative
1965).

for GTP(Monod,WymanandChangeux, unexpected since such apparent studies using GTP as an inhibitor

This
is

interaction

of the enzymatic is to present dehydrogenase data at a

(Frieden,

The purpose of this

coimnunication

data concerning from the analysis single

the interaction of the binding

between GTP sites of glutamate curyes and fran sedimentation Observations concerning

high enzyme concentration.

the dependence ilao be discussed.

of the interaction

on the concentration

of the enzyme will

* This investigation was supported by U.S. Public Health Service Research Grant GM 081l?-og and by U.S. Public Health Service PosMnctoral. Fellowship a%? AM gg6-02 for one of US (R.F.c.).

100

Vol. 22, No. 1, 1966

BIOCHEMICAL

AND BIOPHYSICAL RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS

Experimental

- 'Guanosine 5'-triphosphate-8-%, Inc., Save a single

25 mc/maole radioactive

, obtained

from Schwarz RioResearch, paper chraaatography Sl@a Chemical Co.

spot on ascending IIIvas purchasedfran susto gel

in three solvents. Glufmmte

S-DPRR,Grade suppliedas

dehydroSenase, by E&ringer

a crystalline

pension in eumsonium sulfate filtration sulfate. conta.ining

and Soehne, was subjected

on a column of Sephadex ~-25, fine grade, to remove snmwnim The enzyme wasequilibrated with O.lM Tris acetate buffer, pR 7.15 the

0.1 mpll RDPA and 1 mM sodlurm phosphate. the experjntent.

Under these conditions

enzyme Is stable throughout indicated. adjustedto total The protein 2x&l.

GTP-8-%

and DPKR were added as reported here, was

concentration, Aliquots

in most experImenta

of these solutions

were used to measure the

concentration

of GTP in solution.

The~oteln,wLthboundGTP,was

separated ultracentrifu@ly et -- al. (1955).

from the free GTP at 2' by the method of Velick exhibited no enzymatZc activity
of radioactivity.

Al%quots of the supematauts

and were dried 011 metal planchets hclear

for determlnatlon

A

Chicago gas flow couuter was used and corrections

for self-absorption

were applied. The dissociation prevlously(Frleden, the bindlng studies constants for dP were determined buffer was 16". kinet1calJ.y as described

1963) exceptthatthe and the temperature

usedwas the saavz as that in

bind%ngofdPbyglutamate dehydroResults and Discussion - The dataforthe genase in the absence of DPRR was analysed graphically in accordance with the equation r/(GTP)free = n/K - r/K, where r -moles for GTP per protein of GTP bouud per ~,OOO+

grsans, n = number of sites

moxmner, and K = dissociation

+ The moleclllar weight of the ensymatkcally active monaner is believed to be hOO,OOO *25,ooO, eauewhathigherthanthe previouslyreportedvalue of 350,000 scattering, sedlment(Meden, 1965). The present value is derived fran II@ ation equilibrium aud sedimentation and viscosity studies (Colman and FYieden, Magar, 1965). Sinae the enzyme Is oauposed of polypeptide inweparatlon; chaiaa with amolecularwelghtagproximstely 5O,OOO(Jirgenson,1961~ Msrler and Tanford,ly6k),the eneymatically~tivemonomerpro~~contains eieht chains.

101

Vol. 22, No. 1, 1966

BIOCHEMICAL

AND BIOPHYSICAL RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS

constant valid

for the enzyme-@4!P courplex (Klotz, of a small molecule sites, yields

1953).

This equation, containing

which is multiple as a

for the binding

by a protein a linear plot

equivalent function

and independent of r.

of r/(GTP)free

From the data of Fig. IA it was determined

that glutsmate

dehyclrogenase in the absence of coensyme contains or approxixately one site per peptide chain.

8.9 sites per kOO,OGO grams conpredicted

The measured dissociation with the previously

stsnt is 1.86 x lo-= M. This cmnpares favorably kinetic value of l-2 x 10s5 M (Frieden, 1963).

32I -

0

2

4

r

6

6

2

4

r

6

8

vs r for glutamate dehydrogmase alone (A) Fig. 1. Plot of r/(CTCP)and for enzyme in the presence of rx 10'4 M DPDH (B). Experiments were See text for discussion performed at an enzyme concentration of 2 s&l. andother experimentalconditions.

Inthe ismore

presenue ofDPNE,the andtheplots

bindIng ofr/(UPP)*ee

of Ql'Pbyglutasmte

dehydrogenase shown

caplex

versus r are nonlinear,as

In Fig. I.D. results polated

TheseexperimhntsMreconduotedwifh400~D~,butsimiZar using I.00 to &Xl @I4DPNH. In all high omcentratloas tely8 binding case6, the extra-

were obtained

value at infinitaly

of QIP' (r/(CE6P)A.ae -0) mxleotide, of the plot of@PPwas con-

gaveavalueofapwoxUa the mmeas
indluates

sites for the purine nonllnearity

lnthe

absence of DPNE. Eiouwer,the

that the exkentofbinding

atlowconcentrations

102

Vol. 22, No. 1, 1966

BIOCHEMICAL

AND BIOPHYSICAL RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS

siderably

less than would be predicted by extrapolating

the values at high

concentrations sites. It

of GTP; that is there appeared to be cooperation between UIP plot of rz GTP(amlogousto a graph

should be notedthata reaetLon velocity" coefficient

of initial

ligand concentration) of 1.6 accordiq

would be si&u&d&l plot. concentratlou

with an it&era&ion

to a Hill

Analysis of the data of Fig. lB showsthat at this protein the dissociation the lImitins of 3 x lo-' samebuffer.

constaut for the enzyme-DPNE-G!FP cauplex (as obtained from lO-' M, which agrees well with the kinetic in the presence of DPNEIn the value

slope) is 4.1x

M derived fraa SIP inhibition

Addedcoensymethus strengthens the binding of Gl'Papp~oximately - 1.86 x l.O-'M), 1963).

45-fold as compared with bindIng by the enzyme slone (bP a result predicted previously

fran k%netlu studies (Frieden,

Support for the concept thatdifferentforms unequally canes framtheBPer~ationoftwodiscrctdpeaka ultracentrifuge saturating experiments fnvolvingthe

of the enzyme bind UTP inanalytical

eusyme,lOO yMD~andnon-

concentrations

of G!CP (Magar, 1565; Payley and Padda, 1965). It can be seen that there

Table I shows further

experiments of this type. increase inthe

is acorrelationbetweenthe

averagemoles ofG!PPbound

permoleoftotalproteinsndtheincreaseintheareaoftheslowpeak (13 S) or the corresponding decrease in the area of the fast peak (25 S). This correlatlonaswellasthe was bound Cufferentially existence oftwopeaks suggestedthat OTP

to the two species of the protein. cell (Yphantis and Waugh, 1956) in the

Using the moving boundary partition Spinco Model E Ultracentrifuge, prepsration total protein

the slow peak was separated fran an enzyme

to which ah average of 4.04 moles of GTPwere bound per mole of in the presence of 100 $AM DPNH. The measured #DPwas ccrrected of free GYPwhich had been determined in a separate enzyme conor 73%of con-

for the concentration experiment.

The slow peak, which represented 46s of the total 6.4 moles of bound GYP per mole of protein

tained approximately the total

bound @PP. It maybe calculated

that the fastpeakmusthave

103

Vol. 22, No. 1, 1966

BIOCHEMICAL

AND BIOPHYSICAL RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS

Unequal GTPBinding $o Different

Molecular Weight Species of Glutamate Dehydrogenase
T

Average Moles GTP Bound/ Moles Total Protein (= r) 0.0
1.24 1.96

Fast Peak Moles GTP Bound/ Mole Protein
0.0

Slow P rk Moles GTP Bound/ % Mole Protein Total Area*
0.0

1

1.0 2.0

5.2 6.4

4.04 5.72 7.48

* The areas given are only approximate (* 5%). They are not corrected for the Johnston-Ogston effect which should be small at this protein concentration (2 IQ&.) but would tend to produce a slow peak which was erroneously large (Schachman, 1959). Since glutamate dehydrogenase undergoes a reversible association reaction, the usual asynmetry of sedimentation was taken into account in calculating the area of the fast peak.

tained a maximum 2 moles of G!l!Pbound/mole protein. of

This unequal binding of the purine

of GTP, which has been confimed at several concentrations nucleotide indicates that GTPbinds more extensively

to enzyme molecules

molecules which already contain bound GTP. A certain ndnimumnumber of Q?XYP must be bound in order to cause dissociation single peak with a continuously been observed. It is of interest of the enzyme; otherwise a

decreasing sedimentation constant, would have that in the absence of coenzyme, where between GTP sites, only one peak is

there is no evidence of interaction observed in the ultracentrifuge It

on addition of GTP. of GTP

has been observed that the extent of apparent interaction

binding sites in the presence of coemyme is dependent on the concentration of the enzyme itself.
This

observation is currently

under investigation, becomes

but it is clear that at lower enzyme ccmcent>ations, the interaction

104

Vol. 22, No. 1, 1966

BIOCHEMICAL

AND BIOPHYSICAL RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS

less marked. The present data indicate used in kinetic within kinetic measurements, the effect

that at the extremely low concentration disappears or its magnitude falls

experimental error, behavior exhibited further is directly

thereby accounting for the normal (non-sigmoidal) when GTP is used as au inhibitor (Frieden,

1963).

In addition, interaction

experiments have shown that the extent of apparent related to the well knowu concentration reaction dependent

association-dissociation

of the enzyme. Thus the binding properties of the enzyme with respect to CH!P In this connection it is

and undoubtedly the kinetic sxe affected by the total

properties

protein concentration.

of importance to note that the concentration in the liver

of glutamate dehydrogenase properties frcm of

is quite high (>l mg/ap) and that the kinetic conditions may be very assays.

the enzyme under physiological

different

those measured in routine kinetic

This observation may be relevant association-

with respect to other enzyme systems which undergo reversible dissociation References reactions and to protein-protein interactions

iu general.

Bayley, P.M. and Radda, G. K., Biochem. J., in press. Frieden, C., J. Biol. Chem., Frieden, C., J. Biol. Chern., Jirgensons, B., J. ADI. Chem. Klotz, I.M., in The Proteins, Vol. IB, Ed. Neurath, H. and Bailey, K., Acad. Press, NT, 199, p. 771. Mzqm, M-E., Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 3, 275 (1965). Marler, E. and Tanford, C., J. Biol. Cham., a, 42l7 (1964). Monod, J.,. Wyman,J. and Changeux, J.P., J. Mol. Biol., l2, 88 (1965). Schachman, H.K., Ultracentrifugation in Biochemistry, Acad. Press, New York, 1959, P. u-6. Velick, S.F., Hayes, J.E., Jr. and Rarting, J., J. Biol. Chem., g, 527 (193). Yphsntis, D.A. and Waugh, D.F., J. Phys. Chem., 60, 630 (1956).

105

