Structure, Vol. 9, R93­R99, November, 2001, 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

PII S0969-2126(01)00677-3

Paper Alert

Chosen by Robert Liddington,1 Christin Frederick,2 Stephen D. Fuller,3 and Sophie Jackson4 1 Program on Cell Adhesion The Burnham Institute 10901 North Torrey Pines Road La Jolla, California 92037 2 Laboratory of X-ray Crystallography Dana-Farber Cancer Institute 44 Binney Street Boston, Massachusetts 02115 3 Division of Structural Biology Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics Henry Wellcome Building for Genomic Medicine Roosevelt Drive Headington, Oxford OX3 7BN United Kingdom 4 Department of Chemistry University of Cambridge Lensfield Road Cambridge CB2 1EW United Kingdom

that recognizes the 3 splice site and recruits the U2 snRNP to the branch point. The X-ray structure of the human core U2AF heterodimer, consisting of the U2AF35 central domain and a proline-rich region of ° U2AF65, has been determined at 2.2 A resolution. The structure reveals a novel protein-protein recognition strategy, in which an atypical RNA recognition motif (RRM) of U2AF35 and the U2AF65 polyproline segment interact via reciprocal "tongue-in-groove" tryptophan residues. Complementary biochemical experiments demonstrate that the core U2AF heterodimer binds RNA and that the interacting tryptophan side chains are essential for U2AF dimerization. Structural basis for autoinhibition of the EphB2 receptor tyrosine kinase by the unphosphorylated juxtamembrane region. Leanne E. Wybenga-Groot, Berivan Baskin, Siew Hwa Ong, Jiefei Tong, Tony Pawson, and Frank Sicheri (2001). Cell 106, 745­757. The Eph receptor tyrosine kinase family is regulated by autophosphorylation within the juxtamembrane region and the kinase activation segment. The authors have ° solved the X-ray crystal structure to 1.9 A resolution of an autoinhibited, unphosphorylated form of EphB2 comprised of the juxtamembrane region and the kinase domain. The structure, supported by mutagenesis data, reveals that the juxtamembrane segment adopts a helical conformation that distorts the small lobe of the kinase domain and blocks the activation segment from attaining an activated conformation. Phosphorylation of conserved juxtamembrane tyrosines would relieve this autoinhibition by disturbing the association of the juxtamembrane segment with the kinase domain while liberating phosphotyrosine sites for binding SH2 domains of target proteins. X-ray structure of junctional adhesion molecule: Structural basis for homophilic adhesion via a novel dimerization motif. Dirk Kostrewa, Manfred Brockhaus, Allan D'Arcy, Glenn E. Dale, Peter Nelboeck, Georg Schmid, Francis Mueller, Gianfranco Bazzoni, Elisabetta Dejana, Tamas Bartfai, Fritz K. Winkler, and Michael Hennig (2001). EMBO J. 20, 4391­4398. Junctional adhesion molecules (JAMs) are a family of single-span transmembrane molecules that may contribute to the adhesive function of tight junctions and regulate leukocyte trans migration. The crystal structure of the extracellular part of mouse JAM (rsJAM) reveals two immunoglobulin-like domains that are connected by a short rigid linker. Two rsJAM molecules form a U-shaped dimer with highly complementary interactions between the N-terminal domains. Two salt bridges are formed in a complementary manner by a conserved dimerization motif, R(V,I,L)E. Based on the crystal packing and studies with mutant rsJAM, a model for homophilic adhesion of JAM

A selection of interesting papers that were published in the month before our press date in major journals most likely to report significant results in structural biology, protein and RNA folding.

Crystal structure of LexA: A conformational switch for regulation of self-cleavage. Yu Luo, Richard A. Pfuetzner, Steve Mosimann, Mark Paetzel, Elizabeth A. Frey, Maia Cherney, Baek Kim, John W. Little, and Natalie C.J. Strynadka (2001). Cell 106, 585­594. LexA repressor undergoes a self-cleavage reaction. In vivo, this reaction requires an activated form of RecA, but it occurs spontaneously in vitro at high pH. Accordingly, LexA must both allow self-cleavage and yet prevent this reaction in the absence of a stimulus. The authors have solved the crystal structures of several mutant forms of LexA. Strikingly, two distinct conformations are observed, one compatible with cleavage, ° and the other in which the cleavage site is 20 A from the catalytic center. This analysis provides insight into the structural and energetic features that modulate the interconversion between these two forms and hence the rate of the self-cleavage reaction. A novel peptide recognition mode revealed by the X-ray structure of a core U2AF35/ U2AF65 heterodimer. Clara L. Kielkopf, Natalia A. Rodionova, Michael R. Green, and Stephen K. Burley (2001). Cell 106, 595­605. U2 auxiliary factor (U2AF) is an essential splicing factor

Structure R94

is proposed, in which U-shaped JAM dimers are oriented in cis on the cell surface and form a two-dimensional network by trans-interactions of their N-terminal domains with JAM dimers from an opposite cell surface. Solution structure of the constant region of nuclear envelope protein LAP2reveals two LEM-domain structures: One binds BAF and the other binds DNA. Mengli Cai, Ying Huang, Rodolfo Ghirlando, Katherine L. Wilson, Robert Craigie, and G. Marius Clore (2001). EMBO J. 20, 4399­4407. The nuclear envelope proteins LAP2, emerin, and MAN1 share a conserved 40-residue "LEM" motif. The solution structure of the constant region of human LAP2 reveals two non-interacting domains comprising residues 1­50 ("LAP2-N") and 111­152 (LEM-domain) connected by a 60-residue flexible linker. The two domains are similar, comprising a helical turn followed by two helices connected by an 11­12-residue loop. Chemical shift mapping demonstrates that the LEM-domain binds BAF (barrier-to-autointegration factor), whereas LAP2-N binds DNA. Both binding surfaces comprise helix 1, the N terminus of helix 2, and the inter-helical loop. Binding selectivity is determined by the nature of the surface residues in these binding sites, which are predominantly positively charged for LAP2-N and hydrophobic for the LEM-domain. Crystal structure of the outer membrane protease OmpT from Escherichia coli suggests a novel catalytic site. Lucy Vandeputte-Rutten, R. Arjen Kramer, Jan Kroon, Niek Dekker, Maarten R. Egmond, and Piet Gros (2001). EMBO J. 20, 5033­5039. OmpT from Escherichia coli belongs to a family of homologous outer membrane proteases, known as omptins, which are implicated in the virulence of several pathogenic Gram-negative bacteria. The crystal structure of OmpT shows a 10-stranded antiparallel -barrel that protrudes far from the lipid bilayer into the extracellular space. The proteolytic site is located in a groove at the extracellular top of the vase-shaped -barrel. A novel proteolytic mechanism, involving a His­Asp dyad and an Asp­Asp couple that activate a putative nucleophilic water molecule, is proposed. Structure of the yeast nucleosome core particle reveals fundamental changes in internucleosome interactions. Cindy L. White, Robert K. Suto, and Karolin Luger (2001). EMBO J. 20, 5207­5218. Chromatin is composed of nucleosomes, the universally repeating protein­DNA complex in eukaryotic cells. The crystal structure of the nucleosome core particle from Saccharomyces cerevisiae reveals that the structure and function of this fundamental complex is conserved between single-cell organisms and metazoans. Minor sequence variations lead to dramatic changes in the way in which nucleosomes pack against each other with-

in the crystal lattice. This has important implications for our understanding of the formation of higher order chromatin structure and its modulation by post-translational modifications. The structure of an AspRS­tRNAAsp complex reveals a tRNA-dependent control mechanism. L. Moulinier, S. Eiler, G. Eriani, J. Gangloff, J.-C. Thierry, K. Gabriel, W.H. McClain, and D. Moras (2001). EMBO J. 20, 5290­5301. The crystal structure of an inactive complex between yeast tRNAAsp and Escherichia coli aspartyl-tRNA synthetase reveals the molecular details of a tRNAinduced mechanism that controls the specificity of the reaction. The dimer is asymmetric, with only one of the two bound tRNAs entering the active site cleft of its subunit. However, the flipping loop, which controls the proper positioning of the amino acid substrate, acts as a lid and prevents the correct positioning of the terminal adenosine. The structure suggests that the acceptor stem regulates the loop movement through sugar phosphate backbone-protein interactions. The structure of an alternative form of Paracoccus pantotrophus cytochrome cd1 nitrite reductase. Tove Sjogren and Janos Hajdu ¨ (2001). J. Biol. Chem. 276, 29450­29455. Cytochrome cd1 nitrite reductase is a bifunctional enzyme that catalyzes the 1-electron reduction of nitrite to nitric oxide and the 4-electron reduction of dioxygen to water. Reduced nitrite reductase crystallized under anaerobic conditions reveals substantial domain rearrangements, ° with the c domain rotated by 60 and shifted by 20 A compared with crystals grown under oxidizing conditions. This alternative conformation gives rise to different electron transfer routes between the c and d1 domains and points to the involvement of elements of very large structural changes in the function in this enzyme. The crystal structure of tetanus toxin Hc fragment complexed with a synthetic GT1b analog suggests cross-linking between ganglioside receptors and the toxin. Constantina Fotinou, Paul Emsley, Isobel Black, Hiromune Ando, Hideharu Ishida, Makoto Kiso, Katharine A. Sinha, Neil F. Fairweather, and Neil W. Isaacs (2001). J. Biol. Chem. 276, 32274­32281. Tetanus toxin, a member of the family of Clostridial neurotoxins, is one of the most potent toxins known. The crystal structure of the complex of the COOH-terminal fragment of the heavy chain with an analog of its ganglioside receptor, GT1b, provides the first direct identification and characterization of the ganglioside binding sites. The ganglioside induces cross-linking by binding to two distinct sites on the Hc molecule. The structure sheds new light on the binding of Clostridial neurotoxins to receptors on neuronal cells and provides important information relevant to the design of antitetanus and anti-botulism therapeutic agents.

Paper Alert R95

Structure and mechanism of the RuvB Holliday junction branch migration motor. Christopher D. Putnam, Sheila B. Clancy, Hiro Tsuruta, Susana Gonzalez, James G. Wetmur, and John A. Tainer (2001). J. Mol. Biol. 311, 297­310. Published online before print as 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4852. The RuvB hexamer is the chemomechanical motor of the RuvAB complex that migrates Holliday junction branchpoints in DNA recombination and the rescue of stalled DNA replication forks. The crystal structure of Thermotoga maritima RuvB together with five mutant structures reveal that RuvB is an "ATPase-associated with diverse cellular activities" (AAA -class ATPase) with a wingedhelix DNA binding domain. The RuvB-ADP complex structure and mutagenesis suggest how AAA -class ATPases couple nucleotide binding and hydrolysis to interdomain conformational changes and asymmetry within the RuvB hexamer. Mechanisms for ligand binding to GluR0 ion channels: crystal structures of the glutamate and serine complexes and a closed apo state. Mark L. Mayer, Rich Olson, and Eric Gouaux (2001). J. Mol. Biol. 311, 815­836. Published online before print as 10.1006/ jmbi.2001.4884 Crystal structures of the ligand binding core of GluR0, a glutamate receptor ion channel from Synechocystis PCC 6803, reveal homology with bacterial periplasmic binding proteins and the rat GluR2 AMPA subtype neurotransmitter receptor. The ligand binding site is formed by a cleft between two globular / domains. L-glutamate binds in an extended conformation, similar to that observed for glutamine binding protein (GlnBP). However, the L-glutamate carboxyl group interacts exclusively with Asn51 in domain 1, different from the interactions of ligand with domain 2 residues observed for GluR2 and GlnBP. A symmetrical dimer involving residues in domain 1 occurs along a crystallographic 2-fold axis and suggests that tetrameric glutamate receptor ion channels are assembled from dimers of dimers. The authors propose that ligand-induced conformational changes cause the ion channel to open as a result of an increase in domain 2 separation relative to the dimer interface. Solution structure and dynamics of yeast elongin c in complex with a von HippelLindau peptide. Maria Victoria Botuyan, Georges Mer, Gwan-Su Yi, Christopher M. Koth, David A. Case, Aled M. Edwards, Walter J. Chazin, and Cheryl H. Arrowsmith (2001). J. Mol. Biol. 312, 177­186. Published online before print as 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4938. Elongin is a transcription elongation factor that stimulates the rate of elongation by suppressing transient pausing by RNA polymerase II at many sites along the DNA. It is heterotrimeric in mammals, consisting of elongins A, B and C subunits. A subcomplex of elongins B and C is a

target for negative regulation by the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor-suppressor protein. Elongin C from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Elc1, exhibits high sequence similarity to mammalian elongin C. The solution structure of Elc1 in complex with a human VHL peptide, VHL(157­171) shows that the bound VHL peptide is helical and engages Elc1 via a groove formed by two C-terminal helices, and an intervening loop A global conformational change accompanies Elc1/VHL(157-171) complex formation. On the relationship between protein stability and folding kinetics: A comparative study of the N-terminal domains of RNase HI, E. coli and Bacillus stearothermophilus L9. Satoshi Sato, Song Xiang, and Daniel P. Raleigh (2001). J. Mol. Biol. 312, 569­577. There is currently a great deal of interest in proteins that fold in a single highly cooperative step. Particular attention has been focused on elucidating the factors that govern folding rates of simple proteins. Recently, the topology of the native state has been proposed to be the most important determinant of their folding rates. Here we report a comparative study of the folding of three topologically equivalent proteins that adapt a particularly simple / fold. The folding kinetics of the N-terminal domain of RNase HI and the N-terminal domain of the ribosomal protein L9 from Escherichia coli (eNTL9) were compared to the previously characterized N-terminal domain of L9 from Bacillus stearothermophilus (bNTL9). This 6.2 kDa protein, which is one of simplest examples of the ABCD motif, folds via a two-state mechanism on the millisecond to submillisecond time scale. The RNase HI domain and bNTL9 have very similar tertiary structures but there is little similarity in primary sequence. bNTL9 and eNTL9 share the same biological function and a similar primary sequence but differ significantly in stability. Fluorescence-detected stoppedflow experiments showed that the three proteins fold in a two-state fashion. The folding rates in the absence of denaturant were found to be very different, ranging form 21 s 1 to 790 s 1 at 10 C. The diverse folding rates appear to reflect large differences in the stability of the proteins. When compared at an isostability point, the folding rates converged to a similar value and there is a strong linear correlation between the log of the folding rate and stability for this set of proteins. These observations are consistent with the idea that stability can play an important role in dictating relative folding rates among topologically equivalent proteins. Unusual molecular architecture of the Yersinia pestis cytotoxin YopM: A leucine-rich repeat protein with the shortest repeating unit. Artem G. Evdokimov, D. Eric Anderson, Karen M. Routzahn, and David S. Waugh (2001). J. Mol. Biol. 312, 807­821. Published online before print as 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4973. Many Gram-negative bacterial pathogens employ a contact-dependent secretion system to deliver effector proteins into the cytosol of animal or plant cells. YopM, a member of the leucine-rich repeat protein superfamily,

Structure R96

is an effector produced by the bubonic plague bacterium, Yersinia pestis. The crystal structure of YopM shows that among all leucine-rich repeat family members whose structures are known, the repeating unit of YopM has the least canonical secondary structure. In both crystals, four YopM monomers form a hollow cylinder ° with an inner diameter of 35 A. The domain that targets YopM for translocation into eukaryotic cells adopts a well-ordered, -helical conformation that packs tightly against the proximal leucine-rich repeat module. Acidic conditions stabilize intermediates populated during the folding of Im7 and Im9. Stanislaw A. Gorski, Andrew P. Capaldi, Colin Kleanthous, and Sheena E. Radford (2001). J. Mol. Biol. 312, 849­863. The helical bacterial immunity proteins Im7 and Im9 have been shown to fold via kinetic mechanisms of differing complexity, despite having 60% sequence identity. At pH 7.0 and 10 C, Im7 folds in a three-state mechanism involving an on-pathway intermediate, while Im9 folds in an apparent two-state transition. In order to examine the folding mechanisms of these proteins in more detail, the folding kinetics of both Im7 and Im9 (at 10 C in 0.4 M sodium sulfate) have been examined as a function of pH. Kinetic modeling of the folding and unfolding data for Im7 between pH 5.0 and 8.0 shows that the onpathway intermediate is stabilized by more acidic conditions, while the native state is destabilized. The opposing effect of pH on the stability of these states results in a significant population of the intermediate at equilibrium at pH 6.0 and below. At pH 7.0, the folding and unfolding kinetics for Im9 can be fitted adequately by a two-state model, in accord with previous results. However, under acidic conditions there is a clear change of slope in the plot of the logarithm of the folding rate constant versus denaturant concentration, consistent with the population of one or more intermediate(s) early during folding. The kinetic data for Im9 at these pH values can be fitted to a three-state model, where the intermediate ensemble is stabilized and the native state destabilized as the pH is reduced, providing rationalization for previous results that showed that an intermediate is not observed experimentally at pH 7.0. The data suggest that intermediate formation is a general step in immunity protein folding and demonstrate that it is necessary to explore a wide range of refolding conditions in order to show that intermediates do not form in the folding of other small, single-domain proteins. Dynamic regimes and correlated structural dynamics in native and denatured -lactalbumin. Zimei Bu, Jeremy Cook, and David J. E. Callaway (2001). J. Mol. Biol. 312, 865­873. Understanding the mechanisms of protein folding requires knowledge of both the energy landscape and the structural dynamics of a protein. We report a neutronscattering study of the nanosecond and picosecond dynamics of native and the denatured -lactalbumin. The quasielastic scattering intensity shows that there are -helical structure and tertiary-like side-chain interactions

fluctuating on sub-nanosecond time-scales under extremely denaturing conditions and even in the absence of disulfide bonds. Based on the length-scale dependence of the decay rate of the measured correlation functions, the nanosecond dynamics of the native and the variously denatured proteins have three ° dynamic regimes. When 0.05 Q 0.5 A 1 (where the scattering vector, Q, is inversely proportional to the length scale), the decay rate, , shows a power law relationship, Q2.42 0.08, that is analogous to the dynamic behavior of a random coil. However, when 0.5 ° Q1.0 0.2 Q 1.0 A 1, the decay rate exhibits a relationship. The effective diffusion constant of the protein decreases with increasing Q, a striking dynamic behavior that is not found in any chain-like macromolecule. We suggest that these unusual dynamics are due to the presence of a strongly attractive force and collective conformational fluctuations in both the native and the denatured states of the protein. Above Q ° 1.0 A 1 is a regime that displays the local dynamic behavior of individual residues, Q1.8 0.3. The picosecond time-scale dynamics show that the potential barrier to side-chain proton jump motion is reduced in the molten globule and in the denatured proteins when compared to that of the native protein. Our results provide a dynamic view of the native-like topology established in the early stages of protein folding. The structure of calnexin, an ER chaperone involved in quality control of protein folding. Joseph D. Schrag, John J.M. Bergeron, Yunge Li, Svetlana Borisova, Michael Hahn, David Y. Thomas, and Miroslaw Cygler (2001). Mol. Cell 8, 633­644. The three-dimensional structure of the lumenal domain ° of the lectin-like chaperone calnexin determined to 2.9 A ° resolution reveals an extended 140 A arm inserted into a [ ] sandwich structure characteristic of legume lectins. The arm is composed of tandem repeats of two prolinerich sequence motifs which interact with one another in a head-to-tail fashion. Identification of the ligand binding site establishes calnexin as a monovalent lectin, providing insight into the mechanism by which the calnexin family of chaperones interacts with monoglucosylated glycoproteins. Structure of the Ku heterodimer bound to DNA and its implications for double-strand break repair. John R. Walker, Richard A. Corpina, and Jonathan Goldberg (2001). Nature 412, 607­614. The Ku heterodimer (Ku70 and Ku80 subunits) contributes to genomic integrity through its ability to bind DNA double-strand breaks and facilitate repair by the non-homologous end-joining pathway. The crystal structure of the human Ku heterodimer was determined both alone and bound to a 55-nucleotide DNA element. Ku70 and Ku80 share a common topology and form a dyadsymmetrical molecule with a preformed ring that encircles duplex DNA. The binding site can cradle two full turns of DNA while encircling only the central 3­4 base pairs

Paper Alert R97

(bp). Ku makes no contacts with DNA bases and few with the sugar-phosphate backbone, but it fits sterically to major and minor groove contours so as to position the DNA helix in a defined path through the protein ring. These features seem well designed to structurally support broken DNA ends and to bring the DNA helix into phase across the junction during end processing and ligation. Prokaryotic origin of the actin cytoskeleton. Fusinita Van Den Ent, Linda A. Amos, and Jan Lowe (2001). Nature 413, 39­44. ¨ It was thought until recently that bacteria lack the actin or tubulin filament networks that organize eukaryotic cytoplasm. However, the authors show here that the bacterial MreB protein assembles into filaments with a subunit repeat similar to that of F-actin--the physiological polymer of eukaryotic actin. The MreB crystal structure demonstrates that MreB and actin are very similar in three dimensions. Moreover, the crystals contain protofilaments, allowing visualization of actinlike strands at atomic resolution. The structure of the MreB protofilament is in remarkably good agreement with the model for F-actin, showing that the proteins assemble in identical orientations. Thus, prokaryotes are now known to possess homologs both of tubulin (FtsZ) and actin. Quantitative protein stability measurement in vivo. Sina Ghaemmaghami and Terrence G. Oas (2001). Nat. Struct. Biol. 8, 879­882. The equilibrium between the native and denatured states of a protein can be key to its function and regulation. Traditionally, the folding equilibrium constant has been measured in vitro using purified protein and simple buffers. However, the biological environment of proteins can differ from these in vitro conditions in ways that could significantly perturb stability. Here, we present the first quantitative comparison between the stability of a protein in vitro and in the cytoplasm of Eschericia coli using amide hydrogen exchange detected by MALDI mass spectrometry (SUPREX). The results indicate that the thermodynamic stability of monomeric repressor within the cell is the same as its stability measured in a simple buffer in vitro. However, when the E. coli are placed in a hyperosmotic environment, the in vivo stability is greatly enhanced. The in vivo SUPREX method provides a general and quantitative way to measure protein stabilities in the cell and will be useful for applications where intracellular stability information provides important biological insights. Observation of signal transduction in threedimensional domain swapping. Joost W.H. Schymkowitz, Frederic Rousseau, Hannah R. Wilkinson, Assaf Friedler, and Laura S. Itzhaki (2001). Nat. Struct. Biol. 8, 888­892. p13suc1 (suc1) has two native states, a monomer and a domain-swapped dimer. The structure of each subunit in the dimer is identical to that of the monomer, except

for the hinge loop that connects the exchanging domains. Here we find that single point mutations at sites throughout the protein and ligand binding both shift the position of the equilibrium between monomer and dimer. The hinge loop was shown previously to act as a loaded molecular spring that releases tension present in the monomer by adopting an alternative conformation in the dimer. The results here indicate that the release of strain propagates throughout the entire protein and alters the energetics of regions remote from the hinge. Our data illustrate how the signal conferred by the conformational change of a protein loop, elicited by domain swapping, ligand binding or mutation, can be sensed by a distant active site. This work highlights the potential role of strained loops in proteins; the energy they store can be used for both signal transduction and allostery, and they could steer the evolution of protein function. Finally, a structural mechanism for the role of suc1 as an adaptor molecule is proposed. Crystal structure of the human CD4 N-terminal two-domain fragment complexed to a class II MHC molecule. Jia-huai Wang, Rob Meijers, Yi Xiong, Jin-huan Liu, Toshiko Sakihama, Rongguang Zhang, Andrzej Joachimiak, and Ellis L. Reinherz (2001). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 10799­10804. Published online before print as 10.1073/ pnas.191124098. The structural basis of the interaction between the CD4 coreceptor and a class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is described. The crystal structure of a complex containing the human CD4 N-terminal twodomain fragment and the murine I-Ak class II MHC molecule with associated peptide (pMHCII) shows that only the "top corner" of the CD4 molecule directly contacts pMHCII. The CD4 Phe-43 side chain extends into a hydrophobic concavity formed by MHC residues from both 2 and 2 domains. A ternary model of the CD4-pMHCII-T cell receptor (TCR) reveals that the complex appears V-shaped with the membrane-proximal pMHCII at the apex. This configuration excludes a direct TCR-CD4 interaction and suggests how TCR and CD4 signaling is coordinated around the antigenic pMHCII complex. Crystal structure of human PEDF, a potent antiangiogenic and neurite growth-promoting factor. Miljan Simonovic, Peter G.W. Gettins, and Karl Volz (2001). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 11131­11135. Published online before print as 10.1073/pnas.211268598. Pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), a noninhibitory member of the serpin superfamily, is the most potent inhibitor of angiogenesis in the mammalian ocular compartment. It also has neurotrophic activity, both in the retina and in the central nervous system, and is highly up-regulated in young versus senescent fibroblasts. The authors have solved the crystal struc° ture of glycosylated human PEDF to 2.85 A. The structure revealed the organization of possible receptor and heparin binding sites and showed that, unlike any

Structure R98

other previously characterized serpin, PEDF has a striking asymmetric charge distribution that might be of functional importance. Crystal structure of the quorum-sensing protein LuxS reveals a catalytic metal site. Mark T. Hilgers and Martha L. Ludwig (2001). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 11169­11174. Published online before print as 10.1073/ pnas.191223098. The ability of bacteria to regulate gene expression in response to changes in cell density is termed quorum sensing. This behavior involves the synthesis and recognition of extracellular, hormone-like compounds known as autoinducers. The authors report the structure of an autoinducer synthase, LuxS from Bacillus subtilis, ° at 1.6-A resolution. LuxS is a homodimeric enzyme with a novel fold that incorporates two identical tetrahedral metal binding sites. This metal center is composed of a Zn2 atom coordinated by two histidines, a cysteine, and a solvent molecule and is reminiscent of active sites found in several peptidases and amidases. X-ray structures of H5 avian and H9 swine influenza virus hemagglutinins bound to avian and human receptor analogs. Ya Ha, David J. Stevens, John J. Skehel, and Don C. Wiley (2001). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 11181­11186. Published online before print as 10.1073/pnas.201401198. The three-dimensional structures of avian H5 and swine H9 influenza hemagglutinins (HAs) from viruses closely related to those that caused outbreaks of human disease in Hong Kong in 1997 and 1999 were determined bound to avian and human cell receptor analogs. The four new structures show that HA binding sites specific for human receptors appear to be wider than those preferring avian receptors and how avian and human receptors are distinguished by atomic contacts at the glycosidic linkage. Structure of rat BCKD kinase: Nucleotideinduced domain communication in a mitochondrial protein kinase. Mischa Machius, Jacinta L. Chuang, R. Max Wynn, Diana R. Tomchick, and David T. Chuang (2001). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 11218­11223. Published online before print as 10.1073/ pnas.201220098. Mitochondrial protein kinases (mPKs) are molecular switches that down-regulate the oxidation of branchedchain -ketoacids and pyruvate. Elevated levels of these metabolites are implicated in disease states such as insulin-resistant Type II diabetes, branched-chain ketoaciduria, and primary lactic acidosis. The authors report a three-dimensional structure of a member of the mPK family, rat branched-chain -ketoacid dehydrogenase kinase (BCK). BCK features a characteristic nucleotide binding domain and a four-helix bundle domain. These

two domains are reminiscent of modules found in protein histidine kinases (PHKs), which are involved in two-component signal transduction systems. Unlike PHKs, BCK dimerizes through direct interaction of two opposing nucleotide binding domains. Nucleotide binding to BCK is uniquely mediated by both potassium and magnesium. Binding of ATP induces disorder-order transitions in a loop region at the nucleotide binding site.

Structure of MsbA from E. coli: A homolog of the multidrug resistance ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporters. Geoffrey Chang and Christopher B. Roth (2001). Science 293, 1793­1800. ABC transporters that are associated with multidrug resistance (MDR-ABC transporters) translocate hydrophobic drugs and lipids from the inner to the outer leaflet of the cell membrane. The authors have determined the structure of the lipid flippase MsbA from Escherichia coli by X-ray crystallography to a resolution of 4.5 angstroms. MsbA is organized as a homodimer with each subunit containing six transmembrane -helices and a nucleotide binding domain. The asymmetric distribution of charged residues lining a central chamber suggests a general mechanism for the translocation of substrate by MsbA and other MDR-ABC transporters. The structure of MsbA can serve as a model for the MDR-ABC transporters that confer multidrug resistance to cancer cells and infectious microorganisms.

Crystal structure of maltose phosphorylase from Lactobacillus brevis: Unexpected evolutionary relationship with glucoamylases. Marie-Pierre Egloff, Jonas Uppenberg, Lutz Haalck, and Herman van Tilbeurgh (2001). Structure 9, 689­697. Maltose phosphorylase (MP) is a dimeric enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of maltose and inorganic phosphate into -D-glucose-1-phosphate and glucose without requiring any cofactors, such as pyridoxal phosphate. The crystal structure of the MP from Lactobacillus brevis in complex with the cosubstrate phosphate consists of an N-terminal complex sandwich domain, a helical linker, an ( / )6 barrel catalytic domain, and a C-terminal sheet domain. The ( / ) barrel is unexpectedly similar to the catalytic domain of glucoamylase from Aspergillus awamori. The phosphate ion is bound in a pocket facing the carboxylate of Glu487 and is well positioned for nucleophilic attack of the anomeric carbon atom. These observations suggest that maltose phosphorylase has evolved from glucoamylase.

Glycerol dehydrogenase: Structure, specificity, and mechanism of a family III polyol dehydrogenase. Sergey N. Ruzheinikov, Jacky Burke, Sveta Sedelnikova, Patrick J. Baker, Robert Taylor, Per A. Bullough, Nicola M. Muir, Michael G. Gore, and David W. Rice (2001). Structure 9, 789­802.

Paper Alert R99

Bacillus stearothermophilus glycerol dehydrogenase (GlyDH) catalyzes the oxidation of glycerol to dihydroxyacetone (1,3-dihydroxypropanone). The active site of GlyDH lies in the cleft between the enzyme's two domains, with a catalytic zinc ion playing a role in stabilizing an alkoxide intermediate. The structure further reveals an unexpected similarity to dehydroquinate synthase, providing a striking example of divergent evolution. The NAD binding domain of GlyDH may be related to that of the classical Rossmann fold by switching the sequence order of the two mononucleotide binding folds that make up this domain.

