Advanced Powder Technology 20 (2009) 273­279

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Advanced Powder Technology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/apt

Original Research Paper

Temperature responsive polymers as multiple function reagents in mineral processing
George V. Franks a,*, Haihong Li b, John-Paul O'Shea a, Greg G. Qiao a
a b

Australian Mineral Science Research Institute, Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Melbourne, Vic 3010, Australia Alberta Research Council, Edmonton, AB, Canada

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t
A processing scheme which uses a single chemical that has multiple functions to achieve both efficient mineral flotation and solids dewatering is presented. Temperature sensitive polymers which display hydrophilic/hydrophobic transitions in response to changes in temperature such as poly (N-isopropyl acrylamide) (PNIPAM) have been found to be useful as such multiple function reagents. This polymer can cause the mineral particles' surfaces to be hydrophilic at temperature below the critical solution temperature (CST = 32 °C) and hydrophobic at temperature above the CST. Therefore, both particle surface wettability and inter-particle interaction forces are reversibly controllable. When the surface is hydrophilic, particle dispersion is achieved by repulsive inter-particle forces whereas when the surface is hydrophobic, particle aggregation is induced by inter-particle hydrophobic attractive forces. In addition, the hydrophobic surface condition allows for the attachment of particles to bubbles. Flotation and solid settling tests have been conducted with silica and kaolinite suspensions treated with (PNIPAM). Both effective suspension dispersion or hydrophobic aggregation and flotation without any additional collector have been demonstrated. In solid/liquid separation, rapid settling was obtained with hydrophobic aggregation at temperature above the CST and further sediment consolidation (and water release) occurred at temperature below the CST. The approach has the potential to reduce the amount and types of reagents required for mineral processing. Ó 2009 The Society of Powder Technology Japan. Published by Elsevier BV and The Society of Powder Technology Japan. All rights reserved.

Article history: Received 15 December 2008 Received in revised form 11 February 2009 Accepted 23 February 2009

Keywords: Flocculation Flotation Inter-particle forces Mineral processing Responsive polymers

1. Introduction In the mineral and other industries it is common practice for fine solid particles to be aggregated to allow more rapid settling and easy removal of the solids by gravity [1­3]. This process is achieved in most cases by the addition of a high molecular weight polymer called a flocculant. In fact, the desired or the ultimate goal in treating mineral tailings is to obtain a rapid sedimentation plus minimum moisture content in the sediment consolidation from an economic and environment point of view. Unfortunately, current solids dewatering focuses mainly on sedimentation optimization with little consideration of consolidation. When using conventional polymeric flocculants such as polyacrylamide (PAM), a large amount of water is found trapped within the flocs and sediments. This has an adverse effect on the water release during the stage of sediment consolidation and filtration [4]. Poly (N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) is a temperature responsive polymer. At temperature below its critical solution temperature (CST 32 °C) [5­7], PNIPAM is soluble in water and
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +61 3 8344 9020; fax: +61 3 8344 4153. E-mail address: gvfranks@unimelb.edu.au (G.V. Franks).

hydrophilic. At temperature above the CST, the polymer becomes hydrophobic and insoluble in water. It has been investigated for use as a temperature responsive flocculant [7­12] at temperature above the CST. It can be used as a reversibly responsive flocculant and dispersant [7,13]. The reversibility of the state of aggregation and dispersion can be used to produce both rapid sedimentation (at temperature above the CST) and enhance sediment consolidation and dewatering (at temperature below the CST) [13­17]. The inter-particle forces are changed from repulsive to attractive to form aggregates at high temperature and after the flocs settle, the temperature is reduced which produces repulsion between particles as the polymer becomes hydrophilic. In the new teaching [13], the change of inter-particle force to repulsion allows the sediment to consolidate more under its own weight which releases additional water. The sediment should not be disturbed once the temperature is reduced [13] otherwise the suspension will re-disperse as has been reported previously [7,8]. This new approach (cooling to improve consolidation) [13,17] appears to be more effective than prior research into non-charged PNIPAM which suggests poor consolidation resulted with non-charged PNIPAM at temperature above the CST [8]. It is somewhat difficult to directly compare the consolidation results of our group [11­15] to that of

0921-8831/$ - see front matter Ó 2009 The Society of Powder Technology Japan. Published by Elsevier BV and The Society of Powder Technology Japan. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.apt.2009.02.002

274

G.V. Franks et al. / Advanced Powder Technology 20 (2009) 273­279

the Sakohara group [7­9] because we did not employ the same plunger technique used in their work; furthermore their results were presented after only 30 min sedimentation, while most of our results are typically after 24 h. Once optimized for a particular system, the use of temperature responsive polymers promises to both improve water recovery and recycle as well as minimise the volume of tailings in the mineral processing industry. During development of PNIPAM as a temperature responsive flocculant and consolidation aid, it was noticed, that when the polymer was in the hydrophobic state (T > CST) and the suspension was shaken, a stable foam containing particles resulted [18­20]. Based on this observation, further research presented in this paper has been carried out with the target to develop a novel process strategy that uses responsive polymers for both mineral flotation and tailings treatment. The aim of this paper is to show that PNIPAM can act as a multiple function mineral processing reagent. It will be shown that it can induce hydrophobic aggregation at temperature above the CST and act as a flotation collector. The hydrophobic flocs attach to air bubbles much more efficiently than individual particles due to the increased hydrophobicity and particle size (of flocs). Afterwards, in solids dewatering, a rapid settling rate is achieved by maintaining the condition in the state which produces hydrophobic attraction between the particles (T > CST) [21]. Finally, sediment consolidation and water recovery is achieved by changing the stimuli to let the polymer induce repulsive particle interactions (T < CST). This new concept of using stimulant responsive flocculants as multiple function reagents in both flotation and tailings treatment considered holistically instead of in isolation has the potential of improving mineral recovery, improving dewatering and reducing the quantities and variety of chemical reagents required.

6.0 ± 0.2. Polymer dosages were chosen to the total suspension volume. After filled with suspension, the cylinder was sealed with a parafilm sealing film and gently shaken upside down several times to mix the polymer into the suspension. As soon as the cylinder was placed on a flat solid surface, the settling test began and no further disturbances were allowed. The descent of the solids/liquid interface (mud line) was carefully observed and recorded as a function of settling time. The slope of the settling curve at time zero was obtained as the initial settling rate. To investigate the performance of PNIPAM at temperatures below and above the critical transition temperature (CST around 32 °C), each settling test was conducted at two temperatures, room temperature (near 22 °C) and a temperature higher than the CST (unless otherwise noted, at 50 °C). The settling test was first conducted at room temperature for 24 h. The particles were then re-dispersed by shaking the cylinder again and immersed into a water bath with controlled temperature higher than CST for 5 min to warm up. After 5 min, the cylinder was gently shaken upside down several times and was put back into the water bath and the settling test at the pre-set temperature (unless otherwise noted, 50 °C) started immediately. 2.4. Consolidation tests After 2 h of settling at 50 °C the sediment volume reached an apparent equilibrium and the sediment volume was recorded. The cylinder was taken out of the water bath and allowed to cool down to room temperature. The height of the sediment/solution interface was monitored for 24 h until another apparent equilibrium was noticed where no additional consolidation was observed. This final sediment volume was also recorded. The final sediment density (volume fraction of solids) was determined by conservation of mass based on the relationship:

2. Experimental 2.1. Minerals Silica and kaolinite were investigated. A silica powder (Silica 400G, >98% pure) was obtained from Unimin Australia Limited. It has a density of 2.62 g/cm3. The particle size distribution is about 53% minus 10 lm. A pure kaolinite (Snobrite 55) sample (kaolinite 98%) was also obtained from Unimin Australia. It has a median particle size of 0.7 lm, 94.5% minus 10 lm. The particle density is 2.60 and the surface area is 16 m2/g. 2.2. Polymers The temperature-sensitive polymer, poly (N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM), with different molecular weights were synthesised as described elsewhere [14]. All polymers were dissolved in distilled reverse osmosis treated water at room temperature and at pH 6.0 as a 0.1 wt% solution. The polymer has a critical solution temperature (CST) of 32 °C [7], at higher temperatures the polymer becomes insoluble. A cationic commercial Ciba ZETAG polyacrylamide (PAM) flocculant was tested at a 0.1 wt% solution with deionised water at pH 6.0. 2.3. Settling tests Settling tests were carried out in 100-ml glass cylinders at a number of combinations of polymer molecular weight and dosage. For each settling test, the solid suspension was prepared with 5 g mineral sample and distilled reverse osmosis treated water containing 0.01 M NaNO3. The appropriate amount of polymer solution (0.1 wt%) was added to make a final suspension concentration of 5 wt% solids. The pH value of the suspension was

/init hinit ¼ /fin hfin

ð1Þ

where /init and hinit are the initial volume fraction of solids and suspension height and /fin and hfin are the final volume fraction of solids and suspension height. To evaluate the polymer performance on sediment consolidation, the water release percentage was calculated based on the sediment volume changes recorded at 50 °C and 22 °C:

Release ¼

ðV 50 À V 22 Þ Â 100 V 50

ð2Þ

where V50 is the sediment volume at 50 °C and V22 is the volume at 22 °C. 2.5. Flotation tests Flotation tests were conducted in a laboratory flotation column. It consists of a glass cylinder (/35 Â 145 mm) and a magnetic stirrer. A magnetic stirring bar (20 mm in length) was used to mix the slurry. Air bubbles were produced in the slurry by a wooden air diffuser (50 mm in length) which was supplied with compressed air at 100 ml/min under a pressure of 276 kPa (superficial velocity = 0.11 m/s). Visually, the bubbles appeared to be sub mm in size near the bottom of the column. For each flotation test, the slurry was prepared in a 100-ml cylinder with distilled, reverse osmosis treated water, solids and reagents in the same way as in the settling tests. Once the slurry in the cylinder was heated up to 55 °C, it was poured into the flotation cell and agitated. The agitation rate was adjusted to be as low as possible to avoid breaking flocs but to maintain the solids in suspension. Make up water at 50 °C was added to keep the liquid height between about 11­ 14 cm and forth height between 1 and 3 cm. After slurry conditioning for 1 min, the air flow was initiated and the flotation test

G.V. Franks et al. / Advanced Powder Technology 20 (2009) 273­279

275

started. The froth product was collected for 5 min, filtered and dried in an oven and then weighed to calculate flotation recovery. 3. Results 3.1. Flocculation and sedimentation PNIPAM with a MW of 3.6 million Da was used for the flocculation of silica. Fig. 1 presents the initial settling rates for 5 wt% silica suspensions at various PNIPAM doses at 22 °C and 50 °C. It can be seen that PNIPAM maintained the silica particles in a dispersed state at room temperature. Except for about 4 or 5 ppm dose, the suspensions did not sediment and even where weak hydrophilic bridging flocculation occurred at 4 and 5 ppm, the settling rates were less than 5 m/h. However, much higher settling rates were produced (up to 20 m/h) for 10 ppm or more PNIPAM addition when the suspension temperature was increased to 50 °C. This indicates that an effective flocculation was induced by PNIPAM at temperature above the CST. These settling results clearly demonstrated that PNIPAM has absolutely different performance from conventional PAM flocculants, because PAM has no response to the change of stimuli such as temperature. The processing of kaolinite by PNIPAM is a little more complicated than silica because we will consider flotation and consolidation as well as flocculation. In order to investigate each of these processes, the fine clay particles need to be dispersed first before PNIPAM is added. The dispersant Calgon was added at 10 ppm for that purpose. It was found that PNIPAM with a molecular weight of 3.6 MD was unable to produce dispersed kaolinite suspension even at 22 °C, instead, it flocculated the particles at all dosages from 4 to 40 ppm. In this case, a lower molecular weight PNIPAM (0.71 MD) was investigated. It was found that 200 ppm of 0.71 MD PNIPAM (+10 ppm Calgon) was able to disperse the kaolinite at room temperature. Fig. 2 shows that the kaolinite did not settle rapidly at 22 °C but was flocculated at 50 °C under these conditions. At 22 °C, the solids were actually in a dispersed state as they displayed a very slow settling curve (0.1 m/h settling rate) against settling time over a period of 30 min. However, the formation of solid flocs by PNIPAM produced rapid settling at 50 °C as can be seen from Fig. 2 (about 13.4 m/h settling rate). In fact, the settling difference between 22 °C and 50 °C demonstrates PNIPAM's unique role in promoting flocculation of clay fine particles. Furthermore, the pictures shown in Fig. 3, show that PNIPAM addition at 50 °C creates a clear supernatant after 30 min in comparison to the PNIPAM addition at 22 °C which is completely turbid. A strong dependence of polymer MW on the sedimentation of the silica suspensions was found [17]. In addition, the appropriate

Fig. 2. Settling height of kaolinite suspensions with 200 ppm 0.71 MD PNIPAM and 10 ppm Calgon at 22 °C and 50 °C as a function of time.

Fig. 3. Photos comparing the supernatants at (a) 22 and (b) 50 °C after 30 min settling of kaolinite suspensions with 200 ppm, 0.71 MD, PNIPAM and 10 ppm Calgon.

Fig. 4. Comparison of initial settling rate of PNIPAM of different MW and the conventional PAM flocculant at 50 °C for 10 ppm polymer and none.

Fig. 1. Initial settling rates of silica suspensions with 3.6 MD PNIPAM at 22 °C and 50 °C.

molecular weight of PNIPAM was found to produce sedimentation rates equivalent to (or even exceeding slightly) conventional PAM flocculants. Fig. 4 compares the sedimentation rates of PNIPAMs with various MWs to the PAM flocculant [17]. It can be seen that the settling rates were very slow when no PNIPAM was added or when 10 ppm of PNIPAMs of low MW were used. The settling rates

276

G.V. Franks et al. / Advanced Powder Technology 20 (2009) 273­279

Fig. 5. Comparison of supernatant clarity of silica suspensions for 30 ppm PNIPAMs at various MW (from left to right: 0.23, 0.71, 2.0 and 3.6 MD) after 2 h at 50 °C.

Fig. 7. Percentage of water released from sediment during consolidation for 3.6 M Da PNIPAM as a function of polymer dose.

are below 5 m/h. A much higher settling rate of 20 m/h was obtained with 10 ppm of the high MW PNIPAM (3.6 MD), which is even slightly higher that that induced by the conventional PAM flocculant (17 m/h). The influence of PNIPAM MW on the supernatant clarity is also significant as can be seen from Fig. 5. The two cylinders on the left (with lowest MW PNIPAM) have supernatants that appeared opaque for 30 ppm polymer addition. When the PNIPAM MW was increased (cylinders on the right side), the improvement in supernatant clarity becomes more and more obvious. The supernatant was almost transparent in the cylinder (far right) in which the highest-MW PNIPAM (3.6 MD) was added. 3.2. Sediment consolidation In addition to the use of PNIPAM in solids settling, it also has the ability to be used as a sediment consolidation aid due to its ability to respond to temperature. This ability gives the polymer an important advantage over conventional PAM, which is, its ability to enhance water release from sediments during consolidation. The effectiveness of PNIPAM in aiding consolidation and water recovery is also found to be MW and dosage dependent for the silica investigated [17]. Also, compared to a conventional PAM flocculant, the highest MW PNIPAM produced denser sediment after 2 h sedimentation at 50 °C [17]. As shown in Fig. 6, the sediment consolidated to significantly higher densities after the sediment temperature was cooled from 50 °C to 22 °C and allowed to consolidate under its own weight for several more hours. The sediment volume at the conclusion of 2 h settling at 50 °C was about 6 ml (Fig. 6a), and the volume at the conclusion of 24 h additional consolidation at 22 °C was about 4 ml (Fig. 6b). That is a volume reduction difference of 33% according to Eq. (2), i.e., more water was released. The water release ability of PNIPAM has also been found

to be MW and dosage dependent. Fig. 7 presents the dosage effect on the water release in sediment consolidation for a high MW PNIPAM. It can be seen that 4 ppm PNIPAM addition produced about 22% water release and the maximum water release was observed to be 35% when 10 ppm or more PNIPAM is added. More than 10 ppm addition, did not produce any additional water release. The effect of PNIPAM dosage on sediment consolidation is quite consistent with the results of its effect on the settling. 10 ppm high MW (3.6 MDa) PNIPAM addition seems the optimum point for both best solids flocculation and highest water release. 3.3. Flotation Fig. 8 is a comparison of the froths formed during flotation of silica at 50 °C without and with PNIPAM. It is clear that the PNIPAM acts as a frother from the photographs. The silica recovery after 5 min flotation was 3% when no PNIPAM was used while the recovery of silica was 50% with the addition of 10 ppm PNIPAM indicating that it also acts as a collector. More flotation tests were conducted with added frother, poly(propylene) glycol (PPG) in order to try to improve the recovery of silica. Fig. 9 presents the flotation results as a function of PPG dosage and fixed PNIPAM dosage at 10 ppm. The recovery increased from 50% to 96% as the PPG dose was increased from 0 to 10 ppm. These results indicate that the silica particles surfaces have been rendered hydrophobic by the PNIPAM at 50 °C and are able to strongly attach to the bubbles' surface. Clearly, the addition of PPG frother leads to a formation of thicker and more stable froth layer compared with no PPG addition. The data here demonstrates that PNIPAM worked very well as a collector and as somewhat of a frother. Before flotation, the kaolinite suspensions were dispersed with 10 ppm Calgon. Then they were flocculated by adding PNIPAM

Fig. 6. Photos showing the sediment volume after settling of silica suspension at 50 °C for 2 h (6 ml) (a) and after 22 h additional sediment consolidation at 22 °C (4 ml) (b) for a 3.6 MDa PNIPAM dosage of 20 ppm.

G.V. Franks et al. / Advanced Powder Technology 20 (2009) 273­279

277

Fig. 8. Photos of silica froth at 50 °C, (a) without PNIPAM, (b) with 10 ppm PNIPAM.

Fig. 9. Silica flotation recovery after 5 min at various frother dosages and 10 ppm PNIPAM addition at 50 °C.

Fig. 11. Effect of PNIPAM dosage on kaolinite clay flotation recovery at 50 °C with 10 ppm Calgon. Flotation at 5 min @air flowrate 100 ml/min.

solution at the desired amount. Then the suspension was heated to 55 °C. PPG frother was added at 10 ppm followed by air induction, and the flotation process started. The two pictures shown in Fig. 10 demonstrate that the froth was significantly improved by the addition of PNIPAM. In the absence of PNIPAM, the flotation of kaolinite was very poor as no stable froth layer was formed as in Fig. 10a. This is because the kaolinite surface still remained hydrophilic so there is no driving force for the mineral particles to attach to the air bubbles. However, when 20 ppm PNIPAM was added as seen from Fig. 10b, a rich froth layer was formed and the mineral particles floated. The PNIPAM's ability to induce hydrophobicity on the particles' surface allows it to act as a collector. Due to the enhanced hydrophobicity, it is easier for the particles to attach to the surface of air bubbles. The hydrophobic particles at the bubble's surface help to stabilize the froth better than PPG frother alone. As efficient mineral flotation is dependent on surface hydrophobicity, the amount of added collector (PNIPAM), should be a key factor to achieve good flotation recovery. Fig. 11 shows the results of kaolinite flotation at various PNIPAM dosages. At zero PNIPAM addition the recovery of kaolinite is below 1%. The flotation of kaolinite was enhanced significantly as the PNIPAM dosage increased from 0 to 20 ppm where recovery was 90%. Only a modest increase

in recovery occurred as the PNIPAM concentration was further increased to 40 ppm. It is possible that some of the mineral recovered is due to entrainment of fine hydrophilic particles in the froth. This issue will be addressed in larger scale tests where froth wash water addition will be practical. A conventional approach to improving recovery of fine particles is to use a combination of hydrophobic collector and a conventional Poly acrylamide (PAM) flocculant [22,23]. We made a comparison of this so called hydrophobic flocculation­flotation approach to flotation with PNIPAM under the following conditions: 10 ppm PAM plus 20 ppm dodecyl amine hydrochloride (DDA) (acts as collector and frother) at pH 5.0 and 22 °C. 20 ppm PNIPAM plus 10 ppm PPG frother at natural pH 5.7 and 50 °C. Fig. 12 presents the flotation results for the above conditions plus one with DDA addition alone as a control. When 20 ppm DDA was used as a collector in the absence of any polymer (either PAM or PNIPAM), the kaolinite flotation recovery was 22%, which is quite low and unsatisfactory. The slow flotation kinetics of fine particles [24] and low surface hydrophobicity at this collector dosage explain this low recovery value. With the method of

Fig. 10. Photos showing kaolinite flotation performance at 50 °C for (a) no PNIPAM addition and (b) 20 ppm PNIPAM. Both with 10 ppm PPG frother.

278

G.V. Franks et al. / Advanced Powder Technology 20 (2009) 273­279

Fig. 12. Flotation recovery comparison between DDA only flotation, PNIPAMassisted hydrophobic flocculation/flotation and PAM/DDA-assisted kaolinite hydrophobic flocculation/flotation.

PAM-assisted kaolinite flotation in which the PAM was added to flocculate fine particles and then 20 ppm DDA was added as collector for flotation, the recovery was greatly increased to 78%. These results are consistent with the results presented before and confirm the idea of PAM-assisted hydrophobic flocculation­flotation [22,23]. With the new method of PNIPAMassisted flotation in which PNIPAM was added as a flocculant then heated to act as a flotation collector, the kaolinite flotation recovery was increased to 90%. This is mainly because the addition of PNIPAM induced not only solid flocculation but also strong hydrophobicity upon heating, which induced a hydrophobic flocculation­flotation procedure. 4. Discussion The results indicate that PNIPAM is able to play a role in solids dispersion/flocculation and mineral flotation as a multiple-function reagent and this mechanism is illustrated in Fig. 13. When PNIPAM is mixed with solid particles at room temperature, dispersion is created. Some PNIPAM adsorbs onto the particles' surfaces and some remains in solution [16]; the adsorption mechanism is likely to be driven by hydrogen bonding between the polymer and oxide surface [25]. At this low temperature, the PNIPAM molecules are hydrophilic. They are in an extended conformation and cover the particle surface at higher dosage to produce a dispersed state (repulsive inter-particle interactions). Once the temperature is increased to above the CST, the PNIPAM molecules change conformation and become coiled as they become more hydrophobic

[5]. The PNIPAM then strongly adsorbs onto the particles surfaces [16], likely forming multiple layers driven by hydrophobic interactions [25,26]. Since the molecules are hydrophobic after adsorbing on the particle surface [16], they activate the particle surface into a hydrophobic condition. Due to the presence of the hydrophobic solid surfaces, the inter-particle interactions became attractive. It is the hydrophobic attractive force that induces effective hydrophobic solids flocculation and enhanced mineral flotation. After mineral flotation, rapid settling can be achieved because the particles remain aggregated at temperature above the CST. After the settled solids are separated from the clarified supernatant by conventional means, the temperature is reduced back to room temperature which is below the CST. As a result, the PNIPAM molecules on the solid surface lose their hydrophobicity and dissolve into solution [16]. Some molecules desorb from the surface and the interaction between the particles becomes repulsive again. But in this case, the particles do not disperse up into the solution (unless agitated) since they are already within the sediment which is held in place by the weight of the particles above. Instead, more water is released from the sediment during the process of sediment consolidation. 5. Conclusions Poly NIPAM has been shown to be a multiple function reagent for mineral processing. It can be used as a dispersant and consolidation aid at room temperature and a flocculant, collector and frother at 50 °C. By cycling the temperature above and below the critical solution temperature it is possible to use PNIPAM for several of these functions within one process stream. PNIPAM was found to be useful in processing both silica and kaolinite. It is able to produce rapid settling and sediment consolidation by cycling the temperature around the CST (critical solution temperature). The combination of rapid sedimentation and dense sediment results in highly efficiency solids dewatering. The conventional flocculant, PAM is not able to perform both functions. The PNIPAM performance was found to be dependent of polymer molecular weight and dosage, with higher molecular weight polymers requiring lower doses to be effective. PNIPAM was also found to be an effective collector and frother at 50 °C for use in mineral flotation. The action mechanism of PNIPAM in playing the dual-role is to manipulate the inter-particle forces (repulsive/attractive) via a hydrophilic/hydrophobic polymer transition when temperature is cycled below/above the CST. Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge financial support from the Australian Research Council, AMIRA International, BHP/Billiton, RioTinto, Orica, Anglo Platinum, Xstrata and Phelps Dodge (Freeport McMoran Copper and Gold) through the Australian Mineral Science Research Institute (AMSRI) (LP0667828). References
[1] T.W. Healy, Principles of polymer flocculation, in: Polymer Flocculation Principles and Applications, Royal Australian Chemical Institute, Melbourne, 1973, pp. 1­20. [2] P.C. Hiemenz, R. Rajagopolan, Principles of Colloid and Surface Chemistry, third ed., Dekker, New York, 1997. [3] B.A. Bolto, Polymeric flocculants in water and wastewater treatment, in: L.O. Kolarik, A.J. Priestley (Eds.), Modern Techniques, Water and Wastewater Treatment, CSIRO Publishing, Melbourne, 1995, pp. 65­74. [4] L. Besra, D.K. Sengupta, S.K. Roy, P. Ay, Influence of polymer adsorption and conformation on flocculation and dewatering of kaolin suspension, Separation and Purification Technology 37 (2004) 231­246. [5] T. Sun, G. Wang, L. Feng, B. Liu, Y. Ma, L. Jiang, D. Zhu, Reversible switching between superhydrophilicity and superhydrophobicity, Angewante Chemie International Edition 43 (2004) 357­360.

Fig. 13. Schematic illustration of the interactions between particles and PNIPAM in each step of the process comprising steps of dispersion, flocculation, flotation, sedimentation and sediment consolidation.

G.V. Franks et al. / Advanced Powder Technology 20 (2009) 273­279 [6] B.R. Saunders, H.M. Crowther, G.E. Morris, S.J. Mears, T. Cosgrove, B. Vincent, Factors affecting the swelling of poly (N-iso-propyl-acrylamide) microgel particles: fundamental and commercial implications, Colloids and Surfaces A 149 (1999) 57­64. [7] S. Sakohara, T. Kimura, K. Nishikawa, Flocculation mechanism of suspended particles using the hydrophilic/hydrophobic transition of a thermosensitive polymer, KONA 20 (2002) 246­250. [8] S. Sakohara, K. Nishikawa, Compaction of TiO2 suspension utilizing hydrophilic/hydrophobic transition of cationic thermosensitive polymers, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 278 (2004) 304­309. [9] S. Sakohara, R. Hinago, H. Ueda, Compaction of TiO2 suspension by using dual ionic thermosensitive polymers, Separation and Purification Technology 63 (2008) 319­323. [10] J.E. Guillet, M. Heskins, D.G. Murray, Polymeric flocculants, United States Patent, 4,536,294, 1985. [11] Y. Deng, H. Xiao, R. Pelton, Temperature-sensitive flocculants based on poly(Nisopropylacrylamide-co-diallyldimethylammonium chloride), Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 179 (1996) 188­190. [12] H. Li, J. Long, Z. Xu, J.H. Masliyah, Flocculation of kaolinite clay suspensions using a temperature sensitive polymer, AIChE Journal 53 (2007) 479­488. [13] G.V. Franks, Improved solid/liquid separation using stimulant sensitive flocculation and consolidation, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 292 (2005) 598­603. [14] G.V. Franks, Solid/liquid separation using temperature sensitive flocculation, in: Proceedings of Chemeca 2006, Auckland NZ, 2006. [15] H. Li, J.-P. O'Shea, G.V. Franks, Role of temperature-sensitive polymers in solids dewatering, in: Proceedings of Chemeca 2007, Melbourne, Au., 2007. [16] J.-P. O'Shea, G. G. Qiao, M. Spiniello, G.V.Franks, Temperature mediated adsorption of poly (N-isopropylacrylamide) onto a-alumina, in: Proceedings of Chemeca 2007, Melbourne, Au., 2007.

279

[17] H. Li, J. P. O'Shea, G.V. Franks, Effect of molecular weight of poly (N-isopropyl acrylamide) (NIPAM) temperature-sensitive polymeric flocculants on solids dewatering, AIChE Journal, in press. [18] G.V. Franks, H. Li, J.-P. O'Shea, G.G. Qiao, Application of poly (N-isopropyl acrylamide) PNIPAM as a multiple function process aid in mineral flotation and solid/liquid separation, in: D.D. Wang, C.Y. Sun, F.L. Wang, L.C. Zhang, L. Han, (Eds), Proceedings of XXIV International Mineral Processing Congress, Vol. 2, Beijing, China, 2008, pp. 2097­2106, ISBN 978-7-03-022711-9. [19] H. Li, G.V. Franks, Role of temperature-sensitive polymers in hydrophobic aggregation/flotation of silicate minerals, in: D.D. Wang, C.Y. Sun, F.L. Wang, L.C. Zhang, L. Han, (Eds), Proceedings of XXIV International Mineral Processing Congress, Vol. 1, Beijing, China, 2008, pp. 1261­1269, ISBN 978-7-03-0227119. [20] G.V. Franks, H. Li, J.P. O'Shea, G.G. Qiao, Temperature responsive polymers as multiple function reagents in mineral processing, in: Proceedings of Chemeca 2008, Newcastle, Au., 2008. [21] H. Li, G.V. Franks, J.-P. O'Shea, G.G. Qiao, Application of temperature responsive polymers for water recovery from mineral tailings, in: Proceedings of the International Oil Sands Tailings Conference, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, 2008. [22] S. Song, A. Lopez-Valdivieso, J.L. Reyes-Bahena, C. Lara-Valenzuela, Floc flotation of galena and sphalerite fines, Minerals Engineering 14 (2001) 87­98. [23] Y.H. Hu, W. Sun, H.P. Li, Z. Xu, Role of macromolecules in kaolinite flotation, Minerals Engineering 17 (2004) 1017­1022. [24] A.V. Nguyen, Particle-bubble encounter probability with mobile bubble surfaces, International Journal of Mineral Processing 55 (1998) 73­86. [25] T. Tanahashi, M. Kawaguchi, T. Honda, A. Takahashi, Adsorption of poly (Nisopropylacrylamide) on silica surfaces, Macromolecules 27 (1994) 606­607. [26] M. Callewaert, Ch. Grandfils, L. Boulange-Petermann, P.G. Rouxhet, Adsorption of poly (N-isopropylacrylamide) on glass substrata, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 276 (2004) 299­305.

