Cell, Vol. 111, 155­158, October 18, 2002, Copyright 2002 by Cell Press

Nutrient-Regulated Protein Kinases in Budding Yeast
Wayne A. Wilson and Peter J. Roach1 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Center for Diabetes Research Indiana University School of Medicine Indianapolis, Indiana 46202

Minireview

The ability of cells to react appropriately to nutritional cues is of fundamental importance, and in budding yeast, a small number of intracellular protein kinases, PKA, Snf1p/AMP-activated kinase, TOR, Gcn2p, and the cyclin-dependent kinase Pho85p have key roles. A recently characterized enzyme, PAS kinase, may be a new member of this group of nutritional transducers. Cells and Nutrients The nutritional environment is a critical determinant of cellular behavior, whether the cell is a unicellular microorganism or organized into the tissue of a higher eukaryote. Decisions about growth, proliferation, development, and specific functional responses must, to some degree, take into account the prevailing nutrient status. For most microorganisms, the interface with the surroundings is direct and the compounds neighboring the cell can act as both signals and nutrients. For multicellular organisms like mammals, the interaction is more complex, involving both the response of a cell to its microenvironment as well as its reaction to signals borne by hormones such as insulin and glucagon that reflect the needs of the whole organism. Ultimately, signals must be transduced into a coherent cellular response by key intracellular regulators, many of which are protein kinases (Figure 1). Here, we review the characteristics of the known nutrient-regulated kinases and then discuss the PAS kinases that may fall into this family. Glucose Control of cAMP and the Snf1p Kinase Glucose is the preferred carbon source for Saccharomyces cerevisiae and its presence represses transcription of a large number of genes, including those required for the utilization of alternative carbohydrates (Johnston and Carlson, 1992). The Snf1p kinase, which is central to the glucose repression process, forms a complex with Snf4p and with one of three related Snf1p interacting proteins (Sips), Sip1p, Sip2p, or Gal83p, that may confer functional specificity. As glucose is depleted, Snf1p is activated by a mechanism involving relief of an intramolecular autoinhibition by Snf4p and phosphorylation by an upstream kinase that has yet to be fully characterized. The mammalian ortholog of Snf1p, the AMP-activated protein kinase or AMPK, has a similar structure (a catalytic subunit with and subunits related to the Sip proteins and Snf4p, respectively) and is stimulated by elevated intracellular AMP, such as occurs in exercising skeletal muscle or in cells subjected to stress conditions (Hardie and Hawley, 2001). AMP allosterically activates the kinase complex as well as stimulating an upstream
1

Correspondence: proach@iupui.edu

kinase. By analogy, it is an attractive, albeit controversial, hypothesis that Snf1p is also activated by AMP. Upon glucose depletion, cells reprogram their metabolism from fermentation to oxidation of the ethanol formed from glucose. Activated Snf1p, by phosphorylating transcription factors like Mig1p and Sip4, allows for transcription of glucose-repressed genes. Most prevailing opinion is that both Snf1p and AMPK act as sensors of cellular energy status, and this idea is consistent with the nature of other processes controlled by Snf1p (Wang et al., 2001). Snf1p is necessary for the storage of glycogen, a branched polymeric glucose reserve that is a source of energy during the switch to oxidative metabolism. Similarly, Snf1p provides a positive stimulus for autophagy that is a mechanism for the recycling of cellular components, including proteins, by random engulfment into vesicles, autophagosomes, which are delivered to the vacuole for degradation. Autophagy provides amino acids and other metabolites for the transition to oxidative growth. Glucose signaling also involves the cAMP pathway that controls cell growth, stress resistance, and metabolism (Rolland et al., 2001). Exposure of yeast to glucose causes an acute increase in cAMP levels; some studies suggest a correlation between cAMP concentration and glucose level although this issue is controversial. One input to the cAMP pathway is via activation of adenylate cyclase (Cyr1p/Cdc35p) by the yeast Ras proteins. More recently, a putative trimeric G protein-coupled receptor, Gpr1p, has been implicated in mediating glucose stimulation of cAMP production acting through Gpa2p as the downstream G GTPase homolog. In yeast, the only known downstream target for cAMP is the cAMP-dependent protein kinase, PKA (catalytic subunit, C in the Figure, encoded by three genes, TPK1, 2, and 3, and a regulatory subunit, R, encoded by BCY1), which is allosterically activated by cAMP. Several targets of PKA are metabolic enzymes whose activities are directly regulated. The cAMP pathway also controls expression of a number of genes by negative regulation of the transcription factors Msn2p and Msn4p that stimulate expression of over 30 STRE (stress-responsive element)regulated genes in response to a variety of stresses, including depletion of glucose. For example, under stress conditions, enzymes involved in the metabolism of glycogen are induced and glycogen is synthesized for future use. PKA is highly conserved in eukaryotes and is activated by a similar molecular mechanism in mammals. In mammalian liver, cAMP levels are also linked to nutritional status, in this case indirectly via the hormone glucagon, but in quite the opposite sense to yeast--elevated liver cAMP is an index of fasting or starvation. Starvation and the TOR Pathway Tor1p and Tor2p are two members of the phosphatidylinositide kinase family that are the targets in yeast of the drug rapamycin and, like their mammalian counterpart mTOR, function as protein kinases (Schmelzle and Hall, 2000). They are linked to nutritional controls, especially the availability of nitrogen, and regulate many processes

Cell 156

Figure 1. Nutrient-Sensing Protein Kinases of Budding Yeast

including protein synthesis and autophagy. Facing starvation, the cell suppresses protein synthesis, a major expenditure of energy and cellular resources, and at the same time regenerates amino acids and other small metabolites via autophagy. Exposure of yeast to rapamycin mimics starvation, blocking translation and promoting autophagy. TOR proteins were recently shown to exist in two complexes, TORC1 and TORC2 (Loewith et al., 2002). TORC1 is a trimer of either Tor1p or Tor2p with Kog1p and Lst8p, is sensitive to rapamycin, and likely mediates the starvation response. TORC2 contains exclusively Tor2p in association with Avo1,2,3p and Lst8p and is rapamycin insensitive. It is presumably responsible for TOR2-specific functions, such as the control of the actin cytoskeleton. Several of the TOR associated proteins, Kog1p, Lst8p, and possibly Avo1p, appear to be conserved in mammals, and a mammalian version of Kog1p, Raptor, has recently been characterized as an mTORinteracting protein (Hara et al., 2002; Kim et al., 2002). In mammals, mTOR promotes protein synthesis by controlling the eIF4E binding proteins (4E-BP or PHAS proteins) and the p70S6K. The 4E-BPs downregulate translation by binding eIF4E and preventing its interaction with eIF4G. Phosphorylation of 4E-BPs in response to hormones such as insulin triggers the release of 4EBPs and thus stimulates translation. Though less wellstudied than in yeast, there is also evidence for a negative regulation of autophagy by TOR in liver cells. The molecular mechanism of TOR activation is not entirely clear. In mammals, the TOR pathway is activated by insulin and amino acids. Relevant to a role in nutrient sensing, depletion of ATP in cultured cells inhibits the TOR pathway, and Dennis et al. (2001) have proposed that the ATP level is a direct regulator of mTOR because its Km for ATP is relatively high ( 1 mM). On its own, though, this mechanism would not allow a very sensitive response of TOR in liver and muscle cells where ATP is in the range 2­5 mM. Adenylate control of TOR kinase activity is reminiscent of the regulation of AMPK for

which, however, it is AMP, whose concentration is a very sensitive indicator of energy status, which is the key regulator. Phosphate Sensing and the PHO Genes Low inorganic phosphate concentration induces the expression of nonspecific scavenger phosphatases, typified by Pho5p (Carroll and O'Shea, 2002). Expression of PHO5 is regulated by the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Pho4p that is phosphorylated by Pho85p, a yeast cyclin-dependent protein kinase (CDK). Utilizing Pho80p as its cyclin partner, Pho85p phosphorylates Pho4p at multiple sites that keep it inactive and in the cytoplasm, thereby blocking transcription of PHO5. The activity of Pho85p/Pho80p is controlled by the CDK inhibitor Pho81p that is repressed and inactivated by high phosphate. However, no evidence for binding of phosphate to any of the components of the system has been obtained and the primary sensing event remains unknown. The Pho85p kinase has multiple functions, and consistent with the concept of a pleiotropic role, ten Pho85p cyclins (Pcls) have been identified in yeast (Moffat et al., 2000). The hypothesis is that the Pcls confer specificity to the catalytic subunit Pho85p. There is evidence for cell cycle functions of Pcl1p, Pcl2p, and Pcl9p. Pcl8p and Pcl10p have been linked to the accumulation of glycogen, and a Pcl10p/Pho85p kinase phosphorylates the biosynthetic enzyme glycogen synthase (Gsy2p) directly. It has recently been found that Pcl5p specifies the phosphorylation of the Gcn4p transcription factor, which is then degraded by SCFcdc4p, connecting Pho85p with general amino acid control (Shemer et al., 2002). Another important process that is negatively regulated by Pho85p is autophagy (Wang et al., 2001), although the responsible Pcls have not been identified. The Pho85p kinase system is in fact a collection of some ten different protein kinases, each with potentially different properties, and specific controls are most likely exerted through the cyclin partners. By sequence alignment, Pho85p is most similar to the mammalian CDK Cdk5,

Minireview 157

and expression of Cdk5 in pho85 mutant yeast rescues the otherwise unhealthy yeast strain. However, no metazoan equivalents of any of the Pcls have been identified. Either they are not recognizable through sequence similarity or this nutrient-sensing mechanism is not conserved. General Amino Acid Control and the Gcn2p Kinase Starvation for amino acids, glucose, and purines causes the activation of the Gcn2p protein kinase that phosphorylates the subunit of eIF2 (Hinnebusch and Natarajan, 2002). The ultimate consequence is decreased initiation of general protein synthesis. Concomitantly, however, the translation of mRNA for the transcription factor Gcn4p is enhanced, leading to increased transcription of a large number of genes under its control, notably enzymes of the biosynthesis of amino acids and purines. The Gcn2p protein kinase contains a regulatory domain whose sequence resembles histidyl-tRNA synthetase and which binds uncharged tRNAs that accumulate when amino acids are scarce. Activation involves binding of uncharged tRNA and transphosphorylation of the Gcn2p dimer within the context of the ribosome to which Gcn2p binds. Also required for activation by the uncharged tRNA is the Gcn1p/Gcn20p complex. In mammals, an ortholog of Gcn2p is also activated by limitation of amino acids and translation of the mRNA for the transcription factor, ATF4, of the same family as Gcn4p, is stimulated by starvation and stress signals. ATF4 in turn activates transcription of CHOP/GADD153, a stress-induced transcription factor. Thus, key elements for this mechanism of nutritional control are highly conserved, and at least for the response to amino acid deprivation, the nutrient-sensing mechanism has been identified. PAS Kinase, a Novel Nutrient-Sensing Kinase? The yeast genome encodes two related kinases, Psk1p and Psk2p, which contain PAS domains (Rutter et al., 2002), evolutionarily conserved signaling modules that act as sensors for a variety of stimuli including small molecule ligands, light, oxygen, and redox state (Gu et al., 2000; Taylor and Zhulin, 1999). PAS domains are found in a variety of other signaling molecules, including receptors and transcription factors, as well as protein kinases. The Drosophila proteins PER, ARNT, and SIM, whose initials originally gave the name PAS, are involved in controls of circadian rhythm, of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, and of midline cell lineage, respectively. PAS domains have been extensively studied in bacteria due to their prevalence in the sensor modules of two-component systems. One of the best studied is the FixL/FixJ system of Rhizobia species, which is a regulator of nitrogen fixation (Gilles-Gonzalez, 2001). The FixL protein contains both a heme-containing PAS domain and a histidine kinase domain, with oxygen binding to the heme resulting in activation of the kinase. The yeast Psk1p/2p kinases contain two N-terminal PAS domains and a C-terminal serine/threonine kinase, rather than a histidine kinase, domain. Kinases related to Psk1p and Psk2p are found in both Drosophila and mammals. Removal of the PAS domains of the human enzyme, hPASK (Rutter et al., 2001), also termed PASKIN (Hofer et al., 2001), results in activation. Conversely, addition of isolated forms of the N-terminal PAS domain to free kinase catalytic domain in vitro causes dose-

dependent inhibition. Thus, the PAS domains appear to regulate the kinase, but what signal(s) do they sense and what are the substrates of the PAS kinase? Using approaches ranging from yeast genetics to structural biology, two recent papers (Amezcua et al., 2002; Rutter et al., 2001) are beginning to provide answers to these questions. Amezcua et al. (2002) have determined the solution structure of the N-terminal PAS domain of hPASK. Using NMR-based approaches to screen a library of over 750 compounds, they demonstrated that the isolated PAS domain specifically bound small, hydrophobic organic molecules within its core. Intriguingly, this binding site is not only similar to bona fide ligand binding sites in other PAS domains (e.g., heme within FixL), but also does not exist in the apo structure solved. Ligand binding leads to structural rearrangements within the domain that may constitute a switch mechanism. To investigate how these structural changes might relate to the previously observed kinase inhibition by this domain (Rutter et al., 2001), the kinase-interacting region was directly identified using NMR by analyzing proteins with mutated PAS domains that show mild structural perturbations but lose kinase inhibition. These activating mutations work within the context of the full-length hPASK protein, suggesting a regulatory model similar to the mechanism for FixL activation. However, as no physiological ligand for hPASK or Psk1p/Psk2p is known, it remains an open question as to whether the PAS kinases respond to the level of a nutrient, a metabolite, or a novel intracellular signaling molecule. Rutter et al. (2002) have defined metabolic processes in which Psk1p and Psk2p (and, by extension, perhaps hPASK) are potentially involved. Yeast lacking PSK1and PSK2 genes fail to grow on galactose at elevated temperature, and a screen for high-copy suppressors of this phenotype yielded a number of genes involved in protein synthesis or carbohydrate metabolism. Additionally, incubation of purified Psk2p with fractionated yeast lysates in the presence of radiolabeled ATP resulted in the identification of potential substrates, including three components of the translational apparatus and two enzymes of carbohydrate metabolism. So, what do the PAS kinases actually do? One interesting substrate of Psk2p is Caf20p (cap-associated factor 20), the yeast counterpart of the 4E-BP or PHAS proteins. Does PAS kinase positively regulate translation via phosphorylation of Caf20p? UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (Ugp1p) was also identified in the screen for Psk2p substrates. Ugp1p produces UDP-glucose, a key metabolite required for cell wall biosynthesis, protein glycosylation, trehalose and glycogen synthesis, and utilization of galactose. Interestingly, another protein identified as a Psk2p substrate was the yeast glycogen synthase Gsy2p, which forms glycogen from UDP-glucose. The psk1 psk2 mutant yeast had elevated glycogen stores, a phenotype associated with overactive glycogen synthase or UGP1 overexpression. Therefore, Psk2p might negatively control both Ugp1p and Gsy2p. In summary, the potential clearly exists for PAS kinase to function as a broad regulator of metabolism, promoting protein synthesis and suppressing glycogen accumulation. Future studies should seek to substantiate this hypothesis

Cell 158

and the likelihood that a regulatory ligand binds the PAS domain may facilitate its identification. Perspectives Nutritional controls of yeast metabolism in nature involve overlapping inputs (Figure 1), made distinct only by contrived experimental conditions designed to isolate individual pathways. All pathways simultaneously receive signals that are integrated into the control of an overlapping set of cellular processes. Understanding this integration and the crosstalk between pathways is of considerable importance. Many of the pathways are defined in large part by a regulatory protein kinase but one generality to have emerged is that, even where the nutritional stimulus is known, rarely can we define the nutrient-sensing event. With the idea that the PAS domain of the PAS kinases is the sensor, will it lead us to identify both a new regulatory molecule and a novel nutrient-sensing pathway?
Selected Reading Amezcua, C.A., Harper, S.M., Rutter, J., and Gardner, K.H. (2002). Structure 10, 1349­1361. Carroll, A.S., and O'Shea, E.K. (2002). Trends Biochem. Sci. 27, 87­93. Dennis, P.B., Jaeschke, A., Saitoh, M., Fowler, B., Kozma, S.C., and Thomas, G. (2001). Science 294, 1102­1105. Gilles-Gonzalez, M.A. (2001). IUBMB Life 51, 165­173. Gu, Y.Z., Hogenesch, J.B., and Bradfield, C.A. (2000). Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 40, 519­561. Hara, K., Maruki, Y., Long, X., Yoshino, K., Oshiro, N., Hidayat, S., Tokunaga, C., Avruch, J., and Yonezawa, K. (2002). Cell 110, 177­189. Hardie, D.G., and Hawley, S.A. (2001). Bioessays 23, 1112­1119. Hinnebusch, A.G., and Natarajan, K. (2002). Eukaryotic Cell 1, 22­32. Hofer, T., Spielmann, P., Stengel, P., Stier, B., Katschinski, D.M., Desbaillets, I., Gassmann, M., and Wenger, R.H. (2001). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 288, 757­764. Johnston, M., and Carlson, M. (1992). Regulation of carbon and phosphate utilization. In The Molecular and Cellular Biology of the Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, E.W. Jones, J.R. Pringle, and J.R. Broach, eds. (Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press), pp. 193­281. Kim, D.H., Sarbassov, D.D., Ali, S.M., King, J.E., Latek, R.R., Erdjument-Bromage, H., Tempst, P., and Sabatini, D.M. (2002). Cell 110, 163­175. Loewith, R., Jacinto, E., Wullschleger, S., Lorberg, A., Crespo, J., Bonenfant, D., Poppliger, W., Jenoe, P., and Hall, M.N. (2002). Mol. Cell 10, 457­468. Moffat, J., Huang, D., and Andrews, B. (2000). Prog. Cell Cycle Res. 4, 97­106. Rolland, F., Winderickx, J., and Thevelein, J.M. (2001). Trends Biochem. Sci. 26, 310­317. Rutter, J., Michnoff, C.H., Harper, S.M., Gardner, K.H., and McKnight, S.L. (2001). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 8991­8996. Rutter, J., Probst, B.L., and McKnight, S.L. (2002). Cell 111, 17­28. Schmelzle, T., and Hall, M.N. (2000). Cell 103, 253­262. Shemer, R., Meimoun, A., Holtzman, T., and Kornitzer, D. (2002). Mol. Cell. Biol. 22, 5395­5404. Taylor, B.L., and Zhulin, I.B. (1999). Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 63, 479­506. Wang, Z., Wilson, W.A., Fujino, M.A., and Roach, P.J. (2001). Mol. Cell. Biol. 21, 5742­5752.

