Forum

TRENDS in Genetics Vol.18 No.7 July 2002

379

frequency much higher than the mutation frequency. What is especially interesting about Spm epigenetic regulation is that the transposon itself encodes a protein that is both a transcription factor and an epigenetic regulatory protein. The transposon's TnpA protein is capable of activating a silent transposon and of promoting its transition from a heritably inactive to a heritably active, mobile form. `Presetting' is a reflection of the demethylation resulting from the interaction between this regulatory protein and the transposon's promoter. And, even though such epigenetic regulatory mechanisms are still poorly understood, their importance in eukaryotic development is no longer in doubt, especially as we struggle with stem-cell dilemmas and the low success rates of cloning with nuclei from adult tissues. It would be nice if the bottom line on McClintock were as simple as Comfort would have us believe: that she was right about transposition, but wrong about development. But it isn't. We now know that transposons do not control all genes, but we also know that there are genes that have transposon sequences inextricably embedded in their regulatory regions. We know that the same kinds of mechanism regulate transposon genes as well as

other kinds of genes. (The A gene McClintock used to analyze the regulatory interactions between Spm-encoded proteins and Spm sequences in or upstream of the gene is a very early example of the reporter gene methodology in such wide use today for studying gene regulation.) We know that transposons are astonishingly abundant, comprising a majority of the DNA in some species. We know that transposon-like rearrangements are essential to our immune system and that transposons maintain telomeres, at least in certain kinds of fly. And, we know that transposons are at the heart of genomic restructuring on an evolutionary time scale. So, McClintock's insights, her understanding of development and evolution, were not so bad after all, as even Comfort himself acknowledges in his grand `Synthesis' (Chapter 10). She might not have got everything right, but she sure got a lot of it ­ a track record to die for. She was well ahead of most in her thinking about gene regulation, as well as about how the whole system hangs together. I don't think that's exactly the same as saying that her notions were `unfalsifiable' and `fundamentally unscientific' (p. 258). And I object to the psychobabble. Comfort suggests early in the book that,

`...an incapacity for intimacy is the figure under McClintock's carpet.' We have to wait until the end of the book to find out what he means. And then we learn not much more than that his understanding of intimacy is tied to reproduction. What he finds strange is `...that she could not conceive of marrying...' and that she `...never...had an intimate relationship.' Oh, please. Life is just a little more complicated than that. Maybe its worth pondering why so many people both respected and loved Barbara McClintock ­ not the figure in any of the myths (Comfort's included), but the real contradictory, complex woman. And I, for one, am profoundly grateful that she focused all of her formidable intellect on science and did not divide it among picking up the children, cooking dinner, listening to her husband's ideas, shopping, cleaning ­ and doing genetics.
Nina Fedoroff Life Sciences Consortium and Biotechnology Institute, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Phildelphia, PA 16802, USA. e-mail: nvf1@psu.edu
References 1 Keller, E.F. (1984) A Feeling for the Organism: The Life and Work of Barbara McClintock, W.H. Freeman & Company

Erratum
Syvanen, M. (2002) Recent emergence of the modern genetic code: a proposal. Trends Genet. 18, 245­248 There was an error in the legend for Fig. 1, for which we apologise. The legend should read: Two tRNA ligases showing star or near star phyologenies. (a) Arginine tRNA ligase distance tree. (b) Tryptophan tRNA ligase distance tree. Green, archaea; blue, bacteria; red, eukaryotes; purple, mitochondrial genes (m). Distances were determined from multiply aligned sequences according to the Kimura protein distance method and nearest neighbor trees were determined. Abbreviations of species represented are: aerpe, Aeropyrum pernix; anabae, Anabaena sp. 90; aquae, Aquifex aeolicus; arathal, Arabidopsis thaliana; arcful, Archaeoglobus fulgidus; bachal, Bacillus halodurans; bacsu, Bacillus subtilis; borbu, Borrelia burgdorferi; bucap, Buchnera aphidicola; caeel, Caenorhabditis elegans; campje, Campylobacter jejuni; chltr, Chlamydia trachomatis; chlpn, Chlamydophila pneumoniae; clolo, Clostridium longisporum; coryglub, Corynebacterium glutamicum; deirad, Deinococcus radiodurans; dromel, Drosophila melanogaster; ecoli, Escherichia coli; haein, Haemophilus influenzae; halob, Halobacterium sp. NRC-1; helpy, Helicobacter pylori; metth, Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum; metja, Methanococcus jannaschii; mouse, Mus musculus; myctu, Mycobacterium tuberculosis; neucra, Neurospora crassa; rabbit, Oryctolagus cuniculus; rice, Oryza sativa; pasmu, Pasteurella multocida; pseaer, Pseudomonas aeruginosa; pyrab, Pyrococcus abyssi; pyrho, Pyrococcus horikoshii; ricpr, Rickettsia prowazekii; yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae; schipo, Schizosaccharomyces pombe; strco, Streptomyces coelicolor; syny3, Synechocystis PCC6803; tacid1, Thermoplasma acidophilum; thema, Thermotoga maritima; trepa, Treponema pallidum; ureure, Ureaplasma urealyticum; xylfas, Xylella fastidiosa; zymmob, Zymomonas mobilis.
PII: S0168-9525(02)02727-0

http://tig.trends.com

