doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2003.10.068

J. Mol. Biol. (2004) 335, 531­546

Crystal Structure of the L Intermediate of Bacteriorhodopsin: Evidence for Vertical Translocation of a Water Molecule during the Proton Pumping Cycle
Tsutomu Kouyama1,2*, Taichi Nishikawa1, Takeshi Tokuhisa1 and Hideo Okumura1
1 Department of Physics Graduate School of Science Nagoya University, Furo-Cho Chikusa, Nagoya 464-8602 Japan 2 RIKEN Harima Institute/SPring-8, Kouto Mikazuki, Hyogo 679-5198 Japan

For structural investigation of the L intermediate of bacteriorhodopsin, a 3D crystal belonging to the space group P622 was illuminated with green light at 160 K and subsequently with red light at 100 K. This yielded a , 1:4 mixture of the L intermediate and the ground-state. Diffraction data from such crystals were collected using a low flux of X-rays (, 2 £ 1015 photons/mm2 per crystal), and their merged data were compared with those from unphotolyzed crystals. These structural data, together with our previous data, indicate that the retinal chromophore, which is largely twisted in the K-intermediate, takes a more planar 13-cis, 15-anti configuration in the L intermediate. This configurational change, which is accompanied by re-orientation of the Schiff base N ­ H bond towards the intracellular side, is coupled with a large rotation of the side-chain of an amino acid residue (Leu93) making contact with the C13 methyl group of retinal. Following these motions, a water molecule, at first hydrogen-bonded to the Schiff base and Asp85, is dragged to a space that is originally occupied by Leu93. Diffraction data from a crystal containing the M intermediate showed that this water molecule moves further towards the intracellular side in the L-to-M transition. It is very likely that detachment of this water molecule from the protonated Schiff base causes a significant decrease in the pKa of the Schiff base, thereby facilitating the proton transfer to Asp85. On the basis of these observations, we argue that the vertical movement of a water molecule in the K-to-L transition is a key event determining the directionality of proton translocation in the protein.
q 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

*Corresponding author

Keywords: proton pump; reaction intermediate; X-ray crystallography; radiation damage; retinal

Introduction
Bacteiorhodopsin (bR), the sole protein found in the purple membrane of Halobacterium salinarum, functions as a light-driven proton pump.1 ­ 3 It consists of seven transmembrane helices and contains one molecule of retinal that is bound to the 1-amino group of Lys216 via a protonated Schiff base linkage. Upon light absorption, the retinal isomerizes around the C13vC14 double bond and it
Abbreviation used: bR, bacteiorhodopsin. E-mail address of the corresponding author: kouyama@bio.phys.nagoya-u.ac.jp

assumes a largely twisted 13-cis, 15-anti configuration in the K intermediate.4 ­ 6 In the subsequent relaxation into the L intermediate, the distortion energy stored in the retinal chromophore is spread to a wider region of the protein and, in the L-to-M transition, the primary proton transfer takes place from the Schiff base to the nearby aspartic acid (Asp85) and, simultaneously or with a delay at low pH, a proton is released from an extracellular proton-release group into the medium. In the M-to-N transition, the Schiff base receives a proton from Asp96 that is located in the intracellular hydrophobic region and, in the N-to-O transition, Asp96 receives a proton from the intracellular

0022-2836/$ - see front matter q 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

532

Bacteriorhodopsin's L Intermediate

membrane surface. After re-isomerization of the retinal and proton transfer from Asp85 to the proton release group, the protein structure relaxes into the initial state (bRground). It has been generally believed that the net effect of this cyclic reaction is translocation of one proton from the intracellular to the extracellular medium. An increasing number of experimental data have shown that internal water molecules play an important role in regulating the pKa values of key residues in the pathway of proton transport.7,8 The current structural model of the unphotolysed state (bRground) shows that water molecules existing in the active site participate in stabilizing the protonated Schiff base with a very high pKa (, 13) and unprotonated Asp85 with a very low pKa (,2.5).9 ­ 12 Recent FTIR studies of the L intermediate have suggested that, before the primary proton transfer, rearrangements of the internal water molecules take place in such a manner that they cause a significant reduction of the pKa of the Schiff base and a concomitant increase of the pKa of Asp85.13 But, the structure of a key intermediate, i.e. the L intermediate, has not yet been determined convincingly, making it difficult to quantitatively analyze the detailed movements of the internal water molecules. Early studies of purple membrane by cryogenic electron microscopy clarified structural changes taking place in the late stage of the photocycle but, due to a limited resolution, these crystallographic studies provided no information as to movements of the internal water molecules.14 ­ 18 Recently, novel crystallization methods have been developed to prepare 3D crystals of bacteriorhodopsin,19 ­ 24 and some of them have been utilized for structural investigation of the photoreaction intermediates.25 ­ 31 Using the P63 crystal, Royant et al.30 and more recently Lanyi & Schobert31 investigated the crystal structure of the L intermediate. Unfortunately, the structural models reported by the two groups have no structural correlation with each other. One possible explanation for the discrepancy is that either or both of their models are influenced severely by X-radiation-induced structural changes, which were not taken into account in the previous crystallographic studies. Using a larger crystal belonging to the space group P622, we have recently observed that decarboxylation of functionally important aspartic acids takes place at an X-ray flux of 1016 photons/mm25 This is no longer higher than a typical flux utilized at the third generation synchrotron facilities. A more curious observation is that nearly half of the protein is converted into an unidentified orange species by a much lower flux of X-rays (, 1015 photons/mm2). These observations teach us that the true conformational change induced in the proton pumping cycle can be revealed only after careful removal of the effects of X-radiation damages. In the present study, we carried out a quantitative analysis for X-radiation damages and searched for the best condition for X-ray measurements to

minimize undesired effects of X-radiation-induced structural changes. After a careful structural analysis, we constructed a structural model of the L inter° mediate at 2.4 A resolution. In addition to this structural determination, structural changes taking place in the L-to-M transition were also investigated. Combined with our previous study of the K intermediate,5 the present study leaded us to propose a novel proton-pumping mechanism, in which the vertical translocation of the water molecules in the active site is a key event determining the directionality of proton translocation in the protein.

Results
Thermodynamic properties of the L intermediate at cryogenic temperatures To elucidate the thermal equilibrium between the K and the L intermediates, we investigated absorption spectra of the P622 crystal in the temperature region between 100 K and 180 K. Firstly, a light-adapted crystal was flash-cooled with liquid propane and two absorption spectra were recorded at 100 K; one was recorded after one minute of illumination with 678 nm light from a red CW laser (, 0.4 mW/mm2), and the other was recorded after one minute of illumination with 532 nm light from a green CW laser (,1 mW/mm2). Subsequently, the following warming/re-cooling cycle was repeated: at a temperature that is higher by 10 K than the highest temperature in the previous cycle, the crystal was illuminated for one minute with green light (step I); after cooling to 100 K at a cooling rate of 300 K/hour, the crystal was illuminated for one minute with green light (II), with red light (III) and with green light (IV). No difference was observed for absorption spectra recorded at steps II and IV. Absorption spectra recorded at steps I, II and III are shown separately in Figure 1(a) ­(c). The absorption spectra in Figure 1(a), which were recorded at elevated temperatures, indicate that the peak of the visible band shifted to a shorter wavelength with the increasing temperature. This blue shift is explained by the thermal relaxation from the K intermediate (lmax , 590 nm) to the L intermediate (lmax , 550 nm). An absorption band at 414 nm, which is indicative of accumulation of the M intermediate, became noticeable when the crystal was warmed above 170 K. At this temperature, the visible absorption band exhibited an absorption peak at 555 nm, suggesting that a large fraction (, 40%) of the protein was trapped in the L intermediate. Interestingly, the peak of the visible absorption band shifted towards the longer wavelength when the crystal was re-cooled to 100 K (Figure 1(b)). This red shift was accompanied by a significant absorption increase above 660 nm, suggesting that the amount of the K intermediate increased during the re-cooling process. Indeed, when the re-cooled crystal was illuminated with

Bacteriorhodopsin's L Intermediate

533

Figure 1. Absorption spectra of the P622 crystal at cryogenic temperatures. The data shown were obtained when the illumination condition and the crystal temperature were changed according to the following scheme: 100-red(1) ! 100-green(1) ! 120green(2) ! 100-green(2) ! 100-red(2) ! 100-green(20 ) ! 130-green(3) ! 100-green(3) ! 100-red(3) ! 100-green(30 ) ! · · · ! 180-green(8) ! 100-green(8) ! 100-red(8) ! 100green(80 ). Here "100-red" means one minute of illumination with red light (l ¼ 678 nm; , 0.5 mW/mm2) at 100 K, "100-green" one minute of illumination with green light (l ¼ 532 nm; ,1 mW/mm2) at 100 K, and so on. (a) Absorption spectra recorded at elevated temperatures after one minute of illumination with green light; i.e. 100-green(1), 120-green(2), 130-green(3) and so on. (b) Absorption spectra recorded at the second step of the warming/re-cooling cycle; i.e. 100-green( j), where j ¼ 1; 2; ...; 8: (c) Absorption spectra recorded at the third step of the warming/re-cooling cycle; i.e. 100red( j), where j ¼ 1; 2; ...; 8). Numerals in this Figure represent the temperature to which the crystal had been warmed.

Figure 2. (a) Absorption changes associated with the photo-conversion between the K intermediate and the ground-state. Difference spectra are calculated using the spectra shown in Figure 1; each difference spectrum is derived from absorption spectra recorded at the second and the third steps of the same warming/re-cooling cycle; i.e. DA( j) ¼ 100-green(j) minus 100-red( j), where j ¼ 1,2,3,...,8. The difference spectra for j ¼ 1, 2 and 3 are drawn with gray lines and those for j . 3 are with black lines. (b) Absorption changes due to accumulation of L, L0 and M. Each difference spectrum is derived by subtracting the absorption spectrum of the ground-state from an absorption spectrum recorded at the third step of the warming/re-cooling cycle; i.e. 100red( j) minus 100-red(1), where j ¼ 2,3,...,8.

red light so that the K intermediate was hit back into the ground-state (lmax , 574 nm), the absorbance above 660 nm vanished and the absorbance at 574 nm increased (Figure 1(c)). Figure 2(a) shows the difference absorption spectra that are derived from absorption spectra recorded at the second and the third steps in the same cycle of warming/re-cooling. The difference spectra shown are similar in profile to one another, whereas their amplitudes are dependent on the history of warming and re-cooling. (Small variation in the profile, which is noticeable in a temperature region between 100 K and 140 K, seems to be due to a sort of annealing of the protein structure.) The observed variation in the amplitude is understood

readily, since the re-cooled crystal that had been warmed to a higher temperature is expected to contain a larger amount of the L or the M intermediate. It can be argued that, in Figure 2(a), the amplitude at 650 nm is proportional to the amount of protein that is able to undergo the photo-conversion between the K intermediate and the groundstate. When this argument is applied to the re-cooled crystal that had been warmed to 160 K, it would be calculated that 75 ­80% of the total protein existed as either the ground-state or the K intermediate. On the other hand, the absorption change observed at 414 nm during the warming/ re-cooling cycles (Figure 2(b)) suggests that a small amount (, 3%) of the M intermediate accumulated in the re-cooled crystal that had been warmed to 160 K. Therefore, the content of the L intermediate (plus its photoproducts) in this crystal state would be estimated to be , 20%. It have been shown that excitation of the L intermediate generates a photoproduct (L0 ) having all-trans retinal, which decays into the groundstate above 135 K.32 ­ 34 It is likely that a photoequilibrium between L and L0 was established when a re-cooled crystal was illuminated with

534

Bacteriorhodopsin's L Intermediate

green light. Although the spectroscopic property of L0 in the P622 crystal has not been investigated in detail, the spectroscopic data in Figure 2(b) suggest that L0 has an absorption maximum at a shorter wavelength than the ground-state. In our previous study,5 we recorded absorption spectra after a recooled crystal was illuminated with red light (not with green light). The absorption spectra recorded in this manner, which can be interpreted without consideration of L0 , are slightly different from those shown in Figure 1(c); for example, a re-cooled crystal that had been illuminated with green light at 160 K and then illuminated with red light at 80 K exhibited an absorption spectrum with a relatively lower absorbance at the apparent peak (,565 nm) and a more significant shoulder at 540 nm (data not shown). Together, these spectroscopic data suggest that the photoproduct L0 in the P622 crystal has a slightly red-shifted absorption maximum with a slightly larger extinction than its parent intermediate L, as has been observed in purple membrane.32 To make the following structural analysis simpler, we collected diffraction data from crystals that had been illuminated once with green light at 160 K, re-cooled in the dark and illuminated with red light at 100 K. These operations were carried out in a dark room of the beamline to suppress the accumulation of L0 . Crystal conditions suitable for the structural analysis of the L intermediate Since a crystal kept at 160 K contains a large amount of the L intermediate (Figure 1(a)), one

may argue that this crystal state is most suitable for the structural investigation of the L intermediate. However, our recent study of the K intermediate has shown that an X-radiation damage (i.e. decarboxylaltion of Asp85) proceeds three times faster at 130 K than at 100 K, making it difficult to determine how strongly the structure of the K intermediate is dependent on the temperature (Tokuhisa et al., unpublished data). This observation suggests that the protein becomes more liable to X-radiation damages at higher temperature. In the present study, therefore, we made an effort to remove undesired effects of X-radiation damages by collecting diffraction data from crystals that were re-cooled to 100 K (Table 1). Since the content of the L intermediate in a recooled crystal is not large, extraction of its structural information from diffraction data can be achieved only when there is independent structural information about other intermediates coexisting in the re-cooled crystal. In this study, the contribution of the K intermediate was made negligibly small by collecting diffraction data under illumination with red light. Regarding the groundstate, its structural model was previously constructed using diffraction data from a crystal kept at 100 K.5 With respect to the M intermediate coexisting in the re-cooled crystal, its content was so small that its contribution to diffraction intensities was neglected in the initial stage of structural analysis. In this case, a difference electron-density map between the L intermediate and the groundstate would be derived by comparing diffraction data from re-cooled crystals that had been illuminated at 160 K and those from crystals that had

Table 1. Data collection and final refinement statistics
Date set Data collection ° Wavelength (A) ° Resolution (A) Data completion (%) (outer shell) Number of unique reflections Multiplicity Rsymc (%) (outer shell) I/s (outer shell) Refinement ° Resolution (A) Protein atom Number of lipids Number of water Rcrystd (%) (outer shell) Rfreee (%) (outer shell) ° r.m.s. deviation of bond length (A) r.m.s. deviation of bond angle (8)
a b

Ground-statea 0.9 28.4­2.3 99.7 (99.7) 15,703 11.6 7.9 (47.7) 5.9 (1.6) 33.3­2.3 1756 5 41 24.8 (31.5) 27.1 (34.4) 0.008 1.16

L intermediateb 1.0 30.0­2.4 99.8 (99.8) 13,880 5.7 6.6 (49.2) 5.3 (1.5) 50.3­2.4 1756 5 41 30.0 (50.3) 33.2 (50.6) 0.008 1.28

° The statistics for diffraction data from which the ground-state structure at 2.3 A resolution was built. The statistics for one of three diffraction data sets collected for a 1:4 mixture of the L intermediate and the ground-state. Structural refinement of the L intermediate was performed using the form factor FL ¼ FG 2 ðFLþG 2 FG Þ=0:2; where FG and FLþG represent the form factors of the ground-state and a ,1:4 mixture state of the L intermediate and the ground-state, respectively. c Rsym ¼ Shkl Si lIi 2 kIll= Shkl Si Ii ; where Ii is the intensity of an individual reflection and kIl is the mean intensity obtained from multiple observations of symmetry related reflections. d Rcryst ¼ ðShkl lFo ðhklÞ 2 Fc ðhklÞlÞShkl lFo ðhklÞl: e Rfree was calculated by omitting 5% of the observed reflections from refinement.

Bacteriorhodopsin's L Intermediate

535

Figure 3. X-radiation-induced absorption changes observed for a ,1:4 mixture of the L intermediate and the ground-state. A frozen crystal that had been illuminated for one minute with green light at 160 K was cooled to 100 K and, under illumination of red light, the crystal was exposed to a monochro° matic X-ray radiation at e ¼ 1 A with a flux rate of 1012 photons/ second per mm2 and a beam size of 0.23 £ 0.21 mm2. The incident X-ray beam and red-light illumination were shut off during absorption measurements. (a) Absorption spectrum of the mixture state before and after the X-ray exposure. (b) Difference spectra derived by subtracting the absorption spectrum recorded before the X-ray exposure from those recorded after exposure to various fluxes of X-rays. The numerals in this Figure indicate the accumulated exposure time expressed in seconds. The P622 crystal containing the ,1:4 mixture of the L intermediate and the ground-state was mounted in such a manner that its c-axis became parallel to the propagation direction of the measuring light and perpendicular to the incident X-ray beam.

never been warmed above 100 K after the flash cooling (i.e. crystals containing the ground-state alone). Absorption changes in the P622 crystal exposed to synchrotron X-ray radiation To understand the safe level of X-ray flux for a crystallographic study of the L intermediate, we measured X-radiation-induced absorption changes using a micro-spectrophotometer system constructed at the beamline BL44B2 of SPring8.35 Figure 3 shows absorption changes observed when a re-cooled crystal that had been illuminated at 160 K was exposed to a monochromatic X-ray ° beam at l ¼ 1 A with a flux rate of , 2 £ 12 10 photons/second per mm2. With the increasing exposure time, the absorption band at 564 nm diminished and, instead, an orange species having absorption peaks at 510, 478 and 450 nm and a blue species having an absorption peak at 650 nm appeared (Figure 2(b)). Since the X-radiationinduced production of the orange species has been observed for a crystal containing the ground-state alone,3 it may be argued that the blue species is produced from the L intermediate. But, our recent study showed that the X-radiation-induced absorption increase at 650 nm was more significant for a crystal containing a larger amount of the M intermediate (Takeda et al., unpublished results). At

the present stage, we cannot exclude the possibility that the blue species was generated from a small amount of the M intermediate co-existing in the crystal investigated. Since the absorption peak of the visible band did not significantly shift during the X-ray exposure (Figure 3(a)), it is suggested that susceptibility of the L intermediate to X-ray damage is similar to that observed for the ground-state. It is worth noting that the absorption band at 565 nm did not completely vanish even after a prolonged X-ray exposure, irrespective of the small spot size of the monitoring light (0.1 mm) as compared to the beam size of the incident X-ray beam (0.2 £ 0.2 mm2). It is likely that the L intermediate is re-generated when its X-ray product absorbs a high-energy photon, as has been previously suggested for the ground-state.5 Structural changes induced by X-ray radiation The above result indicates that the safe level of X-ray flux for elucidation of the true structure of the L intermediate is , 3 £ 1014 photons/mm2. Since this value is very small, it seemed impossible for us to collect high-resolution diffraction data without any kind of X-ray damages. So, we first tried to understand which part of the protein is most liable to X-ray damages. For this purpose, several crystals containing a similar amount of the

536

Bacteriorhodopsin's L Intermediate

L intermediate were prepared by one minute of illumination with green light at 160 K and then with red light at 100 K. These crystals were mounted with the c-axis being nearly parallel to the rotation axis and, with the a-axis being initially orientated in various directions, they were rotated at a speed of 18 per frame during diffraction data collection, which was performed using a mono° chromatic X ray beam at l ¼ 1.0 A with a flux rate of , 4 £ 1013 photons/mm2 per frame. In the subsequent data reduction process, the diffraction data collected in an initial phase of X-ray exposure (i.e. the first 15 frames) were merged and compared with those collected in later phases of the X-ray exposure (e.g. the 16th to the 60th frames). ° Difference electron-density maps (at 2.4 A resolution) derived form such combinations of differently merged diffraction data exhibited weak peaks in the vicinity of retinal (data not shown). Unfortunately, the signal-to-noise ratio was not high enough to obtain definitive information as to the structural changes induced by an X-ray flux of , 6 £ 1014 photons/mm2. Nonetheless, this result tells us that the postulated structural change induced by this level of X-ray flux is very small. Our previous study have shown that decarboxylation of the aspartic acids in the active site becomes noticeable at an X-ray flux of , 1016 photons/mm2. In the present study, each diffraction data set was obtained using a much lower flux of X-rays (, 2 £ 1015 photons/mm2) and the structural analysis of the L intermediate was performed on the assumption that the structural change induced by this low flux of X-rays is negligibly small as compared with the one induced upon formation of the L intermediate. After the model building, the 2Fo 2 Fc map of the L intermediate was inspected to detect which amino acid residues in the protein have heterogeneous conformations as a result of X-ray damage. Difference electron density map between the L intermediate and the ground-state Figure 4 shows a difference electron-density map between the L intermediate and the ground-state ðlFL l 2 lFG lÞ that is derived by the following procedure. Firstly, a frozen crystal was mounted as mentioned above (i.e. the c-axis was nearly parallel to the rotation axis) and, after a , 1:4 mixture of the L intermediate and the ground-state was generated by one minute of illumination with green light at 160 K and subsequent illumination with red light at 100 K, a complete diffraction data set was obtained using a total X-ray flux of 2 £ 1015 photons/mm2. For derivation of the structure factor ðlFLþG lÞ of this mixture state, diffraction data sets from three crystals with different initial orientations (with respect to the a-axis), each of which was obtained using the same exposure time, were merged so as to reduce undesired effects of the initial rapid X-ray damages. Similarly, diffraction data from crystals containing the ground-state

alone were collected and merged. In these measurements, crystals grown in the same mother solution were used so as to remove a non-negligible effect of variation (, 0.2%) in the lattice constants, which was occasionally observed for crystals grown in different batches. Finally, the difference map between the mixture state and the ground-state was calculated using the observed structure factors (i.e. (lFLþG l and lFG l) and the phase derived from the structural model of the ground-state. The difference map shown in Figure 4 indicates that the structural changes induced upon formation of the L intermediate are restricted in the central part of the protein. In its detailed view (Figure 5), pairs of positive/negative densities are seen around the amino acid residues (Trp182 and Leu93) making contact with the 13-methyl group of retinal. These are attributable to a horizontal movement of the indole ring of Trp182 towards helix E and a large rotation of the side-chain of Leu93 around the Ca ­Cb bond. A pair of positive and negative densities seen in the vicinity of the C13 methyl group of retinal is indicative of the upward movement of this moiety. It is worth noting that a pair of positive/negative densities in the vicinity of the polyene chain is less significant than those seen in the difference map associated with the formation of the K intermediate.5 As the retinal has been shown to have a largely distorted 13-cis, 15-anti configuration in the K intermediate, the present result suggests that distortion in the retinal becomes smaller in the L intermediate. Another interesting feature in Figure 5 is a negative density seen underneath the retinal Schiff base; i.e. at the position that is occupied by a water molecule (Wat602) in the ground-state. Since a positive density is seen in the opposite side of the Schiff base, Wat602 is suggested to move upward so as to come to the space that is initially occupied by the side-chain of Leu93. Another water molecule (Wat601), which is at first hydrogen-bonded to the indole nitrogen of Trp182, is suggested to move horizontally so as to come near the peptide carbonyl of Ala215. Regarding two positive peaks (marked by X1 and X2) seen in the space among the peptide carbonyls of Lys216 and Thr46 and the side-chains of Leu93, Phe219 and Asp96, their origins will be discussed later. Structure of the L intermediate On the basis of the difference map shown in Figure 5, a structural model of the L intermediate was constructed. In the initial stage of model building, we assumed that all the internal water molecules are fixed at their most favored positions; i.e. the protein in the L intermediate takes only one conformation. Later, this assumption will be removed (see Discussion). In Figures 6 and 7, the structural model of the L intermediate is compared with the ground-state model. It can be seen that, upon formation of the L

Bacteriorhodopsin's L Intermediate

537

° Figure 4. Stereo view of the L minus bRground difference map, calculated at 2.4 A resolution, contoured at 3.5s (green, positive; purple, negative density) and overlaid on the ground-state model. The polypeptide main-chain is drawn in blue and the retinal-Lys216 chain, Leu93 and Trp182 are in red. This Figure and Figures 5 ­ 9 are drawn with XtalView.56

intermediate, the side-chain of Leu93 rotates around the Ca ­Cb bond by a rotation angle of ,1208. This rotation is coupled with a horizontal movement of Trp182 towards helix E. It is also shown that the retinal in the L intermediate takes a less distorted 13-cis,

15-anti configuration. This configuration, in which the Schiff base N­H bond directs towards the intracellular side, is allowed by movements of the amino-acid residues (Leu93 and Trp182) making contact with the C13 methyl group of retinal.

Figure 5. Detailed view of the L minus bRground difference map. This map is contoured at 3.5s (cyan, positive; purple, negative density) and overlaid on the structural models of the ground-state (green) and the L intermediate (carbon, oxygen and nitrogen atoms are drawn in orange, red and blue, respectively). Water molecules in L are represented by red (high occupancy) or navajo-white spheres (low occupancy).

538

Bacteriorhodopsin's L Intermediate

Figure 6. 2Fo 2 Fc map of the ground-state (a) and the L intermediate (b), contoured at 1.0s and overlaid on their structural models. Carbon, oxygen, nitrogen and sulfur atoms are drawn in orange and red, blue, green, respectively; water molecules are represented by red (high occupancy) or navajo-white spheres (low occupancy).

In the L intermediate, Wat602 establishes hydrogen-bonding interactions with the Schiff base N ­ H, the peptide CvO of Thr89 and another water molecule (Wat601). Wat601 is stabilized by hydrogen-bonding interaction with the peptide carbonyl of Ala215, but its intracellular side is connected to a non-polar tunnel extending to Asp96. After the rotation of the side-chain of Leu93, this tunnel becomes wider so that it is able to accommodate one or two water molecules (indicated by gray circles in Figure 6(b)). This possibility may be suggested by the L minus bRground difference map (Figure 5), in which two positive peaks are seen among the peptide carbonyls of Ly216 and Thr46 and the side-chains of Leu93, Phe219 and Asp96. But, as the 2Fo 2 Fc map of the L intermediate indicates that the electron density in this region is not high, we hesitate to add another water molecule of full occupancy (Figure 7(b)). A likely interpretation of the difference map is that Wat601 and Wat602 are mobile along the non-polar tunnel so that they migrate towards Asp96. This interpretation was brought during inspection of the 2Fo 2 Fc map of the ground-state (Figures 6(a) and 7(a)), in which only one water molecule (Wat601) is visible in the postulated proton pathway between the Schiff base and Asp96.

Difference electron density map between the L/M state and the ground-state The above model was constructed on the assumption that a small amount (3%) of the M intermediate co-existing in the re-cooled crystal had no contribution to diffraction intensities. To investigate how much this assumption affects the structural model of the L intermediate, we collected diffraction data from a re-cooled crystal that had been warmed to 180 K. In this crystal state, a large amount (, 20%) of the M intermediate was trapped so that its contribution to diffraction intensities became comparable to that of the L intermediate. Hereafter, this mixture state of the L and M intermediates is designated as the L/M state. To distinguish from the M intermediate (MRT) that accumulates at room temperature, the M intermediate in the L/M state is called Mcold. Our recent study showed that MRT is different structurally from Mcold (Takeda et al., unpublished results). Figure 8 shows a difference electron density map that is derived from the diffraction data of the L/M state and those of the ground-state. When this difference map is compared with that shown in Figure 5, it is suggested that the L-to-Mcold transition is accompanied by movements of key water

Bacteriorhodopsin's L Intermediate

539

Figure 7. 2Fo 2 Fc map of the ground-state (a) and the L intermediate (b), contoured at 0.8s and overlaid on their structural models. Carbon, oxygen, nitrogen and sulfur atoms are drawn in orange and red, blue, green, respectively; water molecules are represented by red (high occupancy) or gray spheres (low occupancy).

molecules. First of all, the positive density above the Schiff base (i.e. at the position occupied by Wat602 in L) is less significant in Figure 8 than in Figure 5. Instead, the positive density seen between the peptide carbonyls of Lys216 and Thr46 becomes more significant in Figure 8. Since the negative density underneath the Schiff base remains significant in Figure 8, it is unlikely that Wat602 moves back to the initial position. A reasonable explanation is that Wat602 moves upward so as to push Wat601 into the space

between the peptide carbonyls of Lys216 and Thr46. The synchronized movements of Wat601 and Wat602 seem to be assisted by rearrangements of Leu93 and Trp182. Since the positive/negative densities around these residues are less significant in Figure 8 than in Figure 5, it is suggested that these residues move towards their original positions and Wat602 moves towards the position initially occupied by Wat601. These movements are accompanied by a small downward movement of the C13 methyl group of retinal and a more

540

Bacteriorhodopsin's L Intermediate

° Figure 8. Streo view of the L/M minus bRground difference map, calculated at 2.5 A resolution, contoured at 3.5s (yellow, positive; purple, negative density) and overlaid on the models of the ground-state (green) and the L intermediate (orange, carbon; red, oxygen; blue, nitrogen atoms).

significant distortion in the main-chain peptide of Lys216. (When the difference maps in Figures 5 and 8 are scaled and subtracted from one another, the resultant double difference map exhibits negative/positive peaks around the backbone polypeptide of Lys216 and the side-chains of Leu93, Trp182 and Arg82. But, due to an irreversible increase in the crystal mosaicity upon warming to 180 K, it is difficult to unambiguously determine the structure of Mcold.) In the extracellular side of the retinal, a pair of positive/negative densities is seen around a water molecule (Wat603) that is located near Asp85. It is very likely that the interaction between this water with Asp85 is altered when Asp85 receives a proton from the Schiff base. It can be read alternatively; i.e. the movement of Wat603, together with the disappearance of Wat602 from the extracellular half, causes a significant increase in the pKa of Asp85, thereby facilitating the proton transfer from the Schiff base to Asp85. Except for structural rearrangements around Asp85 and a small displacement of the side-chain of Arg82, no appreciable structural changes were induced in the extracellular side of the protein.

Discussion
The present study demonstrates that the K-to-L transition is accompanied by vertical translocation of a water molecule (Wat602) that is initially located at the extracellular side of the Schiff base. This translocation is coupled with: (1) re-orientation of the Schiff base N ­ H bond towards the intracellular side and the upward movement of the C13 methyl group of retinal; (2) rotation of the side-chain of Leu93 around the Ca ­ Cb bond; (3) sliding of the indole ring of Trp182 towards helix E; (4) horizontal movement of another water molecule (Wat601), at first hydrogen-bonded to the indole nitrogen atom of Trp189, towards the pep-

tide carbonyl of Ala215; (5) small displacements of amino acid residues making contact with Leu93 and Trp182; but, (6) no significant changes in the other region including the hydrogen bonding interaction between Asp85 and the OH group of Thr89. Our finding of the large displacement of Wat602 is in harmony with recent FTIR studies indicating that the Schiff base interacts with water in the L intermediate but in a different manner than in the ground-state.13 The observation (1) is reasonable because it has been shown by vibrational spectroscopy that the retinal in the L intermediate has a less distorted 13-cis configuration than in the K intermediate.36,37 The observations (2) and (3) are in accordance with previous observations that mutations in Leu93 and Trp182 affect the formation/decay kinetics of the L intermediate.38,39 The observation (4) is in line with recent FTIR studies demonstrating that the indole nitrogen of Trp182 is not hydrogen bonded in the L intermediate.40,41 The observation (6) is consistent with a recent FTIR study showing that a strong interaction between Asp85 and the OH group of Thr89 remains unchanged in the L intermediate.42 These coincidences suggest that the structural change observed in the present study takes place under the physiological condition. In Figure 9, movements of the water molecules observed in the bRground-to-K and the K-to-L transitions are summarized. A small displacement of Wat602 (i.e. towards the Cd of Lys216) is already initiated in the primary photoreaction, which is accompanied by isomerization of the retinal into a largely twisted 13-cis, 15-anti configuration.4,5 A large jump of Wat602 from the crytoplasmic side of the Schiff base to the opposite side is assisted by , 908 rotation of the N ­ H bond of the retinal Schiff base. Now, an interesting question arises as to why the vertical movement of a key water molecule takes place prior to the primary proton transfer. Since the retinal chromophore is accommodated tightly in a hydrophobic pocket, there is

Bacteriorhodopsin's L Intermediate

541

Figure 9. Movements of key water molecules (indicated by red arrows) and conformational changes in Leu93, Trp182 and the retinal-Lys216 chain (indicated by yellow arrows) during the bRground-to-K and the K-to-L transitions. Atoms in bRground, K and L are drawn in green, yellow and purple, respectively.

no channel for passive movement of water across a horizontal plane passing through the chromophore. This plane can act as a structural barrier against movement of water. Probably the backward translocation of Wat602 (i.e. from the intracellular side of the retinal to the extracellular side) would not occur unless the cis-to-trans isomerization of retinal is initiated by excitation of the L intermediate. (It is conceivable that the relaxation rate of L0 into the ground-state, which proceeds above 135 K,32,33 is determined by the backward movement of Wat602.) Indeed, the difference electron-density map associated with formation of the L/M state (Figure 8) suggests that Wat602 moves further towards the intracellular side in the L-to-Mcold transition. This transition is accompanied by rearrangement of water molecules around Asp85, but no significant structural change is induced in the other region of the extracellular half of the protein. The structural change associated with the L-toMcold transition contrasts with that observed for the M intermediate (MRT) accumulated at room temperature, in which the hydrogen-bonding network in the proton transport pathway in the extracellular side is largely altered (Takeda et al., unpublished results). It is possible that Mcold is a transient state that can occur only at cryogenic temperature (at 170 ­180 K). When the present discussion is restricted to the formation mechanism of Mcold, it is reasonable to suppose the following scheme: (1) detachment of Wat602 from the Schiff base (and re-orientation of the side-chain of Leu93) causes a significant decrease in the pKa of the retinal Schiff base; (2) rearrangement of Wat603 around Asp85 (plus disappearance of Wat602 from the extracellular side) causes a significant increase in the pKa of Asp85; and (3) a water molecule (Wat603) remaining in the extracellular side of the Schiff base mediates the proton transfer between the Schiff base and Asp85. (Presently, we don't have enough data to discuss how a proton is

transferred from the Schiff base to Asp85. In our structural models, the OH group of Thr89 always directs towards helix B. But, its transient re-orientation may allow proton hopping along its sidechain.) Further studies are required to answer whether this scheme can be applied to describe the reactions taking place at room temperature. From these observations, it is very natural to consider that a water molecule is actively translocated from the extracellular to the intracellular side during the proton pumping cycle of bacteriorhodopsin; namely, the true function of bacteriorhodopsin is outward pumping of a proton and inward pumping of a water molecule. This idea is similar, but not identical, to the so-called "hydroxide hypothesis" previously proposed by Lueke et al.43 They postulated that a water molecule, at first hydrogen bonded to the Schiff base in the groundstate, is deprotonated by Asp85 after photoisomerization of the retinal. The hydroxide then moves towards the intracellular side of the chromophore, where it regains a proton from the protonated Schiff base. Their idea was brought during consideration of structural and functional relationships between bacteriorhodopsin (proton pump) and halorhodopsin (chloride pump). A recent crystallographic study of halorhodopsin has shown that its overall structure is similar to that of bacteriorhodopsin but, instead of a water molecule, a chloride ion is associated to the protonated Schiff base.44 It is not difficult to imagine that any anion interacting strongly with the protonated Schiff base is dragged towards the intracellular side upon the trans-to-13-cis isomerization of the retinal. But, the "hydroxide hypothesis" conflicts with experimental data as to the electrogenecity of the photocycle intermediates in oriented purple membrane. It has been shown that a positive charge moves towards the intracellular side upon formation of the L intermediate.45 The shortage in the "hydroxide hypothesis" can be removed by supposing that water (i.e. not hydroxide) is

542

Bacteriorhodopsin's L Intermediate

translocated across the Schiff base in the K-to-L transition. The negative electrogenecity of the L intermediate is explained well by the present structural model; i.e. re-orientation of the dipole moment of Wat602, together with the re-orientation of the Schiff base N ­ H bond, generates a net current towards the intracellular side. In the L intermediate, the retinal takes a less distorted configuration and, instead, the side-chains of Trp182 and Leu93 are pushed into narrower spaces (Figure 7). Probably, increase in the confliction energy between these residues with their surroundings is compensated for by decrease in the distortion energy of the retinal. Thus, it is not obvious that the L intermediate is more stable energetically than the K intermediate is. According to a recent report by Zhang & Mauzerall,46 the activation energy of the K-to-L transition is high (, 49 kJ/mol), but the enthalpy change is small (nearly zero). In the present study, we observed that cooling of the P622 crystal from 160 K to 100 K is accompanied by a partial conversion from the L into the K intermediate as well as into the M intermediate (Figure 1). For better understanding of the backward conversion into the K intermediate at low temperature, we need to pay attention on the entropy term in Gibbs free energy. The spectroscopic data of the P622 crystal suggest that the protein gains positive entropy (i.e. a more disordered conformation) upon formation of the L intermediate. In this relation, the 2Fo 2 Fc map shown in Figure 7(b) indicates that the rotation of the sidechain Leu93 creates a nonpolar tunnel that extends from the Schiff base to Asp96. Since the L minus bRground difference map (Figure 5) exhibits four positive density peaks along this tunnel, it can be argued that the water molecules (Wat601 and Wat602) placed at the terminal positions of this tunnel are mobile, at least, at 160 K. (This implies that the real structure of the L intermediate can't be represented with a mono-conformation model as shown in Figure 7(b).) This argument is supported by recent observations that mutations in amino-acid residues (e.g. Asp96, Thr46, Val49) surrounding the nonpolar tunnel affect vibration frequencies of water molecules in the L intermediate.47,48 These observations lead us to suppose that the unusual thermodynamic property of the L intermediate in the P622 crystal is attributable to mobility of these water molecules and/or flexibility of the non-polar tunnel extending from the Schiff base to Asp96. But, as the entropy gain in the K-to-L transition in another retinal protein has been suggested to depend on the composition of lipid/detergent surrounding the protein,49 a more comprehensive study is required to elucidate the relationship between the structural and the thermodynamic properties of the L intermediate. Although our structural model accounts for a large number of spectroscopic data concerning the L intermediate, it is difficult to find a structural correlation between our model and the previously reported models of the L intermediate.30,31 Royant

et al.30 reported that the largest structural rearrangements occurred within the extracellular half of the proton translocation pathway, including deformation of helix C and a downward swing of the side-chain of Arg82. On the other hand, Lanyi and Schobert31 reported that rearrangements took place in a small number of residues, including the retinal-Lys216 chain and the residues Phe42, Arg82 and Phe219; in their model, the Schiff base linkage ( ­NvC ­) is largely distorted so that the N ­ H bond directs towards the extracellular side. Most of the structural changes reported by these groups are not observed in the present study. Since these two groups used the same type of crystal (i.e. twinned or untwined P63), discrepancy between their models must come from experimental errors made by either or both of these groups. To explain discrepancies between our model and theirs, one may argue that the lightinduced structural change is affected greatly by the lattice force. This possibility can't be excluded. But, as most of functionally important native lipids are contained in the P622 crystal,5,50 we believe that the structural change observed in our crystal is close to the one occurring under the physiological condition. It is worth noting that some feature of the L minus bRground map reported by Royant et al. is reproduced in the L/M minus bRground map shown in Figure 8. Namely, a negative density at the initial position of Wat602, a positive density between the peptide carbonyls of Thr46 and Lys216 and a pair of negative/positive densities around Wat603 are commonly seen in these two maps. Interestingly, some other feature in their difference map (e.g. downward swing of the side-chain of Arg82) is shared by the MRT minus bRground map (Takeda et al., unpublished results). It may be argued that the protein in the P63 crystal has a higher freedom of motion than in the P622 crystal, allowing larger structural changes. But, it should be pointed out that what they investigated is a mixture of photoreaction intermediates that were accumulated at 170 K and, indeed, their spectroscopic data indicated accumulation of a large amount of M.2,3,51 Since the L-to-M transition proceeds fast at 170 K (Figure 1), their difference map is likely to be influenced strongly by co-existence of the M intermediate. In this case, our proposal of the upward translocation of Wat602 in the K-to-L transition is not necessarily contradictory to their "L minus bRground map". In fact, this proposal helps to answer why their L-state model has a smaller number of water molecules than their groundstate model. Regarding the model reported by Lanyi & Schobert,31 we cannot give an exact explanation for discrepancy between their model and the others. This is partly because their crystals were merohedrally twinned, and partly because their diffraction data were reported to vary from crystal to crystal. Probably, the variation in diffraction data is related to the susceptibility of the protein

Bacteriorhodopsin's L Intermediate

543

to X-radiation. In an earlier day, we were confronted with the same problem. In the present study, we made an effort to minimize undesired effects of X-radiation-induced structural changes. For instance, we collected diffraction data from crystals that were re-cooled to 100 K; the X-ray flux needed for data collection was substantially reduced by rotating the P622 crystal around an spindle axis nearly parallel to the c axis; diffraction data from several crystals with different initial orientations were merged; each crystal was exposed to a low flux of X-rays (,2 £ 1015 photon/mm2). Even at this low flux of X-rays, a significant Xradiation-induced absorption change took place (Figure 3). At the present stage, we have no definite information as to what happens at this low flux of X-rays, except that the postulated X-radiationinduced structural change is very small. Nonetheless, closer investigation of the 2Fo 2 Fc map of the L intermediate (Figure 7) indicates that the electron density at the Cd ­ C1 bond of Lys216 is lower than the other part of the retinal-Lys216 chain. One possible explanation is that, in the orange or blue species produced by X-ray absorption, the retinal chromophore has an altered configuration (e.g. a 15-syn configuration or a retro form). This remains to be an open question. In this paper, we proposed a hypothesis that water plays a principal actor in the story of proton pumping; i.e active translocation of water across the retinal Schiff base is a key event determining the directionality of proton pumping. In the derivation of this hypothesis, it is assumed implicitly that diffusion of water across the proton-uptake channel is slow as compared to the primary proton transfer from the Schiff base to Asp85. But, it may be argued that water molecules pass up and down the two half channels very rapidly. In this case, the water molecule being discussed could come from the extracellular channel or from the intercellular channel. To prove our hypothesis, therefore, we need to investigate how rapidly water molecules trapped in the hydrophobic cavity are exchanged with the bulk water. This interesting question remains to be answered in future work.

picked up with a cryo-loop and then flash-cooled by immersing into liquid propane. A thin crystal (, 0.2 mm £ 0.2 mm £ 0.01 mm) was selected for absorption measurements, and a thick crystal (,0.1 mm £ 0.1 mm £ 0.2 mm) was selected for diffraction measurements. Absorption measurements at cryogenic temperatures Absorption spectra of the P622 crystal were measured using a micro-spectrophotometer, in which monochromatic light from a double monochromator (Shimadz U350A) was focused on a frozen crystal by a combination of quartz lenses and two diaphragms in a homemade optical microscope and the measuring light passing through the crystal was focused again on a pinhole attached before a photomultiplier tube (Hamamatsu Photonics R374). The photocurrent was converted to a voltage signal by a logarithm amplifier and then digitized for data acquisition. Absorption spectra were corrected using the following equation: A ¼ 2ðlogðIsample 2 ID Þ 2 logðIblank 2 ID ÞÞ; where Isample and Iblank are photo-currents measured in the presence and the absence of a crystal, and ID is the dark current that was measured when the measuring light was blocked at the entrance of the microscope. A frozen crystal was mounted on a goniometer head attached to the microspectrophotometer, by which the crystal orientation was adjusted so that its c-axis became parallel to the measuring light beam. The temperature of the crystal was controlled in flow of cold nitrogen gas from a cryostreamer (Oxford CC-12). A green CW laser (l ¼ 678 nm, ,1 mW/mm2) was used to establish a photo-equilibrium state between the ground-state and photoreaction states and a red CW laser (l ¼ 532 nm, ,0.4 mW/mm2) was used to hit back the K intermediate to the groundstate. X-radiation-induced absorption changes were monitored with a micro-spectrophotometer system that was constructed at the beamline SPring8-BL44B2.35 Briefly, measuring light from a monochromator (ORIEL MS257) was directed into a single crystal by quartz lenses and transmitted light was detected with a photomultiplier tube. Its photocurrent was led to a logarithmic amplifier, whose output signal was digitized and acquired by DAQ device (National Instruments 6034E). Diffraction data collection and analysis X-ray diffraction measurements were performed at the beamlines SPring8-BL40B2, and -BL44B2, where a frozen crystal kept at 100 K and under red-light illumination was exposed to a monochromatic X-ray beam at wave° length of 1.0 A with a flux rate of ,2 £ 1012 photons/ mm2 per second. Diffraction data were collected using a CCD detector (MarScience or ADSC Quantum 4R) with an oscillation range of 18 and an exposure time of 20 seconds per image. Indexing and integration of diffraction spots were carried out with Mosflm 6.1.53 The scaling of data was done using SCALA in the CCP4 program suites.54 Structure of the L intermediate For preparation of a ,1:4 mixture state of the L intermediate and the ground-state, a frozen crystal was illuminated for one minute with green light at 160 K and, after cooling to 100 K, the crystal was illuminated with

Materials and Methods
Protein purification and crystallization Purple membrane was prepared from Halobacterium salinarum JW3 arrording to the established method.52 The P622 crystals of bacteriorhodopsin were grown as described.22 Briefly, a suspension of the polyhedral assemblies of bacteriorhodopsin20 in 2.5 mg/ml octylthioglucoside, 1.0 M ammonium sulfate, 0.16 M NaCl, 12% trehalose, 0.04% NaN3 and 0.08 M sodium citrate (pH 5.2) was concentrated at 5 8C by the sitting-drop vapor diffusion method using a reservoir solution containing 1.9 ­ 2.0 M ammonium sulfate. Incubation for , 6 months yielded high-quality hexagonal crystals. For absorption and diffraction measurements at cryogenic temperature, a single crystal was light-adapted,

544

Bacteriorhodopsin's L Intermediate

red light. Complete diffraction data sets from three crystals with different initial orientations were merged and the merged data ðFLþG Þ were used to evaluate the form factor of the mixture state: i.e. lFLþG l ¼ alFL lþ ð1 2 aÞlFG l; where FL and FG represent the form factors of the L intermediate and the ground-state, respectively, and a is the content of the L intermediate. Similarly, diffraction data obtained for crystals containing the ground-state alone were merged to evaluate the form factor of the ground-state; FG : If no X-ray damage took place, the difference lFLþG l 2 lFG l could be given by aðlFL l 2 lFG lÞ: When the effect of X-ray damage is not negligible, however, lFL l and lFG l should be replaced by the following quantities: lFL l ¼ ð1 2 kgL lÞlFL0 l þ kgL l·lFDL l and lFG l ¼ ð1 2 kgG lÞlFG0 l þ kgG l·lFDG l; where FL0 and FG0 represent the true form factors of the L intermediate and the ground-state, respectively, and FDL and FDG are the form factors of their X-ray products; gL and gG are the fractions of the X-ray products and k l represents the average over the crystals used for data reduction. When the susceptibility to X-rays is not different for the L intermediate and the ground-state (i.e. kgL l < kgG l), lFLþG l 2 lFG l is approximated by the following equation: klFLþG ll 2 klFG ll < a{ð1 2 kgL lÞðlFL0 l 2 lFG0 lÞ þ kgL l·ðlFDL l 2 lFDG lÞ} This equation implies that, in the observed FLþG 2 FL difference map, the structural difference between the ground-state and the L intermediate is superimposed on the structural difference between their X-ray products. In the present structural analysis, we made the following assumption: the major feature of the structural difference between the ground-state and the L intermediate is retained in the structural difference between their X-ray products; i.e. lFDL l 2 lFDG l < lFL0 l 2 lFG0 l: This assumption was brought from such an expectation that, at a low temperature (, 130 K), the positions of most internal water molecules would remain unchanged even if a specific site is altered by X-ray absorption. In this case, the form factor of the L intermediate is given by the relation: lFL0 l < lFG0 l þ ðlFLþG l 2 lFG lÞ=a: In the model building of the L intermediate, the protein conformation in the ground-state model (i.e. the configuration of the retinal-Lys216 chain, the orientation of Leu93 and the positions of Wat601 and Wat602) was modified manually so as to well explain the FLþG 2 FG difference map. Then, the protein conformation was subjected to a simulated annealing refinement with lipid molecules being restrained harmonically.55 This refinement was repeated using various values of a until the 2Fo 2 Fc map exhibited a reasonable feature (i.e. a homogeneous orientation of the side-chain of Leu93). The most likely a value was 0.2. Protein Data Bank accession codes The coordinates of the L intermediate are deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB code: 1ucq).

National Project on Protein Structural and Functional Analyses and partly by grants-in-aid from the Ministry of Education, Science, and Culture of Japan.

References
1. Haupts, U., Tittor, J. & Oesterhelt, D. (1999). Closing in on bacteriorhodopsin: progress in understanding the molecule. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 8, 367­ 399. 2. Balashov, S. P. & Ebrey, T. G. (2001). Trapping and spectroscopic identification of the photointermediates of bacteriorhodopsin at low temperatures. Photochem. Photobiol. 73, 453­ 462. 3. Lanyi, J. K. & Luecke, H. (2001). Bacteriorhodopsin. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 11, 415­ 419. 4. Kandori, H., Belenky, M. & Herzfeld, J. (2003). Vibrational frequency and dipolar orientation of the protonated Schiff base in bacteriorhodopsin before and after photoisomerization. Biochemistry, 41, 6026­ 6031. 5. Matsui, Y., Sakai, K., Murakami, M., Shiro, Y., Adachi, S., Okumura, H. & Kouyama, T. (2002). Specific damages induced by X-ray radiation and structural changes in the primary photoreaction of bacteriorhodopsin. J. Mol. Biol. 324, 469­ 481. 6. Schobert, B., Cupp-Vickery, J., Hornak, V., Smith, S. & Lanyi, J. (2002). Crystallographic structure of the K intermediate of bacteriorhodopsin: conservation of free energy after photoisomerization of the retinal. J. Mol. Biol. 321, 715­ 726. 7. Maeda, A. (2001). Internal water molecules as mobile polar groups for light-induced proton translocation in bacteriorhodopsin and rhodopsin as studied by difference FTIR spectroscopy. Biochemistry (Moscow), 66, 1256­ 1268. 8. Dencher, N. A., Sass, H. J. & Bueldt, G. (2000). Water and bacteriorhodopsin: structure, dynamics, and function. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1460, 192­ 203. 9. Belrhali, H., Nollert, P., Royant, A., Menzel, C., Rosenbusch, J. P., Landau, E. M. & Pebay-Peyroula, E. (1999). Protein, lipid and water organization in bacteriorhodopsin crystals: a molecular view of the ° purple membrane at 1.9 A resolution. Protein: Struct. Funct. Genet. 7, 909­ 917. 10. Luecke, H., Schobert, B., Richter, H. T., Cartailler, J. P. & Lanyi, J. K. (1999). Structure of bacteriorhodopsin ° at 1.55 A resolution. J. Mol. Biol. 291, 899­ 911. 11. Sheves, M., Albeck, A., Friedman, N. & Ottolenghi, M. (1986). Controlling the pKa of the bacteriorhodopsin Schiff base by use of artificial retinal analogues. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 83, 3262­ 3266. 12. Subramaniam, S., Marti, T. & Khorana, H. G. (1990). Protonation state of Asp (Glu)-85 regulates the purple-to-blue transition in bacteriorhodopsin mutants Arg-82 ! Ala and Asp-85 ! Glu: the blue form is inactive in proton translocation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 87, 1013­ 1017. 13. Maeda, A., Balashov, S. P., Lugtenburg, J., Verhoeven, M. A., Herzfeld, J., Belenky, M. et al. (2002). Interaction of internal water molecules with the Schiff base in the L intermediate of the bacteriorhodopsin photocycle. Biochemistry, 41, 3803­ 3809. 14. Grigorieff, N., Ceska, T. A., Downing, K. H., Baldwin, J. M. & Henderson, R. (1996). Electron-crystallographic refinement of the structure of bacteriorhodopsin. J. Mol. Biol. 259, 393­ 421.

Acknowledgements
We wish to express our gratitude to Drs S. Adachi, M. Murakami and K. Miura for helping data collection at Beamlines BL44B2 and BL40B2 of Spring-8. This work was supported, in part, by

Bacteriorhodopsin's L Intermediate

545

15. Vonck, J. (1996). A three-dimensional difference map of the N intermediate in the bacteriorhodopsin photocycle: part of the F helix tilts in the M to N transition. Biochemistry, 35, 5870­ 5878. 16. Hendrickson, F. M., Burkard, F. & Glaeser, R. M. (1998). Structural characterization of the L-to-M transition of the bacteriorhodopsin photocycle. Biophys. J. 75, 1446­ 1454. 17. Bullough, P. A. & Henderson, R. (1999). The projection structure of the low temperature K intermediate of the bacteriorhodopsin photocycle determined by electron diffraction. J. Mol. Biol. 286, 1663­ 1671. 18. Subramaniam, S. & Henderson, R. (2000). Molecular mechanism of vectorial proton translocation by bacteriorhodopsin. Nature, 406, 653­757. 19. Schertler, G. F., Lozier, R., Michel, H. & Oesterhelt, D. (1991). Chromophore motion during the bacteriorhodopsin photocycle: polarized absorption spectroscopy of bacteriorhodopsin and its M-state in bacteriorhodopsin crystals. EMBO J. 10, 2353 ­2361. 20. Kouyama, T., Yamamoto, M., Kamiya, N., Iwasaki, H., Ueki, T. & Sakurai, I. (1994). Polyhedral assembly of a membrane protein in its three-dimensional crystal. J. Mol. Biol. 236, 990­ 994. 21. Landau, E. M. & Rosenbusch, J. P. (1996). Lipidic Cubic Phases: a novel concept for the crystallization of membrane proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 14532­ 14535. 22. Takeda, K., Sato, H., Hino, T., Kono, M., Fukuda, K., Sakurai, I., Okada, T. & Kouyama, T. (1998). A novel three-dimensional crystal of bacteriorhodopsin obtained by successive fusion of the vesicular assemblies. J. Mol. Biol. 283, 463­ 474. 23. Essen, L.-O., Siegert, R., Lehmann, W. D. & Oesterhelt, D. (1998). Lipid patches in membrane protein oligomers: crystal structure of the bacteriorhodopsinlipid complex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 11673­ 11678. 24. Faham, S. & Bowie, J. U. (2002). Bicelle crystallization: a new method for crystallizing membrane proteins yields a monomeric bacteriorhodopsin structure. J. Mol. Biol. 316, 1 ­ 6. 25. Edman, K., Nollert, P., Royant, A., Belrhali, H., Pebay-Peyroula, E., Hajdu, J. et al. (1999). High-resolution X-ray structure of an early intermediate in the bacteriorhodopsin photocycle. Nature, 401, 822­ 826. 26. Luecke, H., Schobert, B., Richter, H. T., Cartailler, J.-P. & Lanyi, J. K. (1999). Structural changes in bacteriorhodopsin during ion transport at 2 angstrom resolution. Science, 286, 255­ 260. 27. Sass, H. J., Buldt, G., Gessenich, R., Hehn, D., Neff, D., Schlesinger, R. et al. (2000). Structural alterations for proton translocation in the M state of wild-type bacteriorhodopsin. Nature, 406, 649­ 653. 28. Facciotti, M. T., Rouhani, S., Burkard, F. T., Betancourt, F. M., Downing, K. H., Rose, R. B. et al. (2001). Structure of an early intermediate in the M-state phase of the bacteriorhodopsin photocycle. J. Mol. Biol. 313, 615­628. 29. Rouhani, S., Cartailler, J.-P., Facciotti, M. T., Walian, P., Needleman, R., Lanyi, J. K. et al. (2001). Crystal structure of the D85S mutant of bacteriorhodopsin: Model of an O-like photocycle intermediate. J. Mol. Biol. 313, 615­ 628. 30. Royant, A., Edman, K., Ursby, T., Pebay-Peyroula, E., Landau, E. M. & Neutze, R. (2000). Helix deformation is coupled to vectorial proton transport in the photocycle of bacteriorhodopsin. Nature, 406, 645­648.

31. Lanyi, J. K. & Schobert, B. (2003). Mechanism of proton transport in bacteriorhodopsin from crystallographic structures of the K, L, M1, M2, and M2, intermediates of the photocycle. J. Mol. Biol. 328, 439 ­450. 32. Hurley, J. B., Becher, B. & Ebrey, T. (1978). More evidence that light isomerises the chromophore of purple membrane protein. Nature, 272, 87 ­ 88. 33. Balashov, S. P. & Litvin, F. F. (1981). Photochemical conversions of bacteriorhodopsin. Biophysics, 26, 566 ­581. 34. Maeda, A., Tomson, F. L., Gennis, R. B., Ebrey, T. G. & Balashov, S. P. (1999). Chromophore­protein­ water interactions in the L intermediate of bacteriorhodopsin: FTIR study of the photoreaction of L at 80 K. Biochemistry, 38, 8800­ 8807. 35. Sakai, K., Matsui, Y., Kouyama, T., Shiro, Y. & Adachi, S. (2002). Optical monitoring of freeze-trapped reaction intermediates in protein crystals: a microspectrophotometer for cryogenic protein crystallography. J. Appl. Crystallog. 35, 270­ 273. 36. Maeda, A., Sasaki, J., Pfefferle, J. M., Shichida, Y. & Yoshizawa, T. (1991). Fourier transform infrared spectral studies on the Schiff base mode of all-trans bacteriorhodopsin and its photointermediates K and L. Photochem. Photobiol. 54, 911 ­ 921. 37. Fodor, S. P., Pollard, W. T., Gebhard, R., van den Berg, E. M. & Mathies, R. A. (1988). Bacteriorhodopsin's L550 intermediate contains a C14 ­ C15 s-transretinal chromophore. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 85, 2156 ­2160. 38. Subramaniam, S., Greenhalgh, D. A., Rath, P., Rothschild, K. J. & Khorana, H. G. (1991). Replacement of leucine-93 by alanine or threonine slows down the decay of the N and O intermediates in the photocycle of bacteriorhodopsin: implications for proton uptake and 13-cis-retinal all-trans-retinal reisomerization. Proc. Natl Acad. USA, 88, 6873­ 6877. 39. Weidlich, O., Schalt, B., Friedman, N., Sheves, M., Lanyi, J. K., Brown, L. S. & Siebert, F. (1996). Steric interaction between the 9-methyl group of the retinal and tryptophan 182 controls 13-cis to all-trans reisomerization and proton uptake in the bacteriorhodopsin photocycle. Biochemistry, 35, 10807­ 10814. 40. Maeda, A., Sasaki, J., Ohkita, Y. J., Simpson, M. & Herzfeld, J. (1992). Tryptophan perturbation in the L intermediate of bacteriorhodopsin: Fourier transform infrared analysis with indole-nitrogen-15 shift. Biochemistry, 31, 12543­ 12545. 41. Yamazaki, Y., Sasaki, J., Hatanaka, M., Kandori, H., Maeda, A., Needleman, R. et al. (1995). Interaction of tryptophan-182 with the retinal 9-methyl group in the L intermediate of bacteriorhodopsin. Biochemistry, 34, 577­ 582. 42. Kandori, H., Yamazaki, Y., Shichida, Y., Raap, J., Lugtenburg, J., Belenky, M. & Herzfeld, J. (2001). Tight Asp-85-Thr-89 association during the pump switch of bacteriorhodopsin. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 98, 1571­ 1576. 43. Luecke, H., Schobert, B., Richter, H. T., Cartailler, J. P. & Lanyi, J. K. (2000). Coupling photoisomerization of retinal to directional transport in bacteriorhodopsin. J. Mol. Biol. 300, 1237 ­1255. 44. Kolbe, M., Besir, H., Essen, L.-O. & Oesterhelt, D. (2000). Structure of the light-driven chloride pump ° halorhodopsin at 1.8 A resolution. Science, 288, 1390 ­1396. ´ ´ ´ 45. Ludmann, K., Gergely, C., Der, A. & Varo, G. (1998). Electric signals during the bacteriorhodopsin

546

Bacteriorhodopsin's L Intermediate

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

photocycle, determined over a wide pH range. Biophys. J. 75, 3120­ 3126. Zhang, D. & Mauzerall, D. (1996). Volume and enthalpy changes in the early steps of bacteriorhodopsin photocycle studied by time-resolved photoacoustics. Biophys. J. 71, 381­ 388. Yamazaki, Y., Hatanaka, M., Kandori, H., Sasaki, J., Karstens, W. F. J., Raap, J. et al. (1995). Water structural changes at the proton uptake site (the Thr46-Asp96 domain) in the L intermediate of bacteriorhodopsin. Biochemistry, 34, 7088­ 7093. Yamazaki, Y., Tuzi, S., Saito, H., Kandori, H., Needleman, R., Lanyi, J. K. & Maeda, A. (1996). Hydrogen bonds of water and C ­ O groups coordinate long-range structural changes in the L photointermediate of bacteriorhodopsin. Biochemistry, 35, 4063 ­ 4068. ¨ Losi, A., Wegener, A. A., Engelhard, M., Gartner, W. & Braslavsky, S. E. (1999). Time-resolved absorption and photothermal measurements with recombinant sensory rhodopsin II from Natronobacterium pharaonis. Biophys. J. 77, 3277­ 3286. Sato, H., Takeda, K., Tani, K., Hino, T., Okada, T., Nakasako, M. et al. (1999). Specific lipid ­ protein interactions in a novel honeycomb lattice structure

51.

52.

53.

54. 55.

56.

of bacteriorhodopsin. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 55, 1251­ 1256. Royant, A., Edman, K., Ursby, T., Pebay-Peyroula, E., Landau, E. M. & Neutze, R. (2001). Spectroscopic characterization of bacteriorhodopsin's L-state in 3D crystals cooled to 170 K. Photochem. Photobiol. 74, 794­ 804. Oesterhelt, D. & Stoeckenius, W. (1974). Isolation of the cell membrane of Halobacterium halobium and its fractionation into red and purple membrane. Methods Enzymol. 31, 667­ 678. Steller, I., Bolotovsky, B. & Rossmann, M. G. (1997). An algorithm for automatic indexing of oscillation images using Fourier analysis. J. Appl. Crystallog. sect. D, 30, 1036­ 1040. Collaborative Computaing Project Number 4 (1994). Programs for protein crystallography. Acta Crystallog. D, 50, 760­ 763. ¨ Brunger, A. T., Adams, P. D., Glore, G. M., Delano, W. L., Gros, P., Grosse-Kunstleve, R. W. et al. (1998). Crystallography and NMR system (CNS): a new software system for macromolecular structure determination. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 54, 905­ 921. McRee, D. E. (1993). Practical Protein Crystallography, Academic Press, San Diego.

Edited by D. Rees (Received 6 August 2003; received in revised form 23 October 2003; accepted 27 October 2003)

