Dispatch

R551

Giant proteases: Beyond the proteasome
Tingting Yao and Robert E. Cohen

Proteasomes and related proteases are thought to be the principal machinery responsible for intracellular protein degradation. A new class of giant proteases has been discovered that can augment the catabolic functions of proteasomes and, under some conditions, may even substitute for proteasomes altogether.
Address: Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa, Bowen Science Building, 51 Newton Road, Iowa City, Iowa 52242-1109, USA. E-mail: robert-cohen@uiowa.edu Current Biology 1999, 9:R551­R553 http://biomednet.com/elecref/09609822009R0551 © Elsevier Science Ltd ISSN 0960-9822

Proteasomes have the remarkable ability to be highly selective and, at the same time, degrade an enormously diverse set of substrates. What other proteases could possibly substitute for the proteasome? One clue comes from the discovery of other proteases with the potential for `self-compartmentalization'. The active sites in proteasomes are confined to an internal cavity, and this self-compartmentalizing architecture provides a unique solution to the problem of substrate specificity. Once a substrate enters the internal chamber, its degradation is ensured by access to multiple endoproteolytic sites. This strategy of limiting access to a proteolytic chamber to provide selectivity and processivity has, in fact, been exploited by several bacterial proteases as well as the proteasome [1]. In Escherichia coli, the ClpP and ClpQ/HslV proteases are each composed of two oligomeric rings that enclose a central cavity for proteolysis. Subunits that are members of the AAA family of ATPases [4] associate with these proteases -- ClpA or ClpX with ClpP, and ClpY/HslU with ClpQ/HslV -- and appear to act as chaperones that can supply unfolded substrates to the proteolytic core of the complex. It is likely that similar concerted unfolding and degradation reactions also occur when the eukaryotic 20S proteasome associates with its ATPase-containing 19S regulatory complex to form the full-size 26S particle. Archaebacteria offer their own examples of self-compartmentalizing proteases. In fact, the proteasome in Thermoplasma acidophilum is the prototype of the eukaryotic core 20S proteasome. It is, however, another archaebacterial protease that may offer some insight into the mystery of the NLVS-adapted mammalian cells. Several years ago, in a search for regulatory components of the Thermoplasma proteasome, Baumeister's group [5] encountered a big surprise, the tricorn protease. They found that, when expressed in E. coli, the 120 kDa tricorn protease polypeptide self-assembled to form a hexameric toroid. Electron microscopy and three-dimensional image reconstruction showed that three tricorn protease dimers enclose a channel that traverses the hexamer. The existence of this channel, which has 2.6 nm openings into a cavity 10 nm across and up to 4.3 nm high [6], suggests that tricorn protease, like proteasomes, may be self-compartmentalizing. The tricorn protease and 20S proteasomes are both ATPindependent peptidases. The tricorn protease hexamer has trypsin-like and very high chymotrypsin-like activities, whereas the archaebacterial 20S proteasome has only chymotrypsin-like activity. The surprise came when it was discovered that tricorn protease can assemble further into an

Our understanding of proteolytic mechanisms of cellular regulation has advanced dramatically in the last few years. One important outcome has been the realization that intracellular proteolysis is accomplished primarily by only one or a few proteases. These proteases are quite unusual: all are large, multisubunit complexes in which the proteolytic sites are confined to an internal cavity [1,2]. The proteasome, found in all eukaryotes and also some archaebacteria, is perhaps the most familiar example. As the destination of proteins tagged with ubiquitin for subsequent degradation, the proteasome has come to be regarded as the ultimate proteolytic machine. Unexpectedly, however, some new and even bigger contenders have now appeared on the scene. Although the functions and mechanisms of these giant proteases remain obscure, a variety of observations suggest that they may cooperate with proteasomes, and possibly even replace them. One hint of the existence of such giant, non-proteasomal proteases came from studies reported two years ago by Glas et al. [3]. With the aim of determining the extent to which the proteasome is essential in eukaryotic cells, they challenged EL-4 lymphoma cells with a proteasome inhibitor -- N-blocked tri-leucine vinyl sulfone (NLVS), which covalently modifies the proteasome's catalytic  subunits. Surprisingly, in the presence of this inhibitor, a small proportion of the cells survived and recovered to proliferate. The frequency of survival (0.3%) was well above what could be expected from mutations. Immunoprecipitation from the adapted cells and subsequent biochemical analysis demonstrated that the proteasomes were completely assembled, yet modified and inactive. These results suggested that the adaptation involved up-regulation of one or more proteases that can functionally replace the proteasome in cell-cycle control and other critical processes.

R552

Current Biology, Vol 9 No 15

Figure 1

Permission to reproduce this figure electronically has been denied.

degradation [8]. Firstly, the degradation rate was found to be limited by the amount of proteasome, but not that of tricorn protease or the tricorn protease activators. Secondly, addition of tricorn protease generated a new set of smaller peptides, whereas addition of the activating factors generated mostly free amino acids. And thirdly, when the proteasome, tricorn protease and tricorn protease activating factors were combined, large amounts of free amino acids with little intermediate-sized peptides were observed. Yet why should tricorn protease be assembled into a supermolecule? Tamura et al. [8] suggested that, in order to efficiently channel reaction intermediates, the capsid structure acts as a scaffold that accommodates the aminopeptidase activators. But so far there is no biochemical evidence for channeling, or for direct interactions between either tricorn protease and the factors or the proteasome and tricorn protease. It also is not known whether the tricorn protease supermolecules have any advantage over tricorn protease hexamers in speeding up this catabolic pathway. An alternative possibility is that the supermolecule has additional proteolytic activities which arise only in response to a cell stress, such as loss of proteasomal function. Returning to eukaryotes, a giant protease assembled from aminopeptidase monomers was discovered that seems to be a likely substitute for the proteasome in NLVSadapted EL-4 cells. In the original study by Glas et al. [3], the adapted cells displayed a remarkable increase in a chymotrypsin-like activity detected with the fluorogenic tripeptide substrate AAF-AMC. This activity eluted earlier than the proteasome upon gel filtration. Importantly, AAF-chloromethylketone, an inhibitor of tricorn protease, blocked proliferation of NLVS-adapted but not normal cells. Niedermann's group [9] later discovered that a large form of a protease known as tripeptidyl peptidase II (TPPII) could account for the AAF-AMC hydrolyzing activity in the proteasome-inhibited cells. TPPII is a serine peptidase that removes amino-terminal tripeptides from unblocked oligopeptides. Its substrates and inhibitors are similar to those of tricorn protease, but completely different from those of the proteasome. A particularly striking observation is that, like tricorn protease, TPPII can assemble into a higher-order structure that has an internal channel. Each supermolecule is a rod-like stack of eight 6.5 nm-wide segments, with a central channel along the long axis that traverses each segment (Figure 1b). This giant TPPII particle might be another example of a selfcompartmentalizing protease, though proof of this awaits a higher-resolution structure. Interestingly, purified TPPII also displayed endoproteolytic activity; compared with the proteasome, TPPII cleaved a 41-residue polypeptide faster and at different sites. Thus, TPPII may make an essential contribution to the proteolytic activities that substitute for those of the proteasome in proteasome-inhibited cells.

(a) Views of the tricorn protease of Thermoplasma acidophilum, obtained by electron microscopy and three-dimensional reconstruction of the icosahedral capsid. The three images show views down the three-fold (left), five-fold (middle) and two-fold (right) symmetry axes. The scale bar represents 50 nm. (Adapted from [6].) (b) The TPPII protease from murine EL-4 cells. This image is an average from 1365 negatively-stained particles visualized by electron microscopy. The rod-like structure is 50 nm long. (Adapted from [9].)

unprecedented 55 nm icosahedral capsid composed of 20 hexamers (Figure 1a) [6]. This 14.6 MDa homooligomer appears to enclose a cavity approximately 37 nm in diameter, large enough to accommodate a ribosome. Because this superstructure was only observed in Thermoplasma cell extracts, but not with recombinant protein, it is likely that accessory factors are required for its assembly in vivo. Despite its peptidase activity and the beauty of its highlyordered structure, tricorn protease by itself gives us little indication as to its physiological role. The identification of aminopeptidases that act synergistically with tricorn protease has provided evidence that tricorn protease may serve as one component of a complete proteolytic pathway. Three such factors -- F1, F2 and F3 -- from T. acidophilum have been described, each of which can release amino acids from the unblocked amino termini of short peptides [7,8]. Experiments by Tamura et al. [8] offered insight into how these aminopeptidases and tricorn protease may work together. When tricorn protease, aminopeptidase F2 and fluorogenic substrates were mixed in different orders, it was found that release of the fluorophore was enhanced by F2 when the substrate was preincubated with tricorn protease. Thus, degradation by tricorn protease generates better substrates for the aminopeptidases. With constant amounts of tricorn protease, activation by the aminopeptidase factors is saturable, a further indication of a sequential mechanism. A more complete sequential scheme for protein degradation (Figure 2) can be envisioned when the proteasome is brought into play. It is conceivable that the proteasome, or possibly other self-compartmentalizing proteases, digests unfolded proteins into oligopeptides, which in turn are substrates for tricorn protease. Digestion by tricorn protease then generates shorter peptides, which are further reduced to amino acids by the aminopeptidases. This hypothesis was supported by an analysis of insulin B-chain

Dispatch

R553

Figure 2 Hypothetical pathway for proteolysis in Thermoplasma. The sequential action of a proteasome complex (or related ATPdependent protease), the tricorn protease (shown here in its hexameric form) and aminopeptidases may be needed for complete degradation of a polypeptide to free amino acids. (Adapted from [8].)

6­12-mers

2­4-mers F2 F1 F3

Free amino acids

Proteasome + AAA ATPase or other ATP-dependent proteases

Tricorn protease

Aminopeptidases

Current Biology

While decidedly provocative, the above observations still do not resolve the key questions of whether tricorn protease and TPPII are in fact functional homologues, and whether the TPPII endoprotease activity is regulated by assembly into a superstructure. At least with regard to this second point, the recent characterization of a giant protease from fission yeast suggests that the answer might be yes. Osmulski and Gaczynska [10] observed small (approximately 0.8 MDa) and large (approximately 4 MDa) forms of a protease from the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe termed `multicorn' -- based on an implied, rather than established, relationship to tricorn protease -- that has substrate specificity similar to mammalian TPPII. Examination of the large form of the multicorn protease by atomic force microscopy revealed a 50­55 nm diameter round structure, consisting of six or seven particles, rather than the eight-segmented, rod-like TPPII superstructure. The large form of the multicorn protease, which may correspond to the giant form of TPPII, was found to have protease activity towards unfolded proteins, such as heat-denatured casein; this activity was not observed with the small form, however. Intriguingly, the relative amounts of the two multicorn complexes in vivo were found to change with the growth state of the cells. It is tempting to speculate that fission yeast cells respond to stress conditions, such as proteasomal inhibition, by promoting assembly of the large multicorn complex. The recent studies on giant proteases from diverse species seem to converge on a common theme: the assembly of small peptidases into large complexes can regulate enzymatic activities in response to an environmental change. Higher-order complex assembly probably requires accessory factors, which may directly or indirectly sense the need for protease function. To substitute for the proteasome, the large protease assemblies must be specific and processive, requirements that in part might be served by the feature of self-compartmentalization. Moreover, because the proteasome-inhibitor-adapted EL-4 cells did not accumulate

ubiquitinated proteins, it should be possible for at least a subset of the substrates normally degraded via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway to be diverted to the new protease. It would not be surprising if one or more chaperones are up-regulated to fulfill this job. Of course, all these speculations await examination. Nonetheless, from the glimpse we have had so far, there can be little doubt that the discovery of these giant proteases has opened a new window on protein catabolism and its role in cell survival.
Acknowledgements
We thank Wolfgang Baumeister, Tomohiro Tamura, and Maria Gaczynska for providing images of proteases, and Lois Weisman and Cecile Pickart for helpful comments. The authors' work is supported by a University of Iowa Center for Biocatalysis and Bioprocessing fellowship (T.Y.) and National Institutes of Health grant GM37666 (R.E.C.).

References
1. Lupas A, Flanagan JM, Tamura T, Baumeister W: Selfcompartmentalizing proteases. Trends Biochem Sci 1997, 22:399-404. 2. Baumeister W, Walz J, Zuhl F, Seemuller E: The proteasome: paradigm of a self-compartmentalizing protease. Cell 1998, 92:367-380. 3. Glas R, Bogyo M, McMaster JS, Gaczynska M, Ploegh HL: A proteolytic system that compensates for loss of proteasome function. Nature 1998, 392:618-622 4. Patel S, Latterich M: The AAA team: related ATPases with diverse functions. Trends Cell Biol 1998, 8:65-71. 5. Tamura T, Tamura N, Cejka Z, Hegerl R, Lottspeich F, Baumeister W: Tricorn protease -- the core of a modular proteolytic system. Science 1996, 274:1385-1389. 6. Walz J, Tamura T, Tamura N, Grimm R, Baumeister W, Koster AJ: Tricorn protease exists as an icosahedral supermolecule in vivo. Mol Cell 1997, 1:59-65. 7. Tamura T, Tamura N, Lottspeich F, Baumeister W: Tricorn protease (TRI) interacting factor 1 from Thermoplasma acidophilum is a proline iminopeptidase. FEBS Lett 1996, 398:101-105. 8. Tamura N, Lottspeich F, Baumeister W, Tamura T: The role of tricorn protease and its aminopeptidase-interacting factors in cellular protein degradation. Cell 1998, 95:637-648. 9. Geier E, Pfeifer G, Wilm M, Lucchiari-Hartz M, Baumeister W, Eichmann K, Niedermann G: A giant protease with potential to substitute for some functions of the proteasome. Science 1999, 283:978-981. 10. Osmulski PA, Gaczynska M: A new large proteolytic complex distinct from the proteasome is present in the cytosol of fission yeast. Curr Biol 1998, 8:1023-1026.

