Abstracts / Bone 44 (2009) S253­S338

S281

serum triglyceride levels also, however, P+ST and P+NG40 showed no statistical differences. Conclusion: P. notoginseng 40 mg/kg showed lowering effect on serum total cholesterol and triglyceride levels significantly. Furthermore, triglyceride levels after P. notoginseng 40 mg/kg administration had no statistical difference with atorvastatin administration group.

Fig. 3. Serum LDL-cholesterol levels.

kidneys, lungs, heart, intestine, eyes, and brain. Different levels of expression and mutations of these molecules were observed in organ diseases as well as in carcinomas. Using immunohistochemistry, we have previously shown the presence of BMP2 and BMP7 in colon tissues. The aim of this study was to investigate the expression level of mRNA for BMP2 and BMP7 in rat colons during different phases of experimental inflammatory disease as well as the effect of BMP7 treatment on endogenous expression of BMP2 and BMP7. Experimental colitis was induced by intracolonic administration of the clysma containing 2,4,6-trinitrobenzensulphonic acid (TNBS). We study the mRNA expression level of BMP2 and BMP7 during acute (2nd and 5th day after colitis induction) and chronic phase (14th and 30th after colitis induction) of experimental colitis as well as after BMP7 treatment with RT-PCR. RT-PCR analysis confirmed immunohistochemical data of the presence of BMP2 and BMP7 during acute and chronic phases of experimental inflammatory bowel disease. Expression of BMP2 and BMP7 was observed during the acute as well the chronic phase of colitis. Levels of BMP2 were gradually increased from days 2 to 30 after colitis induction while levels of BMP7 were increased at days 14 and 30. BMP7 treatment reduced the expression level of transcript for BMP2 in colon tissue during experimental colitis. Presence of BMP2 and BMP7 expressions in colon tissue during inflammatory bowel disease suggests an important role of BMP members in the regulation of colon tissue damage and healing. Their different pattern of expression indicated on potential tension between these BMP members might have therapeutic benefit (potential) for intestine diseases as was shown for kidney disease. Analysis of the BMP family members in colon tissue especially BMP2 and BMP6 may contribute to the better understanding of the role and interplay of BMPs in inflammatory bowel disease. Conflict of interest: None declared. doi:10.1016/j.bone.2009.03.501

Fig. 4.. Serum triglyceride levels.

Conflict of interest: None declared. doi:10.1016/j.bone.2009.03.500

P076 Ultrasonographic findings and biomarkers of bone and cartilage in subjects with early knee OA J. Kumma,*, A. Tammb, M. Lintropc, B. Sondergaardd, A. Tamma a Laboratory Medicine b Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation, University of Tartu c Radiology, University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia d Immunodiagnostics, Nordic Bioscience AS, Herlev, Denmark Background. Assuming that it is important to assess the status of soft tissues in OA joint, there is surprisingly few data concerning the application of US in knee OA, except for the acute cases. Aims. To investigate (i) what kind of US findings are present in early stage knee OA, (ii) the associations between US findings and biomarkers of bone-cartilage. Methods. A population cohort aged 35­55 years (137 subjects. Knee radiographs were graded for OA:14% without changes, 68% grade I and 18% grade II or III OA. US examination was performed according to the EULAR guidelines using 7.5 MHz probe. Biomarkers of type I collagen resorption (CTx-I) and formation (PINP) were assessed by ECLIA;of type II collagen resorption (UCTx-II) by ELISA. Noncollagenuos bone marker OC and cartilage marker COMP were also assessed. For statistics non-parametric methods and regression analysis. Results are adjusted for age and BMI. Results. The most prevalent US findings were calcifications of tendons, defects of cartilage and subchondral bone and popliteal

P075 Effects of in vivo administration of bmp7 to expression levels of bmp2 in experimental inflammatory bowel disease I. Marica,*, S. Zoricic Cveka, T. Celica, T. Turkb, Z. Crncevic-Orlicb, D. Bobinaca a Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of Rijeka b Department of Internal Medicine, Clinical Hospital Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), members of the transforming growth factor-beta superfamily, are multifunctional cytokines originally isolated from the bone. Beside their primarily osteogenic function their importance in development, proliferation and morphogenesis on a variety of cells and tissues has been shown. BMP2 and BMP7 are BMP family members with 60% similarity at the amino acid sequence. They are expressed in many tissues though their role is best understood in the bone. More recently it has been shown that BMP2 and BMP7, their receptors and BMP associated signaling molecules are expressed in non-skeletal organs e.g.

