Molecular Cell, Vol. 12, 1­4, July, 2003, Copyright 2003 by Cell Press

Previews

Inactivating Chromosomes: A macro Domain that Minimizes Transcription

The histone variant macroH2A plays a role in mammalian chromosome X inactivation. Recent data suggest its unusual C-terminal macro domain may be an enzyme that regulates the ADP-ribosylation of chromatin. MacroH2A could thus help correct gene dosage between males and females using a novel epigenetic mark. Over the last few years we have seen good progress in studying the role of distinct histone modifications. Researchers' efforts have gone well beyond studying the historically well-known phosphorylation and acetylation of histones. Lysine and arginine methylation, in particular, have received much attention recently. It is now clear that histones, these most central building blocks of our cellular DNA, are downstream targets for many signaling cascades. Further, covalent changes in chromatin are now known to alter not just gene expression, but also the biological function of intergenic regions. In fact, there hardly appears to be a single chromosomal region whose function is not affected by some form of posttranslational tweaking. An additional set of developments has been challenging our simplified view of the seemingly static, "canonical" nucleosome. First, core components of the nucleosomal histone octamer itself, such as histone H2B (and probably H2A), show increased dynamic behavior in live cells relative to H3/H4 (Kimura and Cook, 2001). Second, histone variants such as H2A.X and H2A.Z form specialized chromatin structures that affect DNA repair, chromatin remodeling and gene silencing (Downs et al., 2000; Santisteban et al., 2000; Dhillon and Kamakaka, 2000). Third, several histone variants are enriched in specific chromosomal locations. The centromere binding protein CENP-A, for example, is a centromere-specific histone H3 homolog (Earnshaw and Migeon, 1985). A particularly enigmatic histone variant is macroH2A. It has an N-terminal region with high sequence homology to H2A but it also contains a 25 kDa nonhistone macro domain of unknown function (Aravind, 2001). What we do know--and this is the exciting bit--is that macroH2A appears to be enriched on the inactive mammalian X chromosome (Costanzi and Pehrson, 1998). So how could its structure relate to its interesting function? A recent crystallographic study by Bycroft and collaborators (Allen et al., 2003) suggests that macro domains, including that found in macroH2A, could possess catalytic activity toward ADP-ribosylated substrates, last but not least toward histones themselves (Figure 1). This raises the possibility that macroH2A, a "histone" by definition, could also be an enzyme at the

same time: a potential case of histone variant meets epigenetic modifier? But what exactly are macro domains? Macro domain proteins can be found in all organisms. While some proteins consist almost entirely of the 135 residue macro fold, others are embedded within much larger polypeptides. Usually occurring as a singlet, the macro domain can be repeated up to three times. Potential roles for the domain in binding RNA have been suggested based on the evidence that several ssRNA viruses contain macro domain proteins essential for RNA synthesis. Macro domains also occur in proteins with poly-ADPribose polymerase (PARP) activity. PARPs catalyze the multiple transfer of ADP-ribose onto the glutamic acid residues of acceptor proteins, using NAD as a substrate. The increased negative charge of poly-ADP-ribosylated proteins may alter their biological properties. Very efficient poly-ADP-ribose glycohydrolases return the acceptor protein to a deribosylated state rather quickly, so it has been suggested that poly-ADP ribosylation is a very dynamic regulatory event, a property that could be useful during the process of cell division, for example. Several poly-ADP-ribosylated centromere proteins have, in fact, been reported. Other known substrates include chromatin components such as histone H1 and HMG proteins, where ribosylation is thought to affect condensation of the chromatin fiber. While the occurrence of macro domains in some PARPs merely hints at a functional role in poly-ADP ribosylation, a much stronger case for an ability of macro domains to bind (or alter) substrates related to (poly-) ADP ribose comes from a whole proteome search for novel catalytic activities in S. cerevisiae (Martzen et al., 1999). The YBR022W gene product, which consists exclusively of a macro domain, processes the 1-phosphate group of 1-phospho-ADP-ribose. The authors suggested that this could be important in the metabolism of tRNA splicing byproducts, such as the ADPribose-1-2-cyclic phosphate that is generated from NAD . But what do macro domains look like? In a recent issue of the Journal of Molecular Biology, Bycroft and collaborators provide us with the first crystal structure of a macro domain and offer us important functional clues (Allen et al., 2003). Their structure reveals a mixed / fold with similarity to P loop-containing nucleotide triphosphate hydrolases, particularly in the enzyme's putative active site. The fact that these enzymes hydrolyze nucleotide triphosphates, while the yeast macro domain gene product YBR022W hydrolyzes compounds with an ADP-ribose moiety instead, could be the result of different primary sequences in crucial substrate binding regions, such as a Walker A motif that is replaced by a Gly-Asp-Ile-Thr (GDIT) consensus motif in macro domains. Macro domains may thus act as phosphoesterases of a quite specific class of ADP-ribose related substrates. The authors suggest that many macro domains may display enzymatic activity, while substrate specificity and therefore biological function could be distinct. Mac-

Molecular Cell 2

Figure 1. MacroH2A Is a Histone H2A Variant that Is Enriched at the Inactive X Chromosome and that May Display Novel Enzymatic Activities The scheme illustrates chromatin at the level of individual nucleosomes. On the inactive X chromosome, a fraction of nucleosomes differ in their histone composition by containing the H2A variant macroH2A. MacroH2A contains a 25 kDa nonhistone domain, known as the macro domain, which may be important for the specialized functions of the protein. The recently determined three-dimensional structure of the macro domain from the macro domain-containing AF1521 protein (Allen et al., 2003) suggests that macro domains may possess enzymatic activity toward phosphorylated substrates.

roH2A itself lends support to this theory. First, there are two closely related macroH2A genes, macroH2A1 and macroH2A2. They differ in a few positions in the H2A domain, but show more extensive sequence divergence in the macro domain. In particular, residues that are probably important for both catalysis and substrate specificity differ between macroH2A1 and macroH2A2. Second, macroH2A1 has a splice variant (that is, macroH2A1.2 c.f. macroH2A1.1), which alters the region that is predicted to bind phosphate groups. As a result of this differential splicing, macroH2A1.2 ends up looking more like macroH2A2. The structure of the macro domain thus suggests that macroH2A subtypes and splice variants may display related, but not identical, enzymatic activities. The 3D structure also suggests a strong structural similarity between macro domains and the N-terminal DNA binding domain of leucine aminopeptidases. Together with the occurrence of macro domain proteins in ssRNA viruses, this adds to the untested possibility that macro domains may bind nucleic acids. Does this potential affinity for DNA and/or RNA help explain macroH2A's biological function? Perhaps. The initiation and establishment of chromosome X inactivation, in fact, does require a noncoding Xist RNA molecule. Xist is expressed from the chromosome that is to be inactivated, coats the chromosome during the establishment phase of inactivation, and leads to formation of a transcriptionally silent X chromosome that is characterized by CpG dinucleotide methylation and histone H3/H4 hypoacetylation, two hallmarks of transcriptionally inactive chromatin. Following inactivation, Xist RNA is no longer required for the maintenance of the inactive state. The possibility that the macro domain may help stabilize the binding of Xist to the X chromosome is therefore appealing. However, macroH2A's incorporation into the inactive X chromosome occurs well after Xist binding. This would rather argue for a role in the maintenance

of the inactive state and not for an interaction between macroH2A and Xist. The structure of the macro domain determined by Bycroft and collaborators is particularly useful in shedding light on this issue: it rules out the macro domain as an obvious nucleic acid binding candidate, but supports its likely enzymatic function toward as yet unknown phosphoester substrates. Whether these substrates are the known poly-ADP-ribosylated histones and HMG proteins, or other proteins that may come into contact with a chromatin-bound macroH2A molecule on the inactive X chromosome, remains to be established. Another open question is what targets macroH2A to the inactive X chromosome. As we dig deeper, it becomes obvious that there are still many answers (and new questions) out there. We can now be a little more confident that several macro domains could be enzymes. Based on the strong transcriptional silencing observed on the inactive X, histone macroH2A may generate an epigenetic mark with a role in the inactivation of the X chromosome for the long life of a mammalian organism. The chromatin community has been provided with an exciting structureled impetus for the continued biological testing of this potential histone/enzyme combo. Andreas G. Ladurner Gene Expression Programme and Structural and Computational Biology Programme European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) Meyerhofstrasse 1 69117 Heidelberg Germany
Selected Reading Allen, M.D., Buckle, A.M., Cordell, S.C., Lowe, J., and Bycroft, M. ¨ (2003). J. Mol. Biol. 330, 503­511. Aravind, L. (2001). Trends Biochem. Sci. 26, 273­275.

Previews 3

Costanzi, C., and Pehrson, J.R. (1998). Nature 393, 599­601. Dhillon, N., and Kamakaka, T.R. (2000). Mol. Cell 6, 769­780. Downs, J.A., Lowndes, N.F., and Jackson, S.P. (2000). Nature 408, 1001­1004. Earnshaw, W.C., and Migeon, B.R. (1985). Chromosoma 92, 290­296.

Kimura, H., and Cook, P.R. (2001). J. Cell Biol. 153, 1341­1353. Martzen, M.R., McCraith, S.M., Spinelli, S.L., Torres, F.M., Fields, S., Grayhack, E.J., and Phizicky, E.M. (1999). Science 286, 1153­1155. Santisteban, M.S., Kalashnikova, T., and Smith, M.M. (2000). Cell 103, 411­422. Smith, S. (2001). Trends Biochem. Sci. 18, 369­376.

Cracking the Histone Code: One, Two, Three Methyls, You're Out!

In this issue of Molecular Cell, Zhang et al. report the structure of a ternary complex between the SET domain histone methyltransferase DIM-5, its cofactor, and a histone H3 peptide. The insight gained from analysis of a key amino acid provides an exciting opportunity to dissect the possible functional meaning of mono-, di-, and trimethylation of histone lysine residues in vivo that will complement existing approaches in the quest to crack the histone methylation code. Although the nucleosome hypothesis was proposed nearly 30 years ago (see Kornberg and Lorch, 1999), only gradually has it been appreciated that chromatin structure plays a vital role in regulating gene expression, DNA replication, recombination, and repair. This awakening has been accompanied by steady movement of chromatin structure into pole position among studies of DNA-templated mechanisms that control cellular differentiation and responses to external stimuli (Felsenfeld and Groudine, 2003). Furthermore, chromatin and the histones that make up the structural core of the nucleosome represent the crux of epigenetic mechanisms for the inheritance of phenotypic traits (Jenuwein and Allis, 2001). Unraveling the physical basis for control of these various processes through alterations in chromatin structure will ultimately determine the depth to which we can understand the development and behavior of complex eukaryotic organisms. Histones are subject to a bewildering array of posttranslational modifications--acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and ADP-ribosylation-- that have been closely linked to the control of many cellular activities (recently reviewed by Ausio et al., 2001). Decades of work on histone modification and regulation of gene expression have coalesced into a "histone code" hypothesis that encapsulates the function of histone modifications in chromatin structure and in the regulation of nuclear functions (Strahl and Allis, 2000; Turner, 2000). In the language of the histone code, specific histone modification patterns control the association of proteins with chromatin through their effect on the strength and specificity of direct physical interaction with histones. The association of histone binding pro-

teins with chromatin leads directly or indirectly to changes in the functional state of the underlying DNA (for example, transcriptionally active or inactive) through changes either in the higher order structure of chromatin or in the ability to subsequently recruit specialized cellular machinery such as the RNA polymerase transcription complex. The histone code hypothesis relies on there being two groups of biochemical activities: (1) enzymes to write the code, which can add or remove modifications at specific target sites in the histones, and (2) proteins to interpret the code, which can specifically interact with histones displaying appropriate modification patterns and with other factors to mediate subsequent functional effects. There is now considerable evidence documenting the existence of both classes of activities, strongly supporting the notion of a histone code. This has stimulated intense interest in cracking the complete histone code so that we might perhaps "read" the functional status of any region of the genome through its histone modifications as easily as we can translate DNA sequence into protein sequence using the genetic code. While progress on this quest to date has been significant, early results indicate that the histone code is exquisitely subtle and complex (see, for example, Fischle et al., 2003), and complete decryption of the code will require a sustained effort combining biochemistry, genetics, and structural biology. A practical application of this knowledge lies in the treatment of numerous human developmental disorders and diseases caused by defects in the machinery that writes and reads the histone code. Out of the many histone modifications, attention has recently focused on lysine methylation because of its close correlation with transcriptional activity (Kouzarides, 2002). Many histone methyltransferase enzymes have been identified, followed in quick succession by several crystal structures (Zhang et al., 2003). Methylation of lysine differs from acetylation in several important aspects. It does not remove the charge of the lysine, and uniquely, the -amino group of a targeted lysine residue can accept one, two, or three methyl groups to form mono-, di-, or trimethylated products. Recent findings suggest that di- and trimethylation have different functional connotations within a transcriptional context, although the significance and exact nature of any difference in meaning remains unknown (reviewed by Turner, 2003). However, given that we know all three methylation products are observed in vivo and that histone methyltransferase enzymes differ with respect to the level of methylation they can achieve (Zhang et al., 2003), it is, at the very least, an extremely provocative

