Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 233, 306­312 (2001) doi:10.1006/jcis.2000.7239, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

Monolayer Characteristics of Bacteriocin AS-48, pH Effect and Interactions with Dipalmitoyl Phosphatidic Acid at the Air­Water Interface
Hikmate Abriouel, Jos´ S´ nchez-Gonz´ lez, Mercedes Maqueda, Antonio G´ lvez,§ e a a a Eva Valdivia, and Mar´a Jos´ G´ lvez-Ruiz¶,1 i e a
 Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Sciences, Institute of Biotechnology, and ¶Biocolloid and Fluid Physics Group, Department of Applied Physics, University of Granada, 18071 Granada, Spain; Department of Electronics and Electromechanical Engineering, School of Industrial Engineering, University of Extremadura, Avda. de Elvas, s/n, 06071 Badajoz, Spain; and §Department of Microbiology, University of Ja´ n, Spain e Received December 6, 1999; accepted September 28, 2000

Bacteriocin AS-48 produced by Enterococcus faecalis S-48 is a ribosomally synthesized cyclic peptide (7.4 kDa) of broad inhibitory spectrum against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Simple monolayers of AS-48 and of dipalmitoyl phosphatidic acid (DPPA) at the air­water interface are studied. The AS-48 interfacial behavior in the function of pH explains the biological activity of the peptide. The lipid monolayers show the characteristic behavior of phosphatidic acid at the mentioned interface. The interactions between AS-48 and DPPA, a majority lipid of the bacterial cell membrane, are quantitatively investigated. The results indicate that only when the lipid molecules are charged enough (pH 10.5) is an attractive interaction between AS-48 and DPPA observed, although under these experimental conditions the results seem to indicate that a deformation of the peptide helical structure could take place. C 2001 Academic Press Key Words: monolayers; peptide; lipid interactions.

INTRODUCTION

The bacteriocin AS-48 produced by Enterococcus faecalis S-48 is a ribosomally synthesized cyclic peptide (7.4 kDa) of broad inhibitory spectrum against Gram-positive and Gramnegative bacteria (1­3). AS-48 is a strongly basic molecule (isoelectric point 10.5) that contains a high proportion (49%) of hydrophobic amino acids and uncharged hydrophilic residues which form a hydrophobic helical peptide (4, 5). The structural gene for AS-48 has been cloned and sequenced (2). The comparative analysis of the amino acid sequence deduced from the as-48 gene and that of a fragment of AS-48 peptide obtained by endoproteinase digestion has demonstrated unambiguously that the mature peptide AS-48 has a cyclic structure in which a peptide bond links the amino group of the Nterminal initial amino acid methionine to the carboxyl group of the final triptophane (Chart 1). Therefore, AS-48 appears to be the first example of a new type of ribosomally synthesized
1

To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: mjgalvez@ugr.es.

cyclic peptide. Recently, the sequence-specific 1 H assignment and secondary structure of this peptide have been reported (3). Bacteriocin AS-48 contains five -helix structures connected by five short turn regions. It is remarkable that the cyclation of the peptide occurs within the -helix encompassing the first three N-terminal and the last seven carboxy-terminal residues. These data suggest that the tridimensional structure of the mature protein must differ greatly from those of the linear prepeptide. Bacteriocin AS-48 exerts a concentration-dependent bactericidal effect on sensitive bacteria and, in some cases, a (secondary) bacteriolytic action. The primary target of AS-48 is the bacterial cell membrane, on which it acts by forming channels or pores. The initial effects caused by AS-48 addition at low concentration include collapse of the membrane electric potential, cessation of active transport, and leakage of small molecules. These effects can be observed on intact cells as well as on cytoplasmic membrane vesicles and artificial asolectin vesicles (6). Similarly, electrical measurements suggest that AS-48 forms channels on phospholipid bilayer membranes, having conductances of 12 to 18 pS and an estimated pore diameter of 0.7 nm (6). Higher concentrations of bacteriocin also induce a chaotic membrane disorganization that results in membrane fusions, as is deduced from observation by electron microscopy (6). This bacteriocin is therefore a good substrate for studying protein­membrane interaction. Moreover, its broad antimicrobial spectrum, including food-spoilage and pathogenic bacteria, also offers promising perspectives for biotechnological applications in the field of food preservation. In order to begin to explain the kind of interactions between AS-48 and the target membrane and to get information on the best conditions for these interactions, in this paper we have studied, at different pH conditions, the interactions between bacteriocin AS-48 and dipalmitoyl phosphatidic acid (DPPA), since this compound has been revealed as a majority component of the bacterial cell membrane. In this case, the study has been carried out using a two-dimensional molecular arrangement formed by spreaded monolayers at the air­water interface. This model

0021-9797/01 $35.00
Copyright C 2001 by Academic Press All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

306

SURFACE BEHAVIOR OF AS-48 PEPTIDE AND DPPA LIPID

307

provides a more quantitative analysis than is available from other models like, e.g., bilayers (7). Investigating the properties of mixed monolayers is of great interest because it makes it possible to gain knowledge about the interactions between the monolayer compounds. From a biological point of view, it is clear that all mechanisms are influenced by these interactions. Hence, understanding the behavior of mixed monolayers can be considered an important contribution to a general study model for biological systems. In order to perform a quantitative analysis of the molecular interactions in the mixed monolayers, we examined the area per molecule or residue as a function of composition for mixed monolayers at various surface pressures for the additivity relationship (8), a12 = x1 a1 + x2 a2 , [1]

250 mm Vydac C18 reversed-phase column equilibrated in buffer A (10 mM trifluoracetic acid, TFA) at a flow rate of 3 ml/min. The column was washed with buffer A for 15 min and the retained material was recovered with a linear gradient (0 to 100% B over 30 min) of isopropyl alcohol : acetonitrile (2 : 1, v : v) in 4 mmol 1-1 TFA. The different fractions collected were lyophilized and then redissolved in 1 ml of water before they were tested for antimicrobial activity and then were stored at -20 C. The protein concentration was determined using a BioRad Bradford reagent. The amino acid sequence of AS-48 peptide, as determined in Ref. (3), is presented in Chart 1 in the one-letter code. Chart 1: Amino acid sequence of AS-48 peptide. The hypothetical maturation occurs by a reaction between M+1 (amino terminal) and W+70 (carboxyl terminal) with a water molecule elimination and the formation of a peptide bond. 1 +1 MAKEFGIPAAVAGTVLNVVEAGGWVTTIVSILTAVGSGGLSLLAAAGRES 51 IKAYLKKEIKKKGKRAVIAW+70 Materials. The AS-48 solutions used for monolayer studies were aqueous solutions (1 mg/ml, ionic strength 1 mM) with the same pH as the subphase, in order to avoid potential barriers and to increase the peptide spreading. A 0.5% of amyl alcohol was added to the AS-48 solutions to improve the spreading process (9, 10). DPPA of analytical research grade was supplied by Sigma. The lipid was spread from a n-hexane/ethanol (9 : 1 v/v) solution with 0.05% amyl alcohol added to improve spreading (9, 10). The subphases were aqueous buffers. The buffers consist of solutions containing sodium acetate and acetic acid (pH 5.0), phosphate (pH 7.0), or boric acid (pH 10.5). Water used in all experiments was first twice distilled in an all-Pyrex apparatus and then passed through a Millipore Milli-Q reagent system for further purification. Conductivity of the water obtained after this process was always 10-6 -1 cm-1 and its pH was 6­6.5. All compounds used in preparing the solutions were of analytical quality, supplied by Merck. Experimental device and method.  -A isotherms were performed using the previously described Langmuir method (9, 11). A computer-controlled film balance (Lauda FW-1) has been used. The film spreading process was carried out using a microsyringe (Hamilton). Before compression of the monolayers, a 10-min lapse was estimated to be sufficient for evaporating the solvent without contamination of the films. For mixed monolayers the peptide was spread first and then the lipid. Previously, it has been demonstrated that the used organic solvent amounts do not damage the peptide at the interface. The monomolecular films were compressed at a constant rate of 6.5 × 10-4 m s-1 . Previously, we checked that the shape of the isotherms was independent of the compression rate. In the case of peptide monolayers, cycles of compression and expansion in

where a12 is the average surface area per residue (for peptide) (residual area) or per molecule (for lipid) (molecular area) in the mixed monolayer, x1 and x2 are the mole fraction of components 1 and 2 in the monolayer, and a1 and a2 stand for residual or molecular areas of pure compounds (in simple monolayer) at the same surface pressure used to determine a12 . The excess free energies of mixing have been estimated for our systems as described elsewhere (9), by the application of the relationship (8) GE =
0 

a E d,

[2]

where a E is the excess area of mixing (NA (a12 - x1 a1 - x2 a2 )) and NA is Avogadro's number. The errors in all cases are 10% of the G E values determined by using this equation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS

AS-48 production and purification to homogeneity. For bacteriocin production, strain E. faecalis A-48-32 was grown at 37 C for 7.30 h in CM-G broth [1], consisting of BHI (0.1%), casaminoacids (0.1%), yeast nitrogen base (YNB; 0.14%), MgSO4 (40 mM), and glucose (1%) dissolved in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.2. After the cultivation period, the cells were removed by centrifugation and the supernatant containing AS-48 was brought to pH 6.5 with 0.1 M NaOH and mixed (20 : 1, v : v) with carboxymethyl­Sephadex CM-25 (Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden) under stirring for 1 h. The mixture was allowed to settle, the supernatant was decanted and discarded, and the gel was loaded on a 2 × 50 cm glass column. The gel was washed first with 200 ml of distilled water (flow rate 300 ml h-1 ) and then with 0.5 M NaCl in water. The material retained in the gel was eluted with 1.5 M NaCl in water. The different fractions obtained were tested for antimicrobial activity as described elsewhere (1). Active fractions obtained after cation exchange were brought to pH 3.5 with acetic acid before they were loaded on a 10 ×

308

ABRIOUEL ET AL.

surface pressure were recorded in order to confirm the stability of these monolayers at the air­aqueous solution interface. The isotherms were recorded at a temperature of 20 C, controlled by a Haake F3 K thermostatic bath to ±0.1 K.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

TABLE 1
pH 10.5 7.0 5.0 pl (mN/m) 22.5 16.7 18.3 Apl  2 (A /residue) 17.4 11.5 7.7 Alift  2 (A /residue) 23.2 15.0 12.0 Ao  2 (A /residue) 21.5 13.6 10.4 re  (A) 7.7 5.0 4.0 ri (A) 3.9 2.6 1.1

Monolayers of AS-48 The ability of the AS-48 peptide to form stable monolayers at different electrical states has been checked by spreading the peptide on aqueous subphases at different pHs and recording surface pressure­molecular area (-A) isotherms on compression. The monolayers of AS-48 were performed by the spreading method. In this study it has been demonstrated that AS-48 peptide forms stable monolayers at the air­water interface. The experimental evidences are as follows: (a) A high reproducibility of the results ( -A isotherms) has been found. (b) The cycles of compression and expansion in surface pressure (not shown) confirm the stability of the films at the mentioned interface. (c) The calculated free energy of desorption per molecule in function of the surface pressure (until 20 mN/M, close to the equilibrium spreading pressure of AS-48) at different pHs is more than 20 kT units in the more unfavorable case, indicating again the stability of the films at the interface. In Fig. 1 the  -A isotherms of AS-48 peptide monolayers compressed on subphases of pH 5.0, 7.0, and 10.5 at 20 C are shown. All isotherms exhibit three zones with different compressibility and the intermediate corresponds to a plateau. This plateau can be interpreted as being due to a different process. It could be due to a reorientation process of the peptide molecules to a more condensed and stable arrangement. Also, the plateau could be interpreted as being due to a desorption of segments following a reversible adsorption process. Most of the biopolymers at the air­water interface behave in this way (7). Both

Note. pl and Apl are the surface pressure and residual area at the beginning of the plateau (inflection point of the -A isotherms for AS-48 monolayers), Alift is the residual area when the surface pressure lifts off, Ao is the limit residual area, and re and ri are the effective external and internal radius of an -helix.

FIG. 1. Surface pressure­residual area (-A) isotherms for AS-48 simple monolayers at 20 C and different pHs.

interpretations would explain the high surface pressures found after the plateau. However, the low limiting area/residue values after the plateau, the plateau surface pressures and areas/residue, summarized in Table 1, and a equilibrium spreading pressure of the peptide of 22.10 ± 0.07 mN/m appear to indicate that this plateau corresponds to the collapse of the films. In fact, the surface pressure values at the beginning of the plateau (16.7­ 22.5 mN/m) are typical values for collapse pressures of proteins with low molecular weight. Similar behavior has been found for other polypeptides by different authors (12­14). The collapse mechanism has not been analyzed. However, in similar studies on the surface behavior of peptides with -helices the collapse has been interpreted as the formation of multilayers by an interdigitation process between the side chains of the -helices, as was proposed by Lavigne et al. (13). It is well accepted that the hydrophobic -helices are lying down on the surface with the helix axis parallel to the interface when the peptide was spread at the air­water interface. After compression the -helices will be distributed on the surface, so that their side chains will be in contact. Further compression will provoke the interdigitation process between the chains and, finally, the transition from monolayer to multilayer will take place in the same way that has been proposed for the monolayer/bilayer transition of homopolypeptides (12, 13, 15). This behavior is very interesting because it could explain the ability of this peptide to form channels. Proteins forming ion channels have been shown to be composed of several strands of helices (16, 17). Assuming the collapse model proposed by Lavigne et al. (13), it is possible to calculate the effective internal and external radii of an -helix from singular residual area values in the  -A isotherms. The area residual at which the surface pressure lifts off is the area to which the side chains come in contact and it should correspond to the diameter of the helix (two times the effective external radius) times the translation distance per residue ° along the -helix (1.5 A/residue) (13, 18). The residual area at the plateau surface pressure or at the inflection point in the  -A isotherms is interpreted as the area at which the interdigitation process occurs and it should be the interhelical distance for interdigitated helices (the effective external radius plus the effective internal radius) times the translation distance. The calculated radii are included in Table 1. The behavior of the peptide monolayers with the pH of the subphase is peculiar, since the -A isotherms appear at higher

SURFACE BEHAVIOR OF AS-48 PEPTIDE AND DPPA LIPID

309

residual areas as the pH is closing to the iep of the peptide (10.5). This feature is also reflected in the limit residual area values (see Table 1). The residual areas obtained for the AS-48 peptide monolayers are in the range found for other polypeptides with a packing of hydrophobic -helices (13, 14, 19). However, the results indicate that at pH iep (of AS-48) a light loss of secondary structure would take place. This expansion of the monolayer is rather difficult to explain, since at this pH the number of charges with opposite sign is the same. In fact, the shape of the isotherms is similar and the most striking difference is that the collapse surface pressure is higher when the pH coincides with the iep. This is probably due to the disappearance of electrostatic repulsion between likely charged groups. Nevertheless, these results coincide with other data obtained for this peptide in relation to its biological activity and thermal stability. It has been found that AS-48 is more biologically active and more thermally resistant as the pH moves away from the iep (data to be published). Other experimental evidence of this feature is the effective internal radius obtained at different pHs, which have been calculated with ° this aim. Observing the results in Table 1, we find that the 2.6-A ° value value corresponding to pH 7.0 is according to the 2.9-A found by Lavigne et al. (13) for hydrophobic polypeptides with -helical conformation. The value of ri at pH 10.5 is higher ° (3.9 A), suggesting a deformation of the helical structure. The ° value of 1.1 A at pH 5.0 is very low; also the residual areas at the beginning and the end of the plateau are much smaller than those generally found for polypeptides, indicating the possibility of a partial solubilization process. In order to confirm this hypothesis, the free energy of desorption per molecule, G d , has been calculated in function of the pH by the application of the following equation (20, 21): Gd =
e

FIG. 2. Free energy of desorption per molecule in kT units as a function of the surface pressure for AS-48 simple monolayers at different pHs.

of the secondary structure by a hydration mechanism at basic pH (16). Monolayers of DPPA The -A isotherms of DPPA and their pH dependence are depicted in Fig. 3. The collapse point of the monolayers is the last point represented in the isotherms. The collapse surface pressure and the limit and collapse molecular area values are shown in Table 2. The isotherms at pH 5.0 and 7.0 indicate that the monolayers are condensed in all ranges of compression. At pH 10.5 the film undergoes a short liquid expanded (LE)/liquid condensed (LC) phase transition at the surface pressure of around 5 mN/m. The behavior in function of the subphase pH is similar to that found by saturated phosphatidic acids (23). The isotherms appear to be more expanded as the pH increases and

A d,


[3]

where e is the surface pressure of the equilibrium monolayer,  is the surface pressure at which all segments are removed from the interface, and A is the area per molecule. The values of G d in kT units are represented in function of the surface pressure at the studied pHs in Fig. 2. As can be observed, the free energy of desorption is lower at pH 5.0 and increases as the pH is closing to the iep. Again, this behavior could be explained as being due to the fall of the electrostatic repulsion as the pH increases. Therefore, it can be concluded that the monolayers are more stable at the air­water interface when the pH is closing to the iep of the peptide. However, at this pH the films are more extended. This feature could be the consequence of some deformation of the helical structure according to the lower biological activity and thermal stability found for AS-48 at this pH. Nevertheless, it is not clear that the behavior of AS-48 at the air­water interface corresponds to those that AS-48 undergoes in aqueous solution. In this study we only observe that the monolayers are more expanded when the biological activity of the peptide is lower. A similar behavior has been observed for other hydrophobic peptides (16, 22). Some authors propose a destabilization

FIG. 3. Surface pressure­molecular area isotherms for DPPA simple monolayers at 20 C and different pHs.

310
TABLE 2
pH 10.5 7.0 5.0 Ao (A2 /molecule) 42.2 40.5 37.1


ABRIOUEL ET AL.

col (mN/m) 48.0 52.3 43.8

Acol (A2 /molecule) 34.7 37.5 35.0



Note. Ao is the limit molecular area, and col and Acol are the surface pressure and molecular area of collapse for DPPA monolayers.

there are no differences at the collapse. This acid suffers two ionizations. The pK 's are 3.9 and 8.6, respectively (23). Then, in the studied pH range the acid is negatively charged. The expansion of the monolayers is explained by the electrostatic repulsion with increasing ionization. However, although the acid bears one negative charge at neutral pH, the condensed monolayers could be explained, considering that the van der Waals attraction between the two long hydrophobic chains is the preferential interaction. At pHs greater than the second pK , the second ionization of the phosphate group provokes the greatest expansion, taking place the LE­LC phase transition. Mixed Monolayers of AS-48 and DPPA Figures 4, 5, and 6 show experimental  -A isotherms corresponding to simple and mixed films formed by DPPA and the AS-48 peptide at pH 5.0, 7.0, and 10.5, respectively. The mixed monolayers of these compounds exhibit a somewhat intermediate behavior compared with that shown by pure components. At pH 5.0 the mixed film isotherms show the same type of shape as those corresponding to the simple peptide monolayer, but the surface pressure corresponding to the collapse of the peptide increases as the content of lipid in the mixture increases. This behavior could be attributed to miscibility between the lipid and the peptide at low surface pressures. However, all

FIG. 5. Surface pressure­residual area isotherms for monolayers containing AS-48 and DPPA in different proportions at pH 7.0. AS-48 mole fraction is indicated.

of the mixed monolayers undergo a second collapse at the same surface pressure as that of the pure lipid film. This feature confirms a phase separation of both components at the highest stages of compression. A similar behavior can be observed at pH 7.0. Conversely, at pH 10.5, the mixed monolayers show a single collapse at the same surface pressure as the lipid film, with the exception of the mixed film with a high proportion of peptide (90%). In this case a collapse due to the peptide monolayer rupture is also observed. The unchanging of the collapse surface pressure with the composition of the mixed films is interpreted as being due to immiscibility between both components. In order to get information on the interactions between AS48 and DPPC, the miscibility curves (residual area versus molar fraction of AS-48 in mixed films) at different surface pressures are represented in Fig. 7.

FIG. 4. Surface pressure­residual area isotherms for monolayers containing AS-48 and DPPA in different proportions at pH 5.0. AS-48 mole fraction is indicated.

FIG. 6. Surface pressure­residual area isotherms for monolayers containing AS-48 and DPPA in different proportions at pH 10.5. AS-48 mole fraction is indicated.

SURFACE BEHAVIOR OF AS-48 PEPTIDE AND DPPA LIPID

311

FIG. 7. Residual area under constant surface pressure as a function of the AS-48 mole fraction in mixed AS-48/DPPA monolayers. (a) pH 5.0; (b) pH 7.0; and (c) pH 10.5. The surface pressures are indicated.

FIG. 8. Excess free energy of mixing under constant surface pressure as a function of the AS-48 mole fraction in mixed AS-48/DPPA monolayers. (a) pH 5.0; (b) pH 7.0; and (c) pH 10.5. The surface pressures are indicated.

312

ABRIOUEL ET AL.

At pH 5.0 and 7.0, no relevant deviation from the linearity predicted by Eq. [1] is found for the compression range. Short positive deviations are observed only at a low proportion of AS48 in the mixed film, indicating slightly repulsive interactions between AS-48 and DPPA. This behavior contrasts with the fact that, at these pH, AS-48 is positively charged and the lipid molecules bear one negative charge. However, we have previously found that at these pHs the attractive van der Waals forces between lipid molecules are predominant and, on the other hand, the peptide conserves its secondary structure. These results indicate the lack of attractive and specific interactions between AS48 and DPPA at neutral pH. Conversely, at basic pH (10.5) and low surface pressures we observe negative deviations from the additivity rule. In this case attractive interactions between AS48 and DPPA are dominant. This behavior is in agreement with the partial loss of AS-48 secondary structure at this pH. Then, the charges would be exposed to the exterior of the molecule and the lipid now bears two charges. At higher surface pressures no deviations from linearity are observed other than the before-mentioned phase separation at the interface. The results in function of pH indicate that only when the lipid molecules are charged enough (pH 10.5) can an attractive interaction between AS-48 and DPPA be observed. With the aim of quantifying the interactions found, the excess free energies of mixing have been estimated. The residual values in kT units versus the mole fraction of AS-48 in mixed films are represented in Fig. 8 at different surface pressures. The trends confirm the previously described behavior in function of pH. At pH 5.0, the mixed films are less stable than the pure components and at pH 7.0 practically all mixes show stability similar to the pure compounds. Finally, at pH 10.5 the mixtures are more stable. However, the excess free energies of mixing are very close to the kT values, indicating weak interactions between AS-48 and DPPA or interactions with contrary effects between both compounds. Therefore, no definitive conclusion in relation to the AS-48 action on membranes can be asserted. It is apparent that further studies considering, i.e., membrane receptors are required to explain the biological activity of this novel peptide.
SUMMARY

component of the bacterial cell membrane that is the primary target of AS-48, have been analyzed. From the results it is possible to conclude that the main interaction between the peptide and the lipid is of electrostatic character, since only when the lipid is charged enough and the peptide is more unfolded has an interaction between them been observed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
H. Abriouel, M. Maqueda, A. G´ lvez, and E. Valdivia thank CICYT, Project a Bio95-0466. M. J. G´ lvez-Ruiz thanks European Union, Project INTAS (96a 1241) and CICYT, Project MAT1999­0662­C03­02. J. S´ nchez-Gonz´ lez a a thanks the "Junta de Extremadura--Consejer´a de Educaci´ n, Ciencia y i o Tecnolog´a--y Fondo Social Europeo", Grant BRV000012. i

REFERENCES
1. G´ lvez, A., Maqueda, M., Valdivia, E., Quesada, A., and Montoya, E., Can. a J. Microbiol. 32, 765 (1986). 2. Mart´nez-Bueno, M., Maqueda, M., G´ lvez, A., Samyn, B., van Beeumen, i a J., Coyette, J., and Valdivia, E., J. Bacteriol. 176, 6334 (1994). 3. Samyn, B., Mart´nez-Bueno, M., Devreese, B., Maqueda, M., G´ lvez, A., i a Valdivia, E., Coyette, J., and Van Beeumen, J., FEBS Lett. 352, 87 (1994). 4. G´ lvez, A., Gim´ nez-Gallego, G., Maqueda, M., and Valdivia, E., Antimia e crob. Agents Chem. 33, 437 (1989). 5. Langdon, G. M., Bruix, M., G´ lvez, A., Valdivia, E., Maqueda, M., and a Rico, M., J. Biomol. NMR 12, 173 (1998). 6. G´ lvez, A., Maqueda, M., Mart´nez-Bueno, M., and Valdivia, E., J. Bactea i riol. 173, 886 (1991). 7. Birdi, K. S., "Lipid and Biopolymer Monolayers at Liquid Interfaces." Plenum Press, New York, 1989. 8. Goodrich, F. C., Proc. 2nd Intern. Congr. Surf. Act. 1, 33 (1957). 9. S´ nchez-Gonz´ lez, J., and G´ lvez-Ruiz, M. J., Progr. Colloid Polym. Sci. a a a 98, 248 (1995). 10. Mi~ ones-Trillo, J., Garc´a-Fern´ ndez, S., and Sanz-Pedreiro, P., J. Colloid n i a Interface Sci. 26(4), 518 (1968). 11. G´ lvez-Ruiz, M. J., and Cabrerizo-V´lchez, M. A., Colloid Polym. Sci. 269, a i 77 (1991). 12. Gabrielli, G., Baglioni, P., and Ferroni, E., J. Colloid Interface Sci. 81, 139 (1981). 13. Lavigne, P., Tancr´ de, P., Lamarche, F., and Max, J. J., Langmuir 8, 1988 e (1992). 14. Vila Romeu, N., Mi~ ones Trillo, J., Conde, O., Casas, M., and Iribarnegaray, n E., Langmuir 13, 71 (1997). 15. Malcolm, B. R., J. Colloid Interface Sci. 104(2), 520 (1985). 16. Fujita, K., Kimura, S., Imanishi, Y., Rump, E., and Ringsdorf, H., Langmuir 10, 2731 (1994). 17. Otoda, K., Kimura, S., and Imanishi, Y., Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1145, 33 (1993). 18. Pauling, L., and Corey, R. B., Nature (London) 171, 59 (1953). 19. Birdi, K. S., and Fasman, G. D., J. Polym. Sci. A-1, 10, 2483 (1972). 20. MacRitchie, F., J. Colloid Interface Sci. 61(2), 223 (1977). 21. Ahluwalia, A., De Rossi, D., Monici, M., and Shirone, A., Biosensors Bioelectron. 6, 133 (1991). 22. Goto, Y., and Hagihara, Y., Biochemistry 31, 732 (1992). 23. Demel, R. A., Yin, C. C., Lin, B. Z., and Hauser, H., Chem. Phys. Lipids 60, 209 (1992).

This study demonstrates that it is possible to explain the biological activity of this type of macromolecules by investigating the surface behavior of monolayers forming by biomolecules. This is the first time that the bacteriocin AS-48, a cyclic peptide, has been studied as a stable monolayer at the air­water interface. Data on its biological activity and thermal stability in function of the pH are according to the state of the monolayers observed at different pHs. The interactions with the lipid DPPA, a majority

