29

Structural insights into the function of type IB topoisomerases Matthew R Redinbo*, James J Champoux and Wim GJ Hol*§
Topoisomerases relax the DNA superhelical tension that arises in cells as a result of several nuclear processes, including transcription, replication and recombination. Recently determined crystal structures of human topoisomerase I in complex with DNA and of the 27 kDa catalytic domain of the vaccinia virus topoisomerase have advanced our understanding of the eukaryotic type IB topoisomerases. These recent structural results provide insights into functional aspects of these topoisomerases, including their DNA binding, strand cleavage and religation activities, as well as the mechanism that these enzymes use to relax DNA superhelical tension. In addition, two proposed models of the anticancer drug camptothecin bound to a covalent complex of human topoisomerase I and DNA suggest a structural basis for the mode of action of the drug.
Addresses *Department of Biological Structure and Biomolecular Structure Center, Department of Microbiology, and Department of Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA e-mail: redinbo@u.washington.edu e-mail: champoux@u.washington.edu §e-mail: hol@gouda.bmsc.washington.edu Current Opinion in Structural Biology 1999, 9:29­36 http://biomednet.com/elecref/0959440X00900029 © Elsevier Science Ltd ISSN 0959-440X Abbreviations CPT camptothecin rmsd root mean square deviation TF transcription factor

ate is characterized by a covalent phosphotyrosine bond formed between the catalytic tyrosine and one end of the nicked DNA strand. The DNA phosphodiester linkage is restored by the reversal of this transesterification reaction, which reseals the broken DNA strand and releases the enzyme from the DNA. The formation of the covalent intermediate upon cleavage obviates an energy cofactor for the religation phase of the reaction. The type I topoisomerases contain one catalytic tyrosine per monomeric enzyme, whereas the dimeric topoisomerases II use a pair of catalytic tyrosines, one in each enzyme monomer, to make staggered cuts in the DNA duplex. Topoisomerases I occur as type IA and type IB, which are entirely unrelated enzymes performing similar functions in dissimilar ways. They share no sequence or structural similarity and have distinct differences in their catalytic action [1]. The type IA enzymes were originally identified only in prokaryotic cells, although, more recently, type IA topoisomerases have been identified in several eukaryotic cell types (including human) and have been termed topoisomerases III [1,4]. Topoisomerases IA relax only negatively supercoiled DNA, appear to require magnesium ions and a stretch of single-stranded DNA for function and become covalently attached to the 5 end of the transiently nicked DNA strand. Recent evidence suggests that the type IA and type II enzymes share structural features relating to the catalysis of the breakage and rejoining of DNA strands [5]. Type IB topoisomerases, in contrast, are capable of relaxing both positive and negative supercoils, require no metal ion or single-stranded region of DNA and become covalently attached to the 3 end of the DNA. Topoisomerases IB are almost exclusively found in eukaryotic cells, with the one exception being the topoisomerase from vaccinia virus. This poxvirus topoisomerase shares several mechanistic and sequence features with eukaryotic topoisomerases IB, but is much smaller (36 kDa) than the known cellular type IB topoisomerases, which range from 80 to 110 kDa in size [3]. Prior to 1998, structural work on the type I topoisomerases included the crystal structure determinations of a 67 kDa N-terminal fragment of Escherichia coli topoisomerase I (a type IA topoisomerase) [6], a 26 kDa fragment of yeast topoisomerase I [7], a 9 kDa N-terminal fragment of the vaccinia topoisomerase [8] and the NMR spectroscopy structure of a 14 kDa C-terminal fragment of E. coli topoisomerase I [9]. The past year has been marked by the crystal structure determination of catalytically essential components of two type IB topoisomerases: human topoisomerase I in complex with DNA [10··,11··], which is the first structure of any topoisomerase in complex with DNA to be solved, and the vaccinia virus topoisomerase [12··]. These structures both revealed an unexpected structural similarity with a family

Introduction
Topoisomerases control the level of the DNA supercoiling in cells that arises from a variety of nuclear processes, including replication, transcription, homologous recombination and chromatin remodeling [1­3]. Topoisomerases relax superhelical tension by forming transient single or double-stranded breaks in the DNA molecule and are classified as either type I or type II. The type I topoisomerases are monomeric, cleave one strand of duplex DNA and require no energy cofactor for topoisomerization. The type II topoisomerases, in contrast, function as dimers, cleave both strands of the DNA and pass an intact DNA duplex through the transient double-stranded break in an ATP-dependent manner. Alterations in the topology of circular DNA molecules are described as changes in linking number, which is the number of times one DNA strand crosses another. The type I topoisomerases are able to catalyze single step changes in linking number, whereas the type II enzymes change the linking number in steps of two. All topoisomerases utilize a tyrosine residue in a nucleophilic attack on a phosphate in the DNA strand in order to generate strand scissions. The nicked DNA intermedi-

30

Protein­nucleic acid interactions

Figure 1 Crystal structures of type IB topoisomerases. (a) The crystal structure of the 70 kDa form of human topoisomerase I in complex with a 22 base pair DNA duplex [10··,11··]. The core domain of the protein is rendered in yellow, blue and red, the linker domain is in orange and the C-terminal domain is in green. The intact strand of the oligonucleotide is shown in cyan and the scissile strand is shown in magenta upstream and pink downstream of the cleavage site. The active site residues, which cluster around the scissile phosphate, are rendered predominantly as white ball-andstick models. The five amino acids (residues 636­640) that connect core subdomain III to the linker domain were disordered and are not present in the model. (b) Crystal structure of the catalytic core of the vaccinia virus topoisomerase [12··]. This 27 kDa domain is oriented similar to core subdomain III from human topoisomerase I, with which it shares structural similarities. Again, the active site residues are rendered predominantly in white. (a) Core subdomain I Core subdomain II

Cterminal domain

Linker domain

Core subdomain III

(b)

Catalytic Domain

Current Opinion in Structural Biology

of tyrosine recombinases, which includes DNA integrases from bacteriophages  and HP-1, and contributed significantly to our understanding of the varied catalytic functions of these enzymes. This review will focus on the type IB topoisomerases and will examine DNA binding, strand cleavage and religation, and the relaxation functions of these enzymes in light of the new structural results. In addition, two proposed binding modes of the anticancer compound camptothecin (CPT) to human topoisomerase I­DNA complexes will be reviewed. This drug, which exhibits potent anticancer activity, is targeted only to the eukaryotic topoisomerase I­DNA covalent complex and effectively slows the religation phase of catalysis and the release of the enzyme from the DNA.

Crystal structures of two type IB topoisomerases
Human topoisomerase I in complex with DNA

is highly charged (composed of 72% charged residues and 90% polar residues), is thought to be relatively unstructured in the final folded form of the enzyme and has been shown to be unnecessary for the relaxation of DNA supercoils in vitro [14]. Yet, this domain appears to interact with other proteins within the nucleus, including nucleolin [15], the simian virus 40 large T antigen [16,17] and the TATAbinding protein associated factors (TAFs) involved in TFIID-mediated transcription initiation [18­20]. The three other domains of human topoisomerase I are a 54 kDa conserved core domain, a 7 kDa positively charged linker domain and a highly conserved 6.3 kDa C-terminal domain that contains the active site residue Tyr723. The 7 kDa linker domain has also been found to be unnecessary for activity in vitro, although its removal affects the processivity of the enzyme [21]. Three crystal structures of engineered, catalytically active components of human topoisomerase I in complex with DNA were reported in March of 1998 [10··,11··]. In each

Human topoisomerase I is a 91 kDa enzyme composed of four major domains [13]. The 24 kDa N-terminal domain

The function of type IB topoisomerases Redinbo, Champoux and Hol

31

structure, the highly charged N-terminal domain has been removed and the protein is in a complex with a 22 base pair blunt-ended duplex DNA oligonucleotide. The largest structure is of the 70 kDa form of human topoisomerase I (with an active site Tyr723Phe mutation) in a noncovalent complex with 14.5 kDa of DNA at 2.8 Å resolution (Figure 1a) [11··]. In addition, two structures of a reconstituted form of the protein in both covalent (at 2.1 Å resolution, with the active site Tyr723 intact) and noncovalent (at 2.5 Å resolution, with the same Tyr723Phe mutation) complexes with duplex DNA were reported [10··]. In these latter two cases, the enzyme is expressed as two separate polypeptides (a 54 kDa core domain and a 6.3 kDa C-terminal domain) and reconstituted to regain an active enzyme that lacks the flexible 7 kDa linker domain. The structures of the reconstituted forms of the protein are essentially identical to that of the intact 70 kDa form, with an rmsd of 1.2 Å over C positions for 458 equivalent residues. These structures represent the first structures to be solved for any topoisomerase in complex with DNA. Human topoisomerase I is a bi-lobed protein that clamps completely around its DNA substrate, much like a nut fits around a bolt. One lobe (core subdomains I and II) sits on top of the DNA duplex (as oriented in Figure 1a), is composed of mixed  and  secondary-structural elements and contains two unique `nose cone' helices that extend 25 Å from the body of the molecule. The surfaces of these helices, which are proximal to the DNA, are highly positively charged and are poised above the DNA major groove, but do not directly interact with the DNA. The second lobe (core subdomain III and the C-terminal domain) sits below the DNA, is composed of an all -helical structure except for one three-stranded  sheet and contains the catalytic residues implicated in the strand cleavage and religation reactions. These two lobes are covalently linked through a continuous chain on one side of the DNA molecule and touch each other in a small contact region, composed of only six amino acids and one salt bridge, on the other side of the DNA. The coiled-coil linker domain extends 50 Å from the body of the second lobe and exposes a highly positively charged face towards the DNA. Similar to the `nose cone' helices, however, this domain fails to make significant interactions with the DNA, contacting it only via two salt bridges between positively charged residues and DNA phosphate groups. The active site of the protein is composed of two conserved arginine residues (Arg488 and Arg590) and a conserved histidine (His632), in addition to the nucleophilic Tyr723. These residues are clustered around the scissile phosphate and shift minimally upon strand cleavage and covalent attachment, based on a comparison of the structures of covalent and noncovalent complexes of the reconstituted enzyme with the DNA [10··]. The sole exception is His632, which is contained in a loop that becomes disordered upon strand cleavage and covalent attachment, and is not observed in the structure of the covalent protein­DNA complex.

Vaccinia virus topoisomerase

The 2.3 Å crystal structure of residues 81­314 of the vaccinia virus topoisomerase (which contains 364 residues in total) was also reported in March of 1998 [12 ··] (Figure 1b). This portion of the vaccinia enzyme is structurally similar to core subdomain III and 19 residues of the C-terminal domain of human topoisomerase I. The two structures superimpose with an rmsd of 3.4 Å over 183 structurally equivalent C positions that exhibit 15% sequence identity. Similar to the human protein, this region of the vaccinia enzyme is composed of a mostly helical structure, with one region of antiparallel  sheet. In the vaccinia structure, however, the catalytic tyrosine residue (Tyr274) is removed 10.8 Å from the position of the catalytic tyrosine in the human structure, after the 183 equivalent C positions of the two molecules are superimposed. A similar shifting of the catalytic tyrosine away from the other active site residues is also observed in structures of  integrase [22·] and, to a much lesser degree, XerD recombinase [23·]. The structure of the catalytic domain of the vaccinia topoisomerase, taken together with the structure of the 9 kDa N-terminal fragment of the vaccinia enzyme reported in 1994 [8], comprises nearly the complete vaccinia topoisomerase protein.

Functional aspects of the type IB topoisomerases
DNA binding

The crystal structures of human topoisomerase I in complex with DNA reveal how the cellular type IB topoisomerases bind DNA and align their DNA substrate for strand cleavage and covalent attachment. In these structures, human topoisomerase I is observed to contact the DNA mostly via protein to DNA phosphate interactions [10··,11··]. For example, 37 out of the 41 direct protein­DNA contacts observed in the co-crystal structure of the 70 kDa form of human topoisomerase I are protein to DNA phosphate contacts [11··]. The remaining four protein­DNA contacts derive from two residues that enter the minor groove of the DNA, adjacent to the cleavage site; as discussed below, only one of these contacts is base specific. Human topoisomerase I exhibits a distinct asymmetry in its contact with DNA, interacting more frequently with the five base pairs upstream of the cleavage site (29 out of 41 contacts) than it does with an eight base pair region downstream of the cleavage site (12 out of 41 contacts). Although the cellular type IB topoisomerases do not exhibit a high degree of sequence specificity in binding to or cleaving DNA substrates, Champoux and coworkers [24] showed that cellular topoisomerases IB strongly prefer to cleave at the sequence T (A/T)(G/A/C)(A/T)T^ (where ^ denotes the site of cleavage), with the strongest observed preference being for the thymidine base at the ­1 position in the scissile strand T (T in the above sequence). In addition, Westergaard and colleagues [25] identified a fairly high affinity binding and cleavage site for eukaryotic topoisomerases I from the ribosomal DNA of Tetrahymena thermophilus. The portion of the

32

Protein­nucleic acid interactions

Figure 2 Stereo view of a region of structural similarity between core subdomain I (light gray) from human topoisomerase I and the 9 kDa Nterminal domain (dark gray) of vaccinia virus topoisomerase [8].  strands 3, 4 and 5 of the vaccinia enzyme have been superimposed on  strands 9, 10 and 11, respectively, of the human protein­DNA complex. Two vaccinia residues (Tyr70 and Tyr72) implicated in DNA binding [27] are also shown, one of which (Tyr70) superimposes on Tyr426, a known DNA-binding residue in the human enzyme. The N-terminal domain comprises residues 1­77 of the vaccinia enzyme. Core subdomain I of human topoisomerase I is composed of residues 215­434. The remainder of the human protein is rendered in light gray and the DNA oligonucleotide of the human protein­DNA complex is shown in a ladder representation.

9 3 10 4 11 Tyr426 5

9 3 10 4 11 Tyr- 426 5

1

1

215
Tyr72

215
Tyr- 72

Tyr70

434 77

Tyr- 70

434 77

Current Opinion in Structural Biology

T sequence adjacent to the cleavage site, AGACTT^AG, is similar to the consensus sequence determined by Been et al. [24]. The ribosomal DNA sequence and flanking nucleotides were used to create the 22 base pair oligonucleotide that was co-crystallized with human topoisomerase I [10··,11··]. The four protein­DNA contacts that do not involve a DNA phosphate derive from residues Arg364 and Lys532, which enter the DNA minor groove adjacent to the cleavage site. Although Arg364 makes nonbase-specific interactions (involving ribose oxygen atoms and different bases in different structures), Lys532 makes the only basespecific contact observed in the human topoisomerase I­DNA complex -- a 2.6­2.9 Å hydrogen bond between the sidechain amino group of Lys532 and the O2 atom of the favored ­1 thymidine base. A lysine residue is conserved at this position in all known sequences of type IB topoisomerases. This interaction explains the observed preference for a thymidine at the ­1 position adjacent to the cleavage site, as thymidine is the only base with a hydrogen bond acceptor freely available at this position in the minor groove. Although cytosine also contains a carbonyl oxygen at the pyrimidine 2 position, this atom participates in a Watson­Crick hydrogen bond to the N2 guanine amino group. Still, cytosine is observed to be the base next favored by the cellular topoisomerases IB, after thymidine, at the scissile strand ­1 position (92% thymidine and 8% cytosine for strong break sites) [24]. Although it is not clear from the crystal structures what the specific purpose of this base-specific interaction is in the reaction mechanism of the protein, it may play a role in the proper ordering of the active site either prior to strand cleavage or prior to religation after the topoisomerization event. The topoisomerase from vaccinia virus is a sequence-specific enzyme that binds to and cleaves the scissile strand target sequence (T/C)CCTT^. Although this specific bind-

ing sequence is similar to the sequence that is weakly preferred by cellular topoisomerases IB, the structural basis for the more extensive sequence preference of the vaccinia enzyme has yet to be determined. The vaccinia protein contains a lysine (Lys167) at the equivalent position to Lys532 in the human enzyme, although the C position of the vaccinia lysine residue [12··] is located 6.0 Å from the equivalent atom in the human protein when the molecules are superimposed. Presumably, the vaccinia protein would make a hydrogen bond between Lys167 and the ­1 thymidine base, similar to the interaction observed in the human protein­DNA structure. Clearly, solving the structure of the vaccinia topoisomerase in complex with DNA would facilitate our understanding of the DNA-sequence-specific nature of this poxvirus topoisomerase. A previously suggested structural similarity [8] has been identified between the 9 kDa N-terminal portion of the vaccinia enzyme and core subdomain I from the top lobe of human topoisomerase I. Three  strands, 3, 4 and 5, from the vaccinia protein superimpose on  strands 9, 10 and 11, respectively, from human topoisomerase I with an rmsd of 3.8 Å over these 36 equivalent C positions, which exhibit only 8% sequence identity (Figure 2). This alignment positions 5 from the vaccinia structure into the major groove of the DNA in a similar position to 11 from human topoisomerase I and positions Tyr70 and Tyr72 of the vaccinia enzyme in the major groove of the DNA, as suggested by photocross-linking [26] and mutagenesis data [27]. In addition, with the structures aligned in this way, Tyr70 from the vaccinia enzyme superimposes on Tyr426 from the human structure, which is a DNA-binding residue in the human topoisomerase I­DNA complex [10··,11··]. Interestingly, yeast topoisomerase II [28] also contains an analogous three-stranded antiparallel -sheet structure that aligns well with 9, 10 and 11 from human topoisomerase I. This -sheet structure is found in a putative DNA-binding domain in yeast topoisomerase II and

The function of type IB topoisomerases Redinbo, Champoux and Hol

33

may represent a common DNA-binding motif used by the DNA topoisomerases. The structural similarity observed between the human and poxvirus type IB topoisomerases over the whole structure of the vaccinia protein (vaccinia residues 41­73 and 81­284 align with human residues 381­427 and 440­737, respectively) suggests that these two enzymes share a common evolutionary origin. The most likely explanation is that the vaccinia virus obtained its topoisomerase from a eukaryotic source and, over time, eliminated portions of it, consistent with its own specific needs.
Strand cleavage and religation reactions

not appear to be available for direct involvement in the active site mechanism. The position of this residue may, however, shift during catalysis in the human protein or, alternatively, the vaccinia enzyme may involve this residue in its active site mechanism in a manner that is distinct from the human enzyme. A structural similarity between the type IB topoisomerases and the bacteriophage family of tyrosine recombinases has been identified [10··,12··] and has been reviewed recently [30,31]. The tyrosine recombinases utilize a similar active site mechanism and form 3 phosphotyrosine linkages during their manipulation of the DNA molecule. In some cases, the active site residues of these molecules align remarkably well with the type IB topoisomerases. For example, Tyr723, Arg488, Arg590 and His632 of human topoisomerase I line up with Tyr315, Arg207, Arg283 and His306, respectively, of the bacteriophage HP1 integrase [10··,32·]. Shifts in the position of the catalytic tyrosine away from the other active site residues, similar to that observed in the vaccinia topoisomerase structure, have also been observed in structures of two tyrosine recombinases,  integrase [22·] and XerD recombinase [23·], suggesting that a possible activation or rearrangement step is required after DNA binding and prior to catalysis.
Relaxation of DNA superhelical tension

The crystal structures of human topoisomerase I in both noncovalent and covalent complexes with DNA facilitated the proposal of a detailed mechanism for the active site cleavage and religation reactions catalyzed by topoisomerases IB [10··,11··]. The DNA strand cleavage reaction is proposed to proceed via a nucleophilic attack on the scissile phosphorous atom by the catalytic tyrosine residue. Surprisingly, no amino acid residues are close enough to the tyrosine to act as a general base for activating the nucleophilic oxygen. The pentavalently coordinated transition state intermediate is probably stabilized both by Arg488 and Arg590, which lie within hydrogen bonding distance of one nonbridging oxygen, and by His632, which lies adjacent to the other nonbridging oxygen. It was originally proposed that His632 also acts as a general acid by protonating the 5 oxygen of the leaving group [11··]. This interpretation is rendered unlikely by the finding that a His632Glu mutation yields an enzyme that retains approximately 2% of the wildtype cleavage activity (Z Yang, J Champoux, manuscript in preparation). In addition, in the case of Cre recombinase (another tyrosine recombinase), a tryptophan (Trp315) superimposes on His632 from human topoisomerase I [29·], which further supports a role for His632 in transition state stabilization, rather than in general acid/base catalysis. The religation reaction probably passes through a transition state that is stabilized by the same Arg488, Arg590 and His632 triad. The vaccinia virus topoisomerase contains active site residues that are in structurally equivalent positions to the active site residues of the human enzyme [12··]. These include Tyr274 (positioned 10.8 Å from the equivalent C in human Tyr723, as mentioned above), Arg223 (3.1 Å from Arg590) and His265 (4.9 Å from His632). Arg130, which corresponds to Arg488 in the human protein, resides in a flexible loop, however, and is not visible in the structure of the vaccinia fragment. Mutagenesis data on the vaccinia protein have also implicated Lys220 in the reaction mechanism of the enzyme. A lysine residue in this position is conserved in all the topoisomerase IB sequences obtained to date. Lys220 is structurally similar to Lys587 from the human protein. Lys587 is involved in a hydrogen bond with a phosphate group at the ­2 position in the structures of the human protein­DNA complexes, however, and does

After strand cleavage and covalent attachment, the type IB topoisomerases are known to relax both positive and negative DNA supercoiling. Two mechanistic hypotheses have been proposed for this relaxation event -- enzyme bridging and free rotation. In the enzyme bridging mechanism, the enzyme is proposed to bridge the DNA nick by tightly binding both upstream and downstream of the single-strand break. During the lifetime of the nick, the intact strand is driven through this enzyme-gated nick by torsional tension in the DNA. This is the suggested mode of action of the type IA topoisomerases [5] and is conceptually similar to the mechanism of type II topoisomerases [28]. The free rotation hypothesis, in contrast, proposes that the enzyme relaxes DNA superhelical tension simply by allowing the DNA duplex downstream of the break to rotate about the intact strand. According to the rotation hypothesis, the DNA is allowed to rotate in either direction, depending on the sign of the supercoiling. In addition, the rotation hypothesis does not require that the DNA loose base pairing interactions around the break site, which would be both energetically costly and structurally disruptive. The recently determined structures of active forms of human topoisomerase I in complex with DNA allow these mechanistic proposals to be examined in light of structural considerations. Given such considerations, Stewart et al. [11··] proposed a `controlled rotation' mechanism for the relaxation of DNA superhelical tension by human topoisomerase I (Figure 3). Support for this proposal comes from several observations concerning the nature of the human topoisomerase I­DNA

34

Protein­nucleic acid interactions

Figure 3

The `controlled rotation' mechanism proposed for the relaxation of superhelical tension by human topoisomerase I [11··]. The protein is colored as in Figure 1a and the DNA duplex upstream of the cleavage site is rendered in pink. The DNA duplex downstream of the cleavage site is proposed to rotate about the intact DNA strand opposite the cleavage site. A model of this rotation is depicted with the DNA

duplex rendered in 30° increments and colored from red to blue. The nose cone helices and the linker domain are proposed both to guide and to control the rotation of the DNA duplex during the relaxation event. (a) and (b) provide orthogonal views of this rotational model, with (b) viewed down the DNA-binding pore of the enzyme.

interaction. First, the enzyme does not exhibit the tight `double-fisted' grip both upstream and downstream of the single-stranded DNA cleavage site that is required by the enzyme bridging mechanism (see above). Second, the region around the DNA duplex downstream of the cleavage site is characterized by 16 conserved, positively charged residues that ring the region around the duplex. This arrangement provides a positively charged cavity that would allow a DNA duplex to rotate about the intact strand. Third, this cavity is also shaped in such a way to control the rotation of the DNA duplex through interactions with the `nose cone' helices and the linker domain, which are proposed to serve as guides for the rotation of the duplex (Figure 3). In addition, the DNA duplex can be modeled to rotate into the space between the `nose cone' helices, thus utilizing this unusual arrangement of helices, which is conserved between the yeast and human topoisomerases I [7,10··,11··]. Although this `controlled rotation' proposal appears to be attractive based on the crystal structures of human topoisomerase I, additional work will be required to test this hypothesis.

potent anticancer drugs. Two derivatives of CPT, Topotecan and Irinotecan, are currently in general clinical use against late-stage solid tumors of the colon, esophagus and ovaries [34­36]. The CPTs bind preferentially to the covalent topoisomerase I­DNA complex [37] and effectively slow both the religation reaction and the release of the enzyme from the DNA; thus, the CPTs serve to trap the topoisomerase on the DNA. These trapped protein­DNA complexes are thought to function as `roadblocks' to the advancement of the transcription and replication machinery, leading to increased levels of double-stranded DNA breaks and rapid cellular advancement to apoptosis. Although human topoisomerase I is inhibited by a variety of compounds that are distinct from the CPTs, some of which have entered clinical trials as promising anticancer leads [38], understanding the detailed binding site and mode of action of the CPTs is of great interest in the field of targeted cancer chemotherapy. Recently, two modes of binding of CPT to the covalent complex of human topoisomerase I and DNA have been proposed [10··,39··]. Both models attempt to account for the results of numerous CPT structure activity studies, which indicate that the lactone, pyridone and 20(S)-hydroxyl moieties of CPT are required for drug activity (see [10··,33] and references therein), as well as chemical cross-linking studies, which suggest that a bound CPT brings the C7 position of CPT into close proximity

Inhibition of topoisomerase IB function by anticancer drugs
DNA topoisomerases are of clinical importance as the targets of several antineoplastic and antimicrobial agents [33]. Human topoisomerase I is the sole target of a well-studied class of compounds, the CPTs, which have emerged as

The function of type IB topoisomerases Redinbo, Champoux and Hol

35

with the N3 position of the guanine base that is favored in the scissile +1 position for CPT action [40]. In addition, each model also takes into account mutagenesis data that identify several topoisomerase I residues that, when mutated, render the enzyme insensitive to CPT (see [10··] and references therein). The model of Redinbo et al. [10··] uses the crystal structure of the human topoisomerase I­DNA covalent complex and places the CPT molecule into the DNA duplex in a position that partially overlaps with the +1 guanine of the scissile strand; this placement requires that the guanine base be flipped out of the duplex and stack on the planar CPT (Figure 4). This model also places the CPT such that its immutable lactone and 20(S)hydroxyl moieties interact with Arg364 and Asp533, and form a stacking interaction with Asn722. Changes at Arg364, Asp533 and Asn722 are all known to lead to resistance to CPT. Most importantly, this model places the CPT in a way that keeps the free 5 hydroxyl 4.5 Å away from the phosphotyrosine linkage, thereby explaining the inhibition of religation. The model of Fan et al. [39··] intercalates CPT into a Bform DNA duplex and models the positions of the phosphotyrosine723 and Asn722 residues as well. This model places the CPT in an essentially opposite position compared to the Redinbo et al. [10··] model, positioning the lactone and 20(S)-hydroxyl moieties adjacent to the phosphotyrosine linkage, rather than adjacent to Arg364 and Asp533, and does not displace any DNA base. Both models account for the chemical cross-linking data, the requirement for 20(S)-hydroxyl rather than 20(R)-hydroxyl moieties at the molecule's chiral center and explain the inhibition of the religation phase of catalysis. The Fan et al. [39··] model does not explain any CPT-resistant mutations, however, other than at Asn722, and also requires changes in the phosphate­ribose backbone in order to provide space for the intercalating CPT, whereas the Redinbo et al. [10··] model invokes a fairly dramatic movement of a DNA base to allow for the binding of the drug. The Fan et al. [39··] model seems to explain well several substitutions of the A ring, but is less convincing in explaining the inactivity of the lactam and thiolactone versions of the E ring. The Redinbo et al. [39··] model explains the latter observation well due to an exquisite interaction with the Asp353­Arg364 salt bridge, but is less convincing concerning the A ring substitutions, although the observed mobility of the peptide chain prior to Asn722 may be relevant in accommodating A ring modifications. Neither model explains the requirement for a guanine at the +1 position of the scissile strand. Further studies, especially a crystal structure of a ternary complex of human topoisomerase I, DNA and CPT, will be required in order to elucidate the nature of the inhibition of human topoisomerase I by this anticancer drug.

Figure 4

+1 Gua N3 7

A

B

E Arg364

5'OH Asn722 Asp533

Tyr723
Current Opinion in Structural Biology

Model of the anticancer drug CPT bound to the covalent complex of human topoisomerase I and DNA [10··]. In this model, CPT (spacefilling representation with the nitrogen atoms in black and the oxygen atoms in dark gray, and the A, B and E rings of the molecule indicated) stacks in the DNA duplex in place of the guanine base at the +1 position of the scissile strand (+1 Gua), which has been flipped out of the duplex. CPT makes stacking interactions with this +1 base and the conjugated sidechain of Asn722, a CPT-resistant mutation. This brings the C7 atom of CPT in close proximity to the N3 atom of the +1 Gua, as suggested by chemical cross-linking studies [40]. Two additional CPT-resistant mutations, Arg364 and Asp533, make interactions with the required lactone and 20(S)-hydroxyl moieties of CPT.

DNA and of the catalytic core of the vaccinia virus topoisomerase have revealed a structural similarity with the bacteriophage tyrosine recombinases and have facilated our understanding of the function of the type IB topoisomerases. Further work will be required in order to test the mechanistic hypotheses that have arisen from these structural studies and additional crystal structures both of the vaccinia enzyme in complex with DNA and of the human enzyme in a ternary complex with CPT and DNA are anticipated in the future.

Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Lance Stewart for his major contributions to the structure determination of human topoisomerase I, and Chonghui Cheng and Stewart Shuman for sharing the coordinates of the catalytic domain of the vaccinia topoisomerase prior to general release. This research was funded by grants NCI CA65656 (WGJH) and GM49156 (JJC) from the National Institutes of Health and by a major equipment grant from the Murdock Charitable Trust to the Biomolecular Structure Center.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

· of special interest ·· of outstanding interest
1. 2. 3. Wang JC: DNA topoisomerases. Annu Rev Biochem 1996, 65:635-692. Champoux JJ: Domains of human topoisomerase I and associated functions. Prog Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol 1998, 60:111-132. Gupta M, Fujimori A, Pommier Y: Eukaryotic DNA topoisomerases I. Biochim Biophys Acta 1995, 1262:1-14.

Conclusions
The crystal structures of three forms of human topoisomerase I in both covalent and noncovalent complexes with

36

Protein­nucleic acid interactions

4. 5.

Li W, Wang JC: Mammalian DNA topoisomerase IIIa is essential in early embryogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998 95:1010-1013. Berger JM, Fass D, Wang JC, Harrison SC: Structural similarities between topoisomerases that cleave one or both DNA strands. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:7876-7881. Lima CD, Wang JC, Mondragón A: Three-dimensional structure of the 67K N-terminal fragment of E. coli DNA topoisomerase I. Nature 1994, 367:138-146. Lue N, Sharma A, Mondragón A, Wang JC: A 26 kDa yeast DNA topoisomerase I fragment: crystallographic structure and mechanistic implications. Structure 1995, 3:1315-1322. Sharma A, Hanai R, Mondragón A: Crystal structure of the aminoterminal fragment of vaccinia virus DNA topoisomerase I at 1.6 Å resolution. Structure 1994, 2:767-777. Yu L, Zhu C-X, Tse-Dinh Y-C, Fesik SW: Solution structure of the C-terminal single-stranded DNA-binding domain of Eschericia coli topoisomerase I. Biochemistry 1995, 34:7622-7628.

23. Subramanya HS, Arciszewska LK, Baker RA, Bird LE, Sherratt DJ, · Wigley DB: Crystal structure of the site-specific recombinase, XerD. EMBO J 1997, 16:5178-5187. The crystal structure of XerD recombinase from Escherichia coli suggests that only a minor rearrangement of the protein structure is required to prepare the active site for catalysis. 24. Been MD, Burgess RR, Champoux JJ: Nucleotide sequence preference at rat liver and wheat germ type 1 DNA topoisomerase breakage sites in duplex SV40 DNA. Nucleic Acids Res 1984, 12:3097-3114. 25. Andersen AH, Gocke E, Bonven BJ, Nielsen OF, Westergaard O: Topoisomerase I has a strong binding preference for a conserved hexadecameric sequence in the promoter region of the rRNA gene from Tetrahymena pyriformis. Nucleic Acids Res 1985, 13:1543-1557. 26. Sekiguchi J, Shuman S: Identification of contacts between topisomerase I and its target DNA by site-specific photocrosslinking. EMBO J 1996, 15:3448-3457. 27. Sekiguchi J, Shuman S: Mutational analysis of vaccinia virus topisomerase identifies residues involved in DNA binding. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3649-3656.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10. Redinbo MR, Stewart L, Kuhn P, Champoux JJ, Hol WGJ: Crystal ·· structures of human topoisomerase I in covalent and noncovalent complexes with DNA. Science 1998, 279:1504-1513. The authors solved the crystal structures of reconstituted forms of human topoisomerase I in both covalent and noncovalent complexes with doublestranded DNA. Structural similarity to the family of tyrosine recombinases is shown and a model for the binding of the anticancer drug camptothecin to the covalent complex of human topoisomerase I and DNA is proposed. 11. Stewart L, Redinbo MR, Qiu X, Hol WGJ, Champoux JJ: A model for ·· the mechanism of human topoisomerase I. Science 1998, 279:1534-1541. The crystal structure of an intact, 70 kDa form of human topoisomerase I in a noncovalent complex with double-stranded DNA is reported. A model for the mechanism of strand cleavage is proposed, as well as a `controlled rotation' mechanism for the relaxation of superhelical tension by the enzyme. 12. Cheng C, Kussie P, Pavletich N, Shuman S: Conservation of ·· structure and mechanism between eukaryotic topoisomerase I and site-specific recombinases. Cell 1998, 92:841-850. The crystal structure of the catalytic core of the vaccinia virus topoisomerase (residues 81­314 of the 364 residue protein) reveals a structural similarity to the tyrosine recombinases and a shifting of the catalytic tyrosine 10 Å away from the other active site residues. 13. Stewart L, Ireton GC, Champoux JJ: The domain organization of human topoisomerase I. J Biol Chem 1996, 271:7602-7608. 14. Stewart L, Ireton GC, Parker LH, Madden KR, Champoux JJ: Biochemical and biophysical analyses of recombinant forms of human topisomerase I. J Biol Chem 1996, 271:7593-7601. 15. Bharti AK, Olson MOJ, Kufe DW, Rubin EH: Identification of a nucleolin binding site in human topoisomerase I. J Biol Chem 1996, 271:1993-1997. 16. Simmons DT, Melendy T, Usher D, Stillman B: Simian virus 40 large T antigen binds to topoisomerase I. Virology 1996, 222:365-374. 17. Pommier Y, Kohlhagen G, Wu C, Simmons DT: Mammalian DNA topoisomerase I activity and poisoning by camptothecin are inhibitee by simian virus 40 large T antigen. Biochemistry 1998, 37:3813-3823.

28. Berger JM, Gamblin SJ, Harrison SC, Wang JC: Structure and mechanism of DNA topoisomerase II. Nature 1996, 379:225-232. 29. Guo F, Gopaul DN, Van Duyne GD: Structure of Cre recombinase · complexed with DNA in a site-specific recombination synapse. Nature 1997, 389:40-46. This paper describes the crystal structure of bacteriophage Cre recombinase arranged as an active tetramer about a site-specific DNA recombination synapse, with two of the four catalytic tyrosines forming covalent 3 phosphotyrosine linkages with the DNA. 30. Sherratt DJ, Wigley DB: Conserved themes but novel activities in recombinases and topoisomerases. Cell 1998, 93:149-152. 31. Wigley DB: Teaching a new dog old tricks? Structure 1998, 6:543-548. 32. Hickman AB, Waninger S, Scocca JJ, Dyda F: Molecular organizaton · in site-specific recombination: the catalytic domain of bacteriophase HP1 integrase at 2.7 Å resolution. Cell 1997, 89:227-237. The crystal structure of the catalytic core (residues 165­337) of the bacteriophage HP1 integrase reveals a cluster of active site residues in close proximity and suggests that no rearrangement step is required prior to catalysis. 33. Wang H-K, Morris-Natschke SL, Lee K-H: Recent advances in the discovery and development of topoisomerase inhibitors as antitumor agents. Med Res Rev 1997, 17:367-425. 34. Armand JP, Ducreux M, Mahjoubi M, Abigerges D, Bugat R, Chabot G, Herait P, de Forni M, Rougier P: CPT-11 (irinotecan) in the treatment of colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer 1995, 31A:1283-1287. 35. O'Reilly S, Rowinsky EK: The clinical status of irinotecan (CPT-11), a novel water soluble camptothecin analogue. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 1996, 24:47-70. 36. Dancey J, Eisenhauer EA: Current perspectives on camptothecins in cancer treatment. Br J Cancer 1996, 74:327-338. 37. Hsiang YH, Hertzberg R, Hecht S, Liu LF: Camptothecin induces protein-linked DNA breaks via mammalian DNA topoisomerase I. J Biol Chem 1985, 260:14873-14878.

18. Kretzschmar M, Meisterernst M, Roeder RG: Identification of human DNA topoisomerase I as a cofactor for activator-dependent transcription by RNA polymerase II. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993, 90:11508-11512. 19. Merino A, Madden KR, Lane WS, Champoux JJ, Reinberg D: DNA topoisomerase I is involved in both repression and activation of transcription. Nature 1993, 365:227-232. 20. Shykind BM, Kim J, Stewart L, Champoux JJ, Sharp PA: Topoisomerase I enhances TFIID-TFIIA complex assembly during activation of transcription. Genes Dev 1997, 11:397-407. 21. Stewart L, Ireton GC, Champoux JJ: Reconstitution of human topoisomerase I by fragment complementation. J Mol Biol 1997, 269:355-372. 22. Kwon HJ, Tirumalai R, Landy A, Ellenberger T: Flexibility in DNA · recombination: structure of the lambda integrase catalytic core. Science 1997, 276:126-131. The crystal structure of the catalytic core of  integrase reveals a shifting of the catalytic tyrosine 20 Å away from the remaining active site residues, suggesting that a rearrangement step is required prior to catalysis in this class of enzymes.

38. Abigerges D, Armand JP, Chabot GG, Bruno R, Bissery MC, Bayssas M, Klink-Alakl M, Clavel M, Catimel G: Phase I and pharmacology study of intoplicine (RP 60475; NSC 645008), a novel topoisomerase I and II inhibitor, in cancer patients. Anticancer Drugs 1996, 7:166-174. 39. Fan Y, Weinstein JN, Kohn KW, Shi LM, Pommier Y: Molecular ·· modeling studies of the DNA-topoisomerase I ternary cleavable complex with camptothecin. J Med Chem 1998, 41:2216-2226. This paper describes a model of the anticancer drug camptothecin bound to DNA in the context of the modeled positions of residues Asn722 and Tyr723 (in a 3 phosphotyrosine linkage with the DNA) of human topoisomerase I. 40. Pommier Y, Kohlhagen G, Kohn KW, Leteurtre F, Wani MC, Wall ME: Interaction of an alkylating camptothecin derivative with a DNA base at topoisomerase I-DNA cleavage sites. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995, 92:8861-8865.

