d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

available at www.sciencedirect.com

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/dnarepair

The intricate structural chemistry of base excision repair machinery: Implications for DNA damage recognition, removal, and repair
Kenichi Hitomi a,b,c , Shigenori Iwai a , John A. Tainer b,c,
a

Division of Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University, 1­3 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-8531, Japan b Department of Molecular Biology and the Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA c Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Mail Stop 74R157, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

a r t i c l e
Article history:

i n f o

a b s t r a c t
Three-dimensional structures of DNA N-glycosylases and N-glycosylase/apyrimidine/ apurine (AP)-lyase enzymes and other critical components of base excision repair (BER) machinery including structure-specific nuclease, repair polymerase, DNA ligase, and PCNA tethering complexes reveal the overall unity of the simple cut and patch process of DNA repair for damaged bases. In general, the damage-specific excision is initiated by structurally-variable DNA glycosylases targeted to distinct base lesions. This committed excision step is followed by a subsequent damage-general processing of the resulting abasic sites and 3 termini, the insertion of the correct base by a repair DNA polymerase, and finally sealing the nicked backbone by DNA ligase. However, recent structures of protein­DNA and protein­protein complexes and other BER machinery are providing a more in-depth look into the intricate functional diversity and complexity of maintaining genomic integrity despite very high levels of constant DNA base damage from endogenous as well as environmental agents. Here we focus on key discoveries concerning BER structural biology that speak to better understanding the damage recognition, reaction mechanisms, conformational controls, coordinated handoffs, and biological activities including links to cancer. As the three-dimensional crystal and NMR structures for the protein and DNA complexes of all major components of the BER system have now been determined, we provide here a relatively complete description of the key complexes starting from DNA base damage detection and excision to the final ligation process. As our understanding of BER structural biology and the molecular basis for cancer improve, we predict that there will be multiple links joining BER enzyme mutations and cancer predispositions, such as now seen for MYH. Currently, structural results are realizing the promise that high-resolution structures provide detailed insights into how these BER proteins function to specifically recognize, remove, and repair DNA base damage without the release of toxic and mutagenic intermediates. © 2007 Published by Elsevier B.V.

Published on line 8 January 2007 Keywords: DNA damage DNA repair Base excision repair pathway Damage reversal Genome maintenance Crystallography Enzyme­DNA complex Structure-specific nuclease Damage recognition Base excision Glycosylase N-glycosylase/AP-lyase enzymes Polymerase FEN-1 PCNA Ligase

Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 858 784 8119; fax: +1 858 784 2289. E-mail address: jat@scripps.edu (J.A. Tainer). 1568-7864/$ ­ see front matter © 2007 Published by Elsevier B.V. doi:10.1016/j.dnarep.2006.10.004



d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

411

1.

Introduction

In the face of constant and high levels of DNA base damage, genetic integrity is protected by robust and dynamic base excision repair (BER) systems in cell. Compared with other DNA repair machinery, such as nucleotide excision repair, base excision repair systems are vertically well conserved, from bacteria to humans in terms of the core components of BER machinery (Fig. 1) [1­5]. In cells, however, BER acts in complex protein networks that vary among different types of organisms and that are not independent of other DNA metabolic regulations including replication and transcription. In this sense, BER systems in Escherichia coli are primarily a paradigm for DNA repair in E. coli, not in humans, because the network of connections can vary despite the commonality of overall pathway steps and the apparent similarities among core catalytic domains. Yet, all living organisms share the DNA code and chemistry and consequently similar BER systems to preserve genetic integrity in the face of common types of base damage. So we benefit from the expanding number of detailed three-dimensional structures for BER components and dynamic machinery to reveal both the diversity and the universality in the responses to DNA base damage for life to exist [6]. BER occurs in two overall steps: first, damage-specific recognition and excision carried out by glycosylases targeted to distinct base lesions, and second, a damage-general stage during which the resulting central apyrimidine/apurine (AP) site intermediates and 3 termini are processed by structurespecific nucleases such as FEN-1, followed by DNA repair synthesis and ligation [4,7]. While diverse types of DNA base damage occur in cells, all organisms have evolved efficient,

specific means to find, remove, and repair such base damage [1]. Furthermore, as base damage is the most common form of DNA damage in cells, BER is one of the major pathways for dealing with most DNA damage [3,5]. The damage recognition of BER relies on distinct glycosylases; these are divided into simple N-glycosylases and bifunctional N-glycosylase/AP-lyase enzymes [2]. In the case of pure N-glycosylases, the specifically recognized damaged base is first removed, then the abasic site is acted upon by a separate enzyme with AP-lyase activity, such as APE1, which cleaves the DNA backbone. Even the removal of normal bases by DNA glycosylases is potentially mutagenic or lethal if the resulting AP site is improperly repaired [8­10]. N-glycosylase/AP-lyase enzymes combine the first two functional steps within a single enzyme [2,4,7]. Remarkably, most glycosylases share a fold with common motif of the active site. The damage-general stages of BER require a repair DNA polymerase to insert the proper base, and polymerase (pol ) plays a major repair role in a complex with XRCC1. Finally, the DNA strand is rejoined by a DNA ligase, ligase III, for complete repair of the damaged base site. In addition to the so-called short-patch repair path, glycosylase products are alternatively processed by long-patch repair involving polymerase, FEN-1, PCNA, RFC, and ligase I [2,7]. Environmental agents such as UV light, ionizing radiation, and alkylation of DNA create distinct DNA base lesions including deamination, depurination, and depyrimidation [11]. The majority of DNA damage is caused by endogenous metabolic agents, such as oxidation [4,7]. The BER system efficiently detects such base damage in the context of an enormous background of normal DNA bases, removes this damage, and restores the normal base to maintain genome integrity. The initial damage recognition process evidently mainly relies

Fig. 1 ­ Primary structural comparisons between bacterial and human enzymes: (a) the HhH-type glycosylases pyrimidine type, E. coli EndoIII and human Nth; (b) purine family, AfOGG and hOGG1; (c) UDG family, E. coli MUG and human TDG (asterisk shows the unique SUMOlyation site); (d) O6 -methylguanine DNA methyltransferase, E. coli Ada and human AGT. Conserved catalytic regions are highlighted in gray.

412

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

upon the glycosylases of BER machinery. The structural biochemistry of these enzymes has thus revealed paradigms from glycosylase structural biology for damaged base recognition. For example, similar folds, common motifs, the gylcosylase exchange of DNA base:base pairing to DNA base:protein pairing [12], a universal nucleotide flipping-out mechanism, as first discovered for the uracil-DNA gylcosylase:DNA complex [13], the helix-hairpin-helix (HhH) motif and invariant Asp residue common to the active sites of many monofunctional and bifunctional DNA glycosylases [2], and so forth [recently reviewed in ref. 6]. On the other hand, emerging structural biology has also raised deeper questions and issues. The protein fold, active channel shape and conserved motifs belie the diversity in the substrate recognition and the real difference in specific reactions, such as seen between the pure or monofunctional N-glycosylases and the bifunctional N-glycosylase/AP-lyase enzymes. Compared with the BER core enzymes of bacteria, many glycosylase counterparts in eukaryotes have added termini that elaborate the activities and functions of these enzymes in more complex organisms in ways as yet incompletely understood (Fig. 1). Similarly, the true significance of seemingly energy-consuming redundancy among BER enzyme activities remains unclear. However, the elucidation of the relevant protein­DNA and protein­protein interactions for these BER components and their interactions is providing deeper insights and a better understanding of the BER machinery in diverse cells. Such insights have biological and medical significance including assessment of public health risks from environmental toxins, as experiments are suggesting that inhibition of DNA repair may be far worse than DNA damage [14]. Here, we focus upon recent discoveries concerning the detailed structural biology of BER machinery by xray crystallography and NMR, especially protein­DNA and protein­protein complexes that elucidate the structural chemistry of short and long-patch BER processes. We also include enzyme­DNA complexes for proteins that perform direct damage reversal. In many ways the structural biochemistry of these damage reversal proteins in complex with DNA is uncovering unifying themes and enlightening diversity in damaged base recognition and repair. As the three-dimensional crystal and NMR structures for the protein and DNA complexes that are representatives of all major components of the BER system have now been determined, we can provide here the first relatively complete description of the key complexes starting from DNA base damage detection and excision to the final ligation process. This detailed structural information is revealing the diverse chemical anatomy for BER machinery that underscores the biologically important variations in genome maintenance among different cells and diverse organisms with implications for cancer risks, predispositions and interventions.

2. The pure or monofunctional DNA glycosylase in complex with DNA
DNA N-glycosylases hydrolyse the N-glycosylic bond between the target base and deoxyribose, thus releasing a free base and

leaving an AP site in DNA [2]. Such AP sites are cytotoxic and mutagenic, and must be further processed (see below). Some DNA glycosylases also have an associated AP-lyase activity that cleaves the phosphodiester bond 3 to the AP site and are herein termed bifunctional glycosylases and considered in a separate section below. The catalytic mechanism of the pure or monofunctional glycosylases considered in this section does not involve covalent intermediates. Instead the conserved Asp residue may activate a water molecule, which acts as the attacking nucleophile. Three-dimensional structure determinations have allowed BER glycosylases to be classified into several major structural families by architectural folds [2]: helix-hairpin-helix [15], helix-two-turn-helix (H2TH) [16], and uracil DNA glycosylases (UDGs) [6]. Glycosylase structures furthermore can show a variety of additional functional domains, such as an [4Fe4S] iron sulfur cluster, as first structurally characterized in EndoIII/Nth [17] and also found in MutY and MIG [18,19], a sheet in AlkA and OGG1 [20,21], a MutT-like domain in MutY [22], and a methyl-CpG binding domain in MBD4 [23]. It is worthwhile considering this structural variation in terms of glycosylase activity and function in cells. The human enzyme methyl-CpG binding domain protein 4 (MBD4) uniquely contains a C-terminal glycosylase domain, which is similar to the M. thermoformicicum thymine DNA glycosylase MIG of the HhH glycosylase family, linked to an N-terminal methyl-CpG binding domain [19,23]. MIG recognizes G:T mispairs and removes the thymine base [19], whereas MBD4 preferentially binds 5-methyl-CpG:GpT mismatches, but will also excise uracil from G:U mispairs [24]. In the proposed mechanism for G:T mismatch recognition and Nglycosylic bond cleavage, which is consistent with structural biochemistry and site-directed mutants, MIG bond cleavage is enhanced by a physical distortion of the nucleotide that imparts a 90 twist to the thymine base, away from its normal anti position in DNA [19], similar to the model proposed for UDG [25]. The DNA-binding model for thymine DNA glycosylases is consistent with known HhH type glycosylase­DNA complex structures, and with most other DNA repair glycosylase structures, in that binding is mediated exclusively via the DNA minor groove [2,13]. NMR structures have elucidated that the methyl-CpG binding domain consists of a compact / fold with an extended loop between two anti-parallel strands [26,27], and that these strands insert into the DNA major groove where particular residues bind methyl-CpG sequences [26]. The methyl-CpG binding domain's DNA major-groove binding complements to the DNA minor-groove binding of the glycosylase domain, suggesting that the N-terminal methyl-CpG and C-terminal glycosylase domains of MBD4 would be able to access together 5-methyl-CpG:GpT mismatches to hold the DNA. Although the isolated glycosylase domain of MBD4 is enzymatically active [28], this dual-binding model provides a mechanism to restrict MBD4 thymine DNA glycosylase activity in vivo to biologically relevant substrates at the promoters of silenced genes without interference from the G:U mispairs that arise continuously throughout the genome from general cytosine deamination. In general, the discoveries of common overall folds and functional motifs do not provide mechanistic details regarding the distinct specificity and often differential biological func-

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

413

tion of these enzymes. The breakthroughs concerning these issues depend upon combing genetics and biological characterizations with systematic characterizations of enzyme complexes with DNA as first shown for UDG [29]. Thus, we expect that an improved understanding of the glycosylase and methyl-CpG binding domain coordination will require detailed and systematic structural and biochemical analyses, particularly of the enzyme­DNA complexes. The adenine DNA glycosylase, MutY, which belongs to the HhH glycosylase family [15], recognizes 8-oxoG:A mispairs and excises the adenine to avoid the formation of mutations [4,7,30,31]. MutY and its homologues have a catalytic core domain with an [4Fe-4S] iron sulfur cluster in the N-terminus [18], followed by an additional C-terminal MutT-like domain [22,30]. MutT catalyzes the hydrolysis of mutagenic nucleoside triphosphates, such as 8-oxoG deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates, by substitution at the rarely attacked -P, to yield deoxyribonucleotide monophosphates and inorganic pyrophosphate, thus preventing misincorporation of this base into DNA [32]. NMR studies have shown that MutT is a mixed / protein with two helices and two sheets composed of five strands and that the C-terminal domain of MutY has similar secondary structure and topology with the MutT, despite low sequence identity between the two proteins [22,32]. The additional C-terminal domain of MutY also seemed to be responsible for 8-oxoG recognition, as the truncation of the domain results in loss of discrimination between 8-oxoG:A and G:A mispairs [33,34]. The recent full-length structure of MutY cross-linked to DNA containing an 8-oxoG:A base pair has helped to address key questions regarding how the protein recognizes both 8oxoG and adenine bases (Fig. 2A) [30]. The catalytic core domain of MutY, including the structural [4Fe-4S] cluster, bears a striking overall similarity to Endonuclease III that excises oxidized pyrimidines [17,18,35], while the C-terminal domain structure of MutY is highly similar to MutT [22,32]. The catalytic core and MutT-like domains both encircle the DNA, individually making close contacts to the appropriate DNA strand. Whereas the adenine is flipped out into a deep pocket similarly to other HhH type glycosylase­DNA complex structures, the 8-oxoG is not flipped out of the base stack. Although the MutT-like domain establishes extensive contacts with 8-oxoG, the interactions are quite different from those of MutT [36]. The anti 8-oxoG is stabilized in the MutY complex structure rather than the syn conformation, which is normally the energetically favored conformer when mispaired opposite adenine. The 8-oxoG is specifically recognized through a hydrogen bond to N7 from a serine hydroxyl group, which is in turn oriented by a hydrogen bond to a hydroxyl of tyrosine. The carbonyl group at C8 position may also form a hydrogen bond to the backbone amino group of the same serine, although the geometry is not ideal. The human homolog of MutY, MYH, is implicated in familial adenomatous polyposis, a type of hereditary colon cancer. The disease was found in one family to result from germline mutations in MYH that caused a defect in repair leading to a number of somatic mutations in the APC gene, normally linked to familial adenomatous polyposis [37]. Notably, the residue in humans corresponding to the tyrosine in the structure is mutated in some familial adenomatous polyposis

patients [38]. This direct connection of the BER glycosylase to cancer resulted in part from having a good means to define and test a relevant at risk group. These results on MYH therefore underscore the important synergism between understanding the basic properties of BER enzymes and understanding how these genome guardians contribute to the prevention of human cancer. We propose that as our understanding of BER structural biology and the molecular basis for cancer continues to improve, we will increasingly discover many links joining BER enzyme mutations and cancer predispositions and that MYH is only the very beginning of such connections.

3. The covalently modified glycosylase: SUMOlyated thymine DNA glycosylase
Human TDG, a thymine DNA glycosylase was initially discovered for its ability to hydrolyze the N-glycosidic bond of the thymidine moiety in G:T mismatch [39]. TDG was later shown to remove thymine from C:T and T:T mismatches, but much less efficiently. More importantly, it removes uracil from G:U mispair with 10-fold higher activity than thymine, suggesting that the enzyme functions in the restoration of G:C base pairs at sites of cytosine or 5-methylcytosine deamination [40]. E. coli MUG, mismatch uracil-DNA glycosylase is closely related to human TDG (37% sequence identity in the catalytic core domain of human TDG), and they possess the same fold, whereas the bacterial homolog only removes uracil and not thymine mismatched with guanine [41]. The crystal structures of MUG and TDG have revealed an overall resemblance to uracil DNA glycosylases UDGs [12,13,42­44]. Two highly conserved motifs in UDG have topological and conformational equivalents in MUG/TDG enzymes: the water activating loop (GQDPY) and the minor groove-intercalating loop (HPSPLS). The corresponding motifs in MUG are GINPGL (identical in human TDG) and NPSGLS (MPSSSS in human TDG), respectively. The latter motif forms specific hydrogen bonds with the unpaired guanine and may constitute the basis of the mismatch specificity [44]. The catalytic residues of UDG underlined in the motif are in both cases replaced by asparagines. The aspartate in the first motif in UDG activates a water molecule for nucleophilic attack on the Cl of the deoxyribose [13]. The asparagine in MUG cannot activate the nucleophilic water, but a water molecule is found in almost the same position as seen in UDG. The tyrosine residue that provides the barrier against thymine in UDG is replaced by a glycine in MUG. The preference for G:U over G:T in MUG is likely conferred by the position of a serine hydroxyl group, which would clash with the 5 methyl-group of thymine. In human TDG, the residue corresponding to the serine of MUG is substituted to an alanine. The smaller alanine side chain would allow better accommodation of thymine, explaining the expanded specificity of TDG for that base. The MUG/TDG specificity for G:U or G:T mispairs over normal G:C base pairs results not from the recognition of the scissile base itself, as in the UDG enzymes, but rather from a combination of the ease of flipping-out a base from an unstable pair over flipping from a Watson-Crick G:C pair and from the deformability of DNA at non-canonical base pairs.

414

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

Fig. 2 ­ Structures of damage recognition proteins in complex with substrate DNA. (A) Structure of MutY complex with DNA carrying 8-oxoG:A mispair shows function for each of the respective domains of the single peptide; N-glycosylase domain, blue; MutT-like domain, green. The HhH motif is highlighted in red. (B) SUMOlylated TDG structure; TDG core domain shown in blue; accessorized region shown in green. (C) Trapped OGG discriminates against 8-oxoG (right) from normal guanine (left) in crystals. The HhH motif and N-terminal sheets are highlighted in red and green, respectively. (D) (a) NEIL structure (yellow) overlaid with Endo VIII (blue) shows the structural conservation: zinc finger domain colored pink; "zincless" finger domain shown in orange. (b) Apo (purple) and DNA-bound (blue) forms of Endo VIII suggest that this enzyme undergoes a drastic conformational change. (E) (a) Structural conservation of methyltransferase domain of Ada/AGT enzymes; human is shown in blue; bacterial is shown in yellow. (b) Human AGT uniquely binds the minor groove of the DNA duplex. The HTH is shown in red. (c) Two components of the E. coli Ada N-terminal domain specifically bind to their consensus sequence. (F) (a) Human AlkB homologue, ABH3 coordinates iron and 2-oxoglutarate as cofactors. (b) Structural comparison between bacterial and human enzymes shows significant diversity in the nucleoside-binding interface. (c) Human enzyme lacks the key tryptophan.

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

415

As with many DNA glycosylases, the rate-limiting step in the action of TDG and MUG is its dissociation process, suggesting that the enzyme protects the harmful AP site until AP endonuclease follows the subsequent step in the BER pathway. The crystal structure of MUG in a complex with DNA shows that the enzyme binds stably to DNA by forming hydrogen bonds with the orphan guanine opposite the AP site [44]. Interestingly, the release of the DNA product can be facilitated by covalent modification as seen for human TDG, which interacts with and is covalently attached by the ubiquitin-like proteins SUMO-1 and SUMO-2/3 [45,46]. TDG has a lysine in the less conserved C-terminus, the -amino group of which can be linked with C-terminus of SUMO via an isopeptide bond. During DNA mismatch repair, the SUMO conjugation of TDG promotes the release of TDG from AP site created after base excision, and coordinates its transfer to AP endonuclease, which catalyses the further step in the repair pathway. The crystal structure of the catalytic core domain of human TDG conjugated to SUMO-1 implicates a molecular mechanism of SUMO modification mediated modulation of enzymatic properties of TDG (Fig. 2B) [47]. In the SUMO-1­TDG complex, TDG bears a striking overall similarity to MUG and the UDG family, while the SUMO-1 moiety is nearly identical to that in unconjugated SUMO1. Significantly, the establishment of a sheet consisting of two strands, respectively, derived from TDG and SUMO-1 enables the C-terminal helix of TDG to protrude. The strand of TDG contains a sequence VQEV that is similar to the consensus SUMO binding motif, V/I-X-V/I-V/I [48], critical for the TDG­SUMO-1 interaction. The helix is formed by the covalent and non-covalent contacts between TDG and SUMO-1 and sticks out from the protein surface. The resulting protruding helix presumably perturbs the protein­DNA interface and thus promotes the dissociation of TDG from the DNA molecule. The non-covalent contacts including a pivotal arginine are also essential for release from the product DNA.

4.

The bifunctional N-glycosylase/AP-lyase

Bifunctional DNA glycosylases are N-glycosylases that not only hydrolyse the N-glycosylic bond between the target base and deoxyribose but furthermore have an associated AP-lyase activity that cleaves the phosphodiester bond 3 to the AP site. Human 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (hOGG1) is prototypic of the bifunctional N-glycosylase/AP-lyase enzymes that have been extensively studied (Fig. 2C) [21,49­54]. Several distinct enzymes recognize 8-oxoG in different contexts because it is a major mutagenic base lesion: 8-oxoG pairs in syn conformation with adenine rather than in anti with cytosine and thereby causing G:C to T:A transversion mutations upon replication. Human OGG excises 8-oxoG from an 8-oxoG:C pair, and mutations in hOGG1 have been linked to lung cancer in humans [55,56]. The overall structure contains a fold that is common to members of the HhH type glycosylase family of BER proteins, such as Endo III, AlkA, MIG, and MutY [17­20]. The N-terminal domain typically has four helices, and the C-terminal domain has six to seven helices. The hallmark of these proteins is a helix-hairpin-helix structural

element, followed by a Gly/Pro-rich loop and a highly conserved aspartic acid, as originally discovered for Endo III. The hairpin loop shows strong sequence conservation, with consensus sequence L/F-P/K/H-G-V/I-G-K/R/T [15]. The structure of hOGG1 contains, in addition to the two-helical domains common to all known family members, a third anti-parallelsheet domain found thus far in only the alkylation repair DNA glycosylase AlkA [20,21]. The function of this extended domain remains unclear. The structure of a catalytically inactive hOGG1 enzyme core bound to 8-oxoG-containing duplex DNA revealed that hOGG1 contains an HhH motif and flips the 8-oxoG base out of the double helix into a specific recognition pocket (Fig. 2C) [21]. Human OGG1 evidently discriminates 8-oxoG from G by using a single hydrogen bond between the Gly carbonyl and the purine N7, which is protonated only in 8oxoG, and no direct contacts are made to the carbonyl group at C8 position. The base opposite 8-oxoG is preferentially C > T > G A, and the preference for C was shown to result from specific hydrogen bonds donated by two arginines to N3 and O2 of the cytosine base. Although hOGG1 and AlkA have the same overall fold and share a common motif, AlkA is a simple N-glycosylase whereas hOGG1 is a bifunctional N-glycosylase/AP-lyase [20,21]. How bifunctional glycosylases, as represented by hOGG1, accomplish catalyses encompassing no fewer than five sequential reaction steps within a single active site has been enigmatic. A lysine has been proposed to be the key for the catalytic reaction and to attack C1 and promote -elimination [21,51]. Substitution of the lysine enormously decreases both N-glycosylase and AP-lyase activities and retains intact 8oxoG in the crystal. Also the monofunctional glycosylase AlkA lacks such a lysine residue [20], and the chemical role of lysine in bifunctional glycosylases is confirmed by trapping the catalytic intermediate with NaHB4 [51]. The reaction proceeds via the Schiff base and reduction by the agent gives a stable complex of the protein covalently attached to DNA. In the trapped complex structure, the cleaved 8-oxoG moiety is observed in the active site, prompting the authors to propose that 8-oxoG base itself functions in acid/base chemistry. On the one hand, however, the active site structure of the abasic-trapped complex, i.e. resultant with DNA carrying the AP site, is also nearly identical to that of the 8-oxoG-containing structure. An independent experiment reports that hOGG1 AP-lyase activity is inhibited with free 8-oxoG [57]. Endo III is also an N-glycosylase/AP-lyase. The same strategy employed to determine the hOGG1 complex was therefore also applied to an Endo III-DNA complex [35]. In the trapped Endo III structure, the excised base moiety is not observed. Notably, a structure of apo hOGG1 showed that, in the absence of DNA, the same overall enzyme conformation is conserved, but key catalytic residues, such as the lysine, are positioned improperly for catalysis [49]. Binding of the correct substrate is therefore proposed to correlate to reorientation of these side chains and subsequent catalysis. Interestingly, a hOGG1 mutant and DNA carrying 8-oxoG can be crystallized after in situ repair. The complete DNA processing in the crystallization experiment eventually generates 2 ,3 didehydro-2 ,3 -dideoxyribose as a product in a crystal, yet many biochemical data suggest that a 3 - / -unsaturated

416

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

aldehyde is the -elimination product from N-glycosylase/APlyase enzymes [52]. DNA repair systems must find damage in the context of genomic DNA. A major question for BER glycosylases concerns how damaged bases are efficiently located in this enormous background. Most base damage recognized by BER glycosylases is subtle, differing by only two atoms from a normal base. The structure of the hOGG1 and B-DNA complex proposes one possibility for efficient searching systems (Fig. 2C) [53]. A cross-link strategy with substitution of asparagine to cystine allowed hOGG1­B-DNA to be crystallized. In the hOGG complex with DNA carrying 8-oxoG, the side chain carbonyl of the asparagine makes a hydrogen bond with the exocyclic amine of the orphane cytosine, the base left unpaired by extrusion of 8-oxoG from the DNA helix. The cross-link aimed to replace the hydrogen bond between the asparagine and the cytosine. The global structure of hOGG1 in complex with a non-lesioncontaining DNA duplex shows overall similarity to that of the 8-oxoG complex. Whereas 8-oxoG fits into the catalytic pocket ° of the enzyme, normal guanine locates at an "exo-site" 5 A away from the active site. The extra-helical normal guanine interacts with two active site residues, phenylalanine and histidine, but the contacts are completely different from those of 8-oxoG. This study proposed that hOGG1 is able to read out the subtle structural distinctions between the 8-oxoG versus guanine, allowing the damage admittance to the active site pocket, while rejecting normal bases. Notably, the apo hOGG1 structure suggests that the asparagine position substituted to cysteine for the cross-link is subject to a severe conformational change upon DNA binding [49].

5. The H2TH type glycosylases: MutM/Fpg, Endonuclease VIII (EndoVIII), and EndoVIII-like 1 (NEIL1)
These enzymes catalyse the excision of damaged purine bases such as the oxidation products (8-oxoG and 2,6-diamino-4hydroxy-5-methylformamidopyrimidine) from dsDNA. Structurally they are H2TH type glycosylases, which include bacterial EndoVIII/Nei, MutM/Fpg, and the mammalian Neilike proteins, NEIL1-3, and representative structures have been determined for each subgroup [58­66]. The helix-multi turn-helix motif was originally discovered in the flap endonuclease FEN-1 structure [16]. The H2TH type glycosylases use a completely different molecular scaffold from the HhH type glycosylases, while the overall topology of these glycosylases is conserved among the family. As seen in the HhH proteins [20,21,30,35], N- and C-terminal domains create a cleft where DNA is bound, but the H2TH type glycosylases contain / structures rather than the primarily -helical fold of the HhH type glycosylases [59­64]. The N-terminal domain has catalytically important amino acids at positions 1­6, followed by two sheets consisting of four strands that form an anti-parallel sandwich flanked by two helices. The C-terminal domain contains the H2TH motif and is helix-rich, typically with the zinc finger contributing the only two strands. The -hairpin loop of the zinc finger motif inserts into the DNA minor groove. MutM, also known as Fpg, is a functional homolog of OGG1 in E. coli and other prokaryotes in that it catalyzes the removal

of 8-oxoG from 8-oxoG:C, but MutM binds DNA with a H2TH motif rather than an HhH motif. In contrast to OGG1, MutM has been shown to recognize and remove other oxidized bases [31,63,64,67]. In structures of the H2TH type glycosylases, which have thus far all been bifunctional N-glycosylases/APlyases that recognize oxidized base lesions, an N-terminal proline and glutamate have been identified as catalyzing base excision and -elimination, while an internal lysine and arginine are proposed to promote an additional activity resulting in a final , -elimination product [59­62]. Structures of MutM have been determined with and without DNA, and help elucidate the mechanisms of the H2TH type glycosylases for damage recognition and catalysis [58­60,62­64]. Structures of an inactive MutM mutant with lesion-containing DNA have shed light on recognition of oxidized bases [63,64], particularly in comparison to the hOGG1 complex with DNA carrying 8-oxoG. MutM initiates repair of 8-oxoG, DHU (5,6-dihydroxyuracil), and a number of other lesions, including FapyG (2,6-diamino-4hydroxy-5-formamidopyrimidine). As in hOGG1, MutM makes its discriminating contacts with N7 of 8-oxoG, which is contacted by the main chain carbonyl of a serine in MutM. Other protein­base interactions differ from those observed in hOGG1. The structure of MutM with DNA containing DHU revealed that the protonated N3 of DHU overlays with N7 of 8-oxoG and that the DHU carbonyls O2 and O4 are in identical positions to O8 and O6 of 8-oxoG, respectively. In the structure of a complex with FapydG-containing DNA, hydrogen bond contacts are made to the base lesion by four residues, two glutamines, a serine, and an isoleucine, as well as via interactions mediated by structural water molecules [64]. In particular, water-mediated interactions largely discriminate between FapyG and guanine at the five-membered ring of guanine. Only the serine and isoleucine main chain interactions are shared between the recognition mechanisms for FapyG and 8-oxoG. Structures of MutM with reduced abasic DNA and opposite cytosine, guanine, or thymine have shown that a single residue, arginine, specifies the preference for the opposing base by enforcing a hydrogen bonding pattern; cytosine is accommodated in the normal anti position, guanine takes the less favorable syn position, presenting its Hoogstein face, and thymine is pushed away from the side chain of the pseudo-base arginine but is still found in the anti position [59]. E. coli Endo VIII, also known as Nei, shares significant sequence homology and a similar catalytic mechanism with MutM, though the Endo VIII H2TH glycosylase differs significantly from MutM in substrate specificity (Fig. 2D) [61,66]. Endo VIII excises thymine glycol, DHU, -ureidoisobutyric acid, and other oxidized pyrimidines from DNA [68,69]. Interestingly, the substrate specificity of Endo VIII overlaps that of HhH type Endo III. Endo VIII is also reported to show some activity towards 8-oxoG, possibly performing a back-up function in the enzymatic system that repairs oxidized purines in DNA. The structure of a covalently trapped Nei­DNA complex has been determined, revealing acid/base chemistry by conserved proline and glutamate in the very N-terminus, consistent with MutM catalysis [61]. To date, however, no structure has been available to show its damage recognition mechanism. By contrast to the complex form, apo Endo VIII is flattened with 50

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

417

rotation of the two major domains pivoting at a hinge domain and indicating a global conformation change from an elongated `open' form to a `closed' form upon DNA binding [66]. Human NEIL1 and NEIL2 both have higher affinity for DNA bubble structures, as would be expected to occur during transcription or replication, compared to single or doublestranded DNA [70]. NEIL1 expression is activated during S-phase, when DNA is being synthesized, whereas NEIL2 levels are cell cycle independent, implicating NEIL2 in transcriptioncoupled repair. The mammalian NEIL proteins are different in their regulation and substrate specificity, though the bacterial and mammalian H2TH proteins share similar overall folds [65,66]. The H2TH motifs are used in a manner similar to the HhH, namely to recognize DNA through interactions with the DNA backbone. Interestingly, the structure of the catalytic core of human NEIL1 revealed a "zinc-less finger" in which the structural motif was three-dimensionally conserved despite missing a true zinc ion binding site (Fig. 2D). NEIL1 contains a structural motif composed of two antiparallel -strands that mimics the anti-parallel -hairpin zinc finger found in other H2TH type glycosylases but lacks the loops to maintain the zinc-binding residues and, therefore, does not coordinate zinc [65]. In contrast, NEIL2 has been shown to bind zinc ion as observed in the other family members [71]. NEIL1 has an extended C-terminal region, which is not included in the crystal structure, which has been implicated in interactions with Pol and DNA ligase III [72]. Even the processing of the 3 phosphates generated by NEIL1 and NEIL2 differs from other glycosylases of the BER pathway, because it is carried out by polynucleotide kinase rather than AP endonuclease [72].

6. The distinct zinc site roles in AGT/ada proeins
Mammalian O6 -alkylguanine-DNA methyltransferase AGT and bacterial Ada are homologous proteins that directly remove alkyl groups at the O6 position of guanine in a stoichiometric irreversible reaction that directly reverses the DNA base damage [73]. As a complement to the BER machinery, the structural biochemistry of these direct damage reversal proteins is also aiding in uncovering unifying themes and specific mechanisms in damaged base recognition. Structures have been determined for bacterial, archaeal, and human AGT/Ada proteins with and without DNA [74­79]. Human AGT is of particular interest because it repairs damage induced by some anticancer chemotherapeutics because O6 -alkylguanine is one of the important damaged products that promotes apoptosis and hence therapeutic responses. The crystal structure of apo human AGT, as well as structures of the methylated and benzylated enzymes, revealed a two domain / fold (Fig. 2E) [76,77]. The N-terminal domain consists of an antiparallel sheet followed by two helices. The C-terminal domain is comprised of a hairpin, four helices, and a 310 helix, which harbors a conserved Pro-Cys-His-Arg motif. The C-terminal domain also contains a helix-turn-helix (HTH) motif, often used by DNA binding proteins for sequencespecific recognition [80]. The methylated and benzylated AGT structures, in which a catalytic cysteine has a covalently

attached respective alkyl groups, established the active site as being near the recognition helix of the HTH motif. Interestingly, the DNA-bound structures revealed that the AGT HTH motif is not used as seen in all other existing examples of DNA binding by HTH proteins that bind the recognition helix in the major groove, where it can take a broad range of possible orientations that allow sequence-specific binding [78,79]. Instead, the AGT HTH recognition helix lies in the minor groove, which is likely to be advantageous for sequence-independent binding and nucleotide flipping. Another unexpected finding was that binding of AGT to DNA is cooperative and displays directionality, likely to be useful for targeting to areas of localized alkylated damage [78]. Furthermore, analysis of these AGT:DNA structures discovered a 3 phosphate twist mechanism by which a tyrosine is thought to facilitate nucleotide flipping that was also then recognized to be present in other base-flipping systems, including UDG, AlkA, Endonuclease IV, and AP endonuclease [20,25,81,82]. Human AGT also contains a novel zinc-binding site which is likely to play a structural role [76,83]. This zinc atom lies on the active site face with two histidines and two cysteines ° coordination, but 20 A from the reactive cysteine, bridging three strands of the sheet and the coil immediately preceding the domain-spanning helix. The zinc-binding sites are well conserved in higher eukaryotes but not prokaryotes and a leucine, adjacent to one of the histidines, is a site of genetic polymorphism. Apo-metal ion site results in local distortions in the N-terminal domain, including a slight opening of the zinc-binding sites and the vicinity. Unlike human AGT, E. coli Ada is a unique bifunctional DNA repair protein with an extended N-terminal domain (Figs. 1 and 2E) [84]. The C-terminal domain is homologous to human AGT, transferring alkyl group of O6 -alkylguanine to a cysteine residue, whereas the N-terminal domain repairs the Sp-configured methyl phosphotriester lesion in DNA, also responsible for adaptive response. Structures of human AGT and bacterial Ada C-terminal domain are well conserved despite low primary amino acid sequence homology helix (Fig. 1) [74]. A loop of AGT, correspond to the first of Ada C-terminal domain, a major difference between the human and bacterial structures. Other differences include the tilting of a helix by 30 , and the presence of two 310 helices in the AGT structure. The N-terminal domain of Ada is the key component of the chemosensory mechanism by which E. coli monitors its intracellular methylation burden and activates ada regulon [85]. The regulatory regions of ada regulon promoters contain a methylation-dependent activation element comprising conserved AAT and GCAA sequences separated by a six base pair spacer. Methylated N-Ada, resulting from methyl phosphotriester repair stably binds this site and recruits RNA polymerase for the initiation of transcription [85]. The N-terminal domain of Ada contains two domains connected by a flexible linker. Initial domain folds into a globular domain having a central three-strand sheet sandwiched between a helices, with the zinc ion being bound to four cysteins residues, including a methyl acceptor, at one edge of the sheet, the other domain folds into -helical bundles similar to that found in the Rob and MarA transcription factors [85]. In structures of DNA complexes (solution and crystal), the elongated N-terminal Ada consisting of two domains lie along one

418

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

face of the DNA helix. The globular domain is bound over the minor groove, while the a bundle domain inserts the recognition helix of its canonical HTH motif into the major groove. The complex structure also shows that both the DNA repair and methylation-dependent DNA binding functions of Ada are dependent on electrostatic switching by a coordinated zinc atom at the four cysteines.

7. The bacterial AlkB and human homologues have a distinct interface for nucleotide binding
AlkB and the homologues belong to a superfamily of 2oxoglutarate- and iron-dependent oxyganases [86]. E. coli AlkB and the human homologues, ABH2, and ABH3 stand alone restoring normal bases from alkylation damage in both RNA and DNA [87­90]. These oxygenases share some mechanistic features with cytchrome P450 enzymes, which are involved in the process of detoxifying foreign substances. These enzymes require ferrous iron and catalytic hydroxylation reactions where O2 is the oxygen donor. When N-alkyl group is hydroxylated by the catalytic activity, the resulting alcohol is spontaneously converted to amine and aldehyde. The Fe(II)/2oxoglutarate-dependent oxygenases couple the substrate oxidation to conversion of 2-oxoglutarate into succinate and CO2 . In addition to 1-alkyladenine and 3-alkylcytosine, which are major cytotoxic lesions, bacterial AlkB is capable of repairing 1-methylguanine, 3-methylthymine, 1,N6 -ethenoadenine, 3,N4 -ethenocytosine and the analogues [91­93]. Compared with the bacterial enzyme, the substrate specificity of human homologues is more restricted. Besides 1-methyladenine and 3-methylcytosine, ABH3 shows a much lower activity toward 1,N6 -ethenoadenine. Interestingly, bacterial AlkB and human ABH3 both tend to prefer single-stranded DNA and RNA, whereas human ABH2 is more active on double-stranded substrates [94­96]. AlkB crystal structures have revealed the catalytic center with mechanistic implications [97]. Whereas the core domain consisting of double-layered sheets form a "jellyroll" fold closely matches that observed in other deoxygenase superfamily members, AlkB has a unique extra domain made of three strands, designed as nucleotide-recognition lid (Fig. 2F). The cofactors, 2-oxoglutarate and iron, are located at the conserved H-X-D/E-Xn -H motif [98] in the core domain. In a complex structure with trinucleotide carrying 2 -deoxy1-methyladenosine, the methylated base moiety is stuck in a deep, predominantly hydrophobic cavity, where the nucleoside was pinched out between bulky residues typtophan from the nucleoti de-recognition lid and histidine, an ironanchoring residue in the oxyganase core. The methyl group directly contacts its molecular surface as well as an oxygen atom on the 1-carboxylate of 2-oxoglutrate. To efficiently repair bulkier alkyl modifications or other modified bases, however, the enzyme is likely to require reorientation of the base and movement of the attached polynucleotide backbone to maintain the precise alignment of the target alkyl atom, suggesting that the substrate-binding lid is flexible to adjust the substrate binding.

At almost the same time, the structure of human homologue, ABH3, was also reported in a complex with iron and 2-oxoglutarate, showing overall structural conservation, especially in the jellyroll core, and nearly identical geometry of iron and 2-oxoglutarate [99] (Fig. 2F). However, significant differences between bacterial and human enzymes occur in the substrate-binding cavity and in other key regions in the vicinity of the active sites. In ABH3, the substrate-binding cavity has more polarity and the key tryptophan of AlkB is substituted to a tyrosine (Fig. 2F), presumably restricting the substrate specificity of the human enzyme. Moreover, the proposed interfaces for nucleotide backbone interactions are poorly conserved and structurally different. Structural diversity is also remarkable at the substrate-binding lid. This region of ABH3 makes unique turns and forms different secondary structure elements. These striking variations in contact residues support distinct binding modes among the AlkB homologues. In humans, seven homologues of AlkB have been identified but demethylase activity has been observed for only ABH2 and ABH3. The function for the other five homologues remains unclear. Even ABH2 is drastically different from ABH3 in the substrate specificity. Complex structures will shed more light on functional similarities and diversities of the redundant genes.

8. The structure-specific nuclease FEN-1 in DNA and PCNA interplay
The BER pathway, involving nick formation, DNA synthesis and ligation, is dependent not only upon the nature of the glycosylase and its resultant product, but also upon the timing in the cell cycle and the subnuclear localization of the process. Thus, the long-patch pathway shares a set of factors that are also involved in DNA replication, such as DNA pol and , FEN-1, PCNA, and DNA ligase I, whereas the short-patch repair pathway uses different enzymes including pol and ligase III stimulated by XRCC1 [7,100]. In the BER machinery, modified AP sites are processed via the PCNA-dependent pathway, which involves cleavage of a two to eight nucleotide "flap". FEN-1 binds the ring-shaped adaptor protein, PCNA, to precisely remove flap structures during DNA replication and long-patch BER [16,101­105]. In these contexts, FEN-1 binding to PCNA stimulates FEN-1 endonuclease activity [101]. Structures of FEN-1 show a saddle-shaped, single-domain / protein with a deep groove along one face formed from the central seven-stranded sheet, an anti-parallel ribbon, and two a-helical bundles (Fig. 3) [16,102­104]. FEN-1 has the conserved PCNA binding domain located near the C-terminus of the enzyme. The structure of Achaeoglobus fulgidus FEN-1­DNA complex, along with that of the PCNA­FEN-1 peptide complex, reveals the interplay among these three key components (Fig. 3A) [103]. FEN-1 recognizes the flap junction by binding a sin° gle, unpaired, 3 nucleotide (3 flap), in a specific pocket 25 A from the nuclease active site. Recognition of the 3 flap and associated duplex DNA by two -loop- motifs promotes DNA kinking by 90 and conformational closing of the 5 flap binding motif. These interactions allow FEN-1 precisely position and cleave the 5 flap.

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

419

posal that interface mimicry and exchange allows an ordered sequence of handoffs induced by the specific DNA products, such that the structures of the PCNA:enzyme:DNA complexes themselves help to coordinate individual repair steps into a pathway by promoting specific sequential exchanges without the release of toxic intermediates [103].

9. The repair polymerase switching for base fidelity

and open/close

Fig. 3 ­ Structures of FEN-1 complexes. FEN-1 in complex with (A) DNA and (B) PCNA.

A crystal structure of a peptide derived from afFEN-1 bound to afPCNA shows that the unstructured C-terminal regions in FEN-1 and PCNA create an intermolecular anti-parallel sheet interface in the PCNA­FEN-1 peptide complex [103]. The interface directly links adjacent PCNA and DNA binding regions of FEN-1, suggesting a potential mechanism for how PCNA binding affects FEN-1 activity. The crystal structure of human FEN-1 bound to PCNA also shows that the C-terminal domain of FEN-1, which consists of two -strands connected by a short helix, is a key for the interaction with PCNA, consistent with archaeal PCNA­FEN-1­peptide complex (Fig. 3B) [103,104]. Additionally, the full-length enzyme complex reveals another interface in the core domain of FEN-1. These interactions orient the enzyme into an inactive `locked-down' form, suggesting that a significant rearrangement must occur in a pivotal hinge region to convert from an inactive to an active conformation. In general, the ability of different BER pathway enzymes to bind to PCNA by similar motifs and coupled -strand interactions prompted the pro-

DNA polymerase of the X family is responsible for DNA synthesis during BER [7,106], and in fact, pol contributes two activities to the BER pathway. A deoxyribose phosphate lyase activity, associated with an amino-terminal 8-kDa lyase domain, excises a deoxyribose phosphate intermediate during repair of abasic sites and generates a 5-phosphate in a single-nucleotide gap. The nucleotidyl transferase activity of pol is associated with a 31-kDa polymerase domain that fills the single-nucleotide gap and is also needed for some alternate repair pathways that require longer gap-filling DNA synthesis (e.g. long-patch base excision repair) [107­109]. The single or multiple nucleotide gap-filling synthesis requires that the polymerase efficiently incorporate correct nucleosides that preserve Watson-Crick base-pairing to maintain genetic integrity since pol lacks proofreading activity. Crystallographic structures of pol have been determined in complex with nicked, gapped, non-gapped, and blunt-end DNA [107­112]. Similar to structures of various DNA polymerases derived from diverse sources, the pol structure is also composed of three functionally distinct domains, C (catalytic), D (duplex DNA binding), and N subdomains (dNTP and template nucleotide binding), referred to as palm, thumb, and fingers subdomains, respectively, according to the nomenclature that utilizes an architectural analogy to a right hand (Fig. 4A). The complex structures show that pol kinks both gapped and nicked DNA substrates, facilitating access to the 3 end to carry out the gap-filling process. Recent structures of pol , lacking a proofreading exonuclease activity, in complex with damaged and mispaired DNA reveal its accuracy. Structure of pol with DNA carrying 8-oxoG shows that the modified guanine residue is in an anti conformation and forms Watson-Crick hydrogen bonds with an incoming dCTP (Fig. 4B) [113]. In the conformation, the N subdomain of pol is closed around the nascent base pair and interacts with the Nterminal lyase domain. To accommodate the carbonyl group at C8, however, subtle conformational changes occur both in the deoxyribose and 5 -phosphodiester linkage of the modified nucleotide. The 5 -phosphate backbone of the template nucleotide flips 180 away from the oxygen at C8 of 8-oxoG. This circumvents an unfavorable clash between the base moiety and backbone, thus providing a stable binding of cytosine with anti-8-oxoG in a template. By contrast to dCTP, an incoming dATP forms a staggered conformation with anti-8-oxoG. In this conformation, the N subdomain is in a fully open conformation. This has important implications for pol function, since the ability to replicate through 8-oxoG lesions depends on maintaining the 8-oxoG base in the anti conformation.

420

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

Fig. 4 ­ Snap shots of DNA polymerase give insight into its DNA mismatch repair mechanism. (A) Overall view of pol in complex with its DNA substrate. (B) Pol recognizes the oxidized base 8-oxoG. (C) Stalls the incoming mismatch base in the open form of the enzyme. (D) Allows for further DNA extension.

DNA polymerases distinguish incorrect nucleotides by binding more weakly and inserting more slowly than they do with the correct complementary nucleotide. DNA polymeraseimposed constraints during nucleotide discrimination have remained poorly understood, in part due to an inability to trap an incorrect dNTP that has a much lower binding affinity than the complementary nucleoside. Since pol retains affinity for a nicked DNA product, it provides an important opportunity to test DNA with a mismatched pair. By placing the mismatched pair at the nick site it was possible to ensure full occupancy of the mismatched nucleoside in the incoming dNTP binding site [114]. The resulting crystal structures of pol in complex with two different mispairs (A:C and T:C) reveal that the two bases stack partially, rather than pair through nonstandard hydrogen bonds, resulting in the disturbance of the magnesium ion positions (Fig. 4C). This shift in catalytic magnesium ion locations prevents the open/close conformational switching of the N subdomain that is believed to be required for catalytic cycling. The N subdomain of pol adopts a partially

open conformation that is suboptimal for catalysis in the mispaired complexes. This partially open conformation results in distinct hydrogen bonding networks unique for each mispair. In contrast, the structure of an A family DNA polymerase complex with DNA mismatches shows that mismatches are situated at the boundary of the post-insertion site and in many cases, engage hydrogen bonds similar to those observed in DNA duplex alone [115]. In three cases, however, the primer terminus remained in the insertion site. In these situations, an aromatic side chain blocks the template site, and the noncomplementary template base is flipped out of the helix axis into the pre-insertion site. Importantly, the structure of pol complex with mispaired DNA confirms that geometric constraints imposed by the template base occur in part prior to the dNTP binding, whereas these constraints are presumably imposed subsequent to nucleotide binding for A-family DNA polymerase. Pol shows relatively higher accuracy compared with low fidelity polymerases, but even pol is subjected to miscoding.

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

421

The structure of DNA pol with a DNA mismatch at the boundary of the polymerase active site reveals how pol manages a mismatch (Fig. 4D) [116]. The structure of this complex indicates that the template adenine of the mispair stacks with the primer terminus adenine while the coding cytosine is flipped out of the DNA helix. By soaking with dGTP, the crystals of the binary complex resulted in crystals of a ternary substrate complex. In this case, the template cytosine forms Watson-Crick hydrogen bonds with the incoming dGTP in the DNA duplex. The adenine at the primer terminus has rotated into a synconformation to interact with the opposite adenine in a planar configuration, yet the 3 -hydroxyl on the primer terminus is out of position for efficient nucleotide insertion. Pol shows lyase activity toward the 5 -deoxyribose phosphate group, which occurs in some BER sub-pathways [117]. Pol was crystallized with 5 -phosphorylated abasic sugar analogs in nicked DNA [118]. However, the crystal structure shows that the 5 -deoxyribose phosphate group is bound in a non-catalytic binding site. In the complex structure, the catalytic nucleophile in the 5 -deoxyribose phosphate lyase reaction and all other potential secondary nucleophiles, are too far away to participate in nucleophilic attack on the C1 of the sugar. This suggests that a rotation of 120 , which pivots the 3 -phosphate of the 5 -deoxyribose3 -phosphate, group is required to position the catalytic lysine close to the 5 deoxyribose C1 .

10. The ligase ring and DNA complex paradox
All BER pathways are completed by ligating the 3 primer terminus of the newly inserted nucleotide(s) to the parent DNA strand. This end-joining reaction, which is catalyzed by DNA ligase, is required by all organisms and serves as the ultimate step of not only DNA repair but also DNA replication and recombination processes. In accordance with their role in catalyzing phosphodiester bond formation, genetic inactivation of DNA ligases causes pleiotropic phenotypes including lethality and hypersensitivity to DNA damaging agents [119]. DNA ligases are members of the nucleotidyl transferase superfamily whose members interact with a nucleotide cofactor to form a covalent enzyme-nucleoside monophosphate. In general, DNA ligase catalyses formation of phosphodiester bonds at single-strand breaks between adjacent 3 -hydroxyl and 5 phosphate in DNA duplex. For the BER machinery, DNA ligase III carries out this essential ligation step. Ligase III has a zinc finger motif in the N-terminus, which consists of three cysteines and one histidine (Fig. 5A and B) [120]. The enzyme recognizes single-strand nicks and other damage features in dsDNA, both through the N-terminal domain containing a single zinc finger and the catalytic core domain. The NMR structure shows that the zinc finger domain of human DNA ligase III consists of a three-stranded antiparallel sheet following two helices and that zinc atom is coordinated between the sheet and a helix [121]. This structure is also considered to represent zinc fingers of other enzymes that recognize DNA damage, such as poly(adenosineribose)polymerase and nick-sensing DNA 3 -phosphoesterase [122].

Ligase III has two isomers, DNA ligase III and , which differ in domain structure: ligase III consists of an N-terminal DNA-binding domain carrying a zinc finger motif, a core catalytic domain, and a C-teminal BRCT (BRCA1 carboxyl terminus) domain (Fig. 5A), whereas ligase III lacks the BRCT domain [123]. Widely distributed ligase III is involved in DNA repair in most cells, whereas ligase III is thought to be involved in completion of homologous recombination during meiotic prophase or post-meiotic DNA repair [124,125]. While no structure of the entire DNA ligase III is yet available, domain and homologous structures highlight several of its characteristic features. The BRCT domain of DNA ligase III interacts with the distal BRCT domain of XRCC1 [126]. It has been suggested that XRCC1 coordinates the rapid recruitment of pol , poly(ADPribose)polymerase, and ligase III to DNA substrate [122]. Ligase III requires XRCC1 for stability, whereas ligase III , which lacks a BRCT domain is stable without XRCC1. The solution structure of ligase III BRCT domain shows the conserved BRCT fold as also seen in the XRCC1 BRCT domain, which consists of a four-stranded parallel sheet with a two a helix bundle against one face of the sheet (Fig. 5C) [123]. The major difference is that ligase III is missing ten residues that comprise an additional helix in XRCC1. The truncated DNA ligase III BRCT domain exists as a dimer in solution. It is suggested that the N-termini are involved in forming the homodimer interface, as was similarly observed in the crystallographic structure of the BRCT domain from XRCC1 [123,126]. DNA ligase I joins Okazaki fragments during DNA replication but also functions in long-patch BER. The recent crystallographic structure of human DNA ligase I in complex with a nicked, 5 adenylated DNA intermediate reveals that the enzyme redirects the path of the double helix to expose the nick termini for the strand-joining reaction (Fig. 5D). This ligase:DNA complex furthermore shows a DNA-binding domain that stabilizes the DNA in a distorted structure, and positions the catalytic core on the nick [127]. To obtain a stable reaction intermediate complex, a synthetic nicked duplex terminated with a 3 dideoxynucleotide was used, thereby blocking the final sealing step. The structure shows that three domains of ligase I completely encircle DNA. The N-terminal DNA binding domain (DBD) consisting of 12 helices provides most of the interactions with DNA, localized extensively in the minor groove, and also contacts the adenylation domain (AdD) and the OB-fold domain (OBD). The DBD binds DNA evenly on both sides of the nick with an 2fold axis of symmetry. The DBD is also conserved in ligase III and IV. The AdD mixed / fold has resemblance to the nucleotide binding domains of other known ligase structures with conserved active site sequences. In the complex, the 5 AMP binds deep within a pocket of the AdD, outside of the DNA duplex. Downstream of the nick, DNA is in the B-form, which may explain why ligase I does not seal Okazaki fragments before the RNA primer is removed, whereas upstream DNA adopts A-form with an expanded minor groove. The OBD binds in the minor groove adjacent to the ends of the nicked DNA, and alters the curvature of the DNA. The OBD distorts the DNA, leading to an underwound conformation that widens the major and minor grooves, and causes a

422

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

Fig. 5 ­ Structures of DNA ligase domains and DNA complex. (A) Domain structures of mammalian DNA ligase I and III . (B) Comparison between ligase III and XRCC1 BRCT domains. (C) Structure of the zinc finger binding domain of ligase III . (D) Structure of ligase I in a complex with DNA.

° more than 5 A shift in the helical axis between upstream and downstream segments. These distortions bring the nick close to the active site and also explain the fidelity of the DNA ligase. A conserved motif of the OBD, which is involved in the initial enzyme-AMP formation, is distant from the other essential motifs in the AdD. The coordination of the C-terminal OBD in the ligase I complex with DNA implies that a rearrangement between the OBD and AdD is necessary to proceed from enzyme-AMP to a DNA-bound form. Recent results on a

ligase derived from Pyrococcus furiosus offer insightful observations on the initial ATP processing [128]. The archaeal enzyme is also an ATP-dependent DNA ligase, consisting of three major domains: an N-terminal DNA binding domain, an adenylation domain, and a C-terminal OB-fold domain. The crystal structure of the P. furiosus ligase shows a closed conformation of the two domains at the carboxyl terminus, creating a small compartment where the AMP molecule is non-covalently bound. The closed conformation is formed by part of the enzyme mimicking DNA backbone. The identi-

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

423

fied residues are well conserved between archaeal and human enzymes. Although mammalian ligases show homology in the primary sequences and are predicted to catalyze ligation in a similar manner, each enzyme has distinct roles in a cell. Understanding the specific interactions with other cellular components, such as ligase I/PCNA or ligase III/XRCC1 complexes, will provide insights into the complexities of ligase structure­function relationships needed to explain its distinct biological roles. Obvious critical issues include how the ligase ring can load onto DNA, the role of PCNA in this loading process, and whether ligase loading and release is general or specific to the individual ligase classes.

11. The diverse chemical anatomy of BER and genome maintenance
As outlined above the three-dimensional structures of DNA N-glycosylases, N-glycosylase/AP-lyases, structure-specific nucleases, repair polymerase, DNA ligase, and PCNA tethering complexes provide unifying concepts while also revealing mechanistic diversity with important biological implications. As we develop systematic structural characterizations of BER complexes we will gain an informed understanding of the mechanisms by which these BER proteins function to specifically recognize, remove, and repair DNA base damage without the release of toxic and mutagenic intermediates. Beginning with the discoveries of the HhH sequenceindependent DNA binding motif [15] and both nucleotide flipping to allow specific damage recognition [13,20,21,30,35] and dinucleotide flipping to expose the opposite base [81], initial BER complex structures have revealed the power of structural biology to help define the structural basis for specificity and catalysis [12,29]. These structures have furthermore suggested how dynamic assemblies may act in efficient damage scanning and detection [78], that initial enzyme­substrate strain promotes dissociative mechanisms [25], and that the resulting product inhibition aids handoffs without the release of toxic intermediates [82,110]. Particularly surprising and intriguing structures have furthermore discovered the roles of interface mimicry (where interface motifs and components resemble one another sufficiently to be exchanged) in pathway control and interface exchange [129­131], and the critical controls from conformational switching [103]. These existing and emerging lesions learned from BER machinery are proving to be prototypes for other DNA repair pathways. We find conformational switching applying to other DNA repair pathways including transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair [132], Holliday junction resolution [133], and double strand break repair [134,135]. Similarly interface mimicry in pathway regulation is showing up for other repair pathways [136]. In any case, the detailed understanding of the molecular basis for BER will continue to be important in its own right and in the understanding of mutations, cancer initiation and cancer predispositions. As the spontaneous mutation rate in somatic cells cannot account for the multiple mutations observed in human cancers, a compelling model for cancer initiation involves the development of a `mutator phenotype'. Defects in base exci-

sion repair are obviously among the key components that could cause such a mutator phenotype. Indeed, mutations to alter the specificity of UDG were used to create just such a mutator phenotype by design [137]. Consistent with the connection of repair defects with cancer, deficiencies in mismatch repair and nucleotide excision repair can cause cancer predispositions [138,139]. Why have not many BER defects been shown to cause cancers so far? We suggest that BER deficiencies are not likely to leave specific fingerprints in terms of DNA defects as they primarily will cause single base changes. This makes the search for a specific BER defect linked to specific cancers much more difficult than was the case for mismatch repair and satellite instabilities, for example. Yet, screening for low activities of particular DNA glycosylases or other BER enzymes may not be the most useful approach, since as evident from the motifs, interfaces, and conformational changes outlined here, we expect many key defects may be in specificity, fidelity, handoffs, and the coordination of different repair steps. The direct connection of the BER glycosylase MYH to cancer resulted in part from having an easily recognized phenotype (the development of hundreds to thousands of adenomatous polyps throughout the intestinal tract indicative of Familial adenomatous polyposis). However, this discovery has served to highlight the value of obtaining a detailed understanding of BER structural biology including the mechanisms for DNA base damage recognition and removal plus the potential relationship of these processes to the molecular basis for human cancers and other pathologies. In fact, emerging results suggest that DNA repair proteins may be master keys for aging and brain pathology as well as cancer [140]. For these reasons, it will be important to have future BER structures and chemical tools that will test proposals for the detailed basis for damage recognition and removal including substrate assisted catalysis in oxidized base repair [14,39­51,141]. Multiple structures will also be needed to understand functionally important conformational changes, such as how the ligase ring loads onto PCNA and DNA [96,142,143] and the possible roles of conformational switching in this process. Defining the structural biochemistry of mitochondrial DNA polymerase and its interactions and conformations controlling processivity in repair synthesis is likely important for understanding aging and neurodegenerative diseases associated with DNA repair processes [144]. Interface mimicry and its role in interface exchanges such as seen for PCNA [89,145] also merits systematic structural characterizations. Such detailed structures of substrate and product complexes and coordinating assemblies will ultimately provide answers to how proteins are joined to pathways and why the evidently redundant specificities in BER enzymes are important for genome integrity, aging, and cancer avoidance.

Acknowledgments
The work on DNA Repair in the Authors' laboratory is supported by the Human Frontiers in Science Program (S.I. and J.A.T.), by NIH grants GM46312, and CA92584 (J.A.T) and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (K.H.). We thank Dr. Brian R. Chapados for the FEN-1­DNA complex coordinate

424

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

and critical comments on this manuscript, and Drs. Jill Fuss and Julie L. Tubbs for critical reading of the manuscript.

references

[1] D.R. Denver, S.L. Swenson, M. Lynch, An evolutionary analysis of the helix-hairpin-helix superfamily of DNA repair glycosylases, Mol. Biol. Evol. 20 (2003) 1603­ 1611. [2] H.E. Krokan, R. Standal, G. Slupphaug, DNA glycosylases in the base excision repair of DNA, Biochem. J. 325 (1997) 1­16. [3] T. Lindahl, R.D. Wood, Quality control by DNA repair, Science 286 (1999) 1897­1905. [4] B. Demple, L.B. Harrison, Repair of oxidative damage to DNA: enzymology and biology, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 63 (1994) 915­948. [5] R.D. Wood, DNA repair in eukaryotes, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65 (1996) 135­167. [6] J.L. Huffman, O. Sundheim, J.A. Tainer, DNA base damage recognition and removal: new twists and grooves, Mutat. Res. 577 (2005) 55­76. [7] T. Izumi, L.R. Wiederhold, G. Roy, R. Roy, A. Jaiswal, K.K. Bhakat, S. Mitra, T.K. Hazra, Mammalian DNA base excision repair proteins: their interactions and role in repair of oxidative DNA damage, Toxicology 193 (2003) 43­65. [8] S. Boiteux, M. Guillet, Abasic sites in DNA: repair and biological consequences in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, DNA Repair (Amst) 3 (2004) 1­12. [9] R.W. Sobol, M. Kartalou, K.H. Almeida, D.F. Joyce, B.P. Engelward, J.K. Horton, R. Prasad, L.D. Samson, S.H. Wilson, Base excision repair intermediates induce p53-independent cytotoxic and genotoxic responses, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 39951­39959. [10] B. Kavli, G. Slupphaug, C.D. Mol, A.S. Arvai, S.B. Peterson, J.A. Tainer, H.E. Krokan, Excision of cytosine and thymine from DNA by mutants of human uracil-DNA glycosylase, EMBO J. 15 (1996) 3442­3447. [11] T. Lindahl, Instability and decay of the primary structure of DNA, Nature 362 (1993) 709­715. [12] C.D. Mol, A.S. Arvai, G. Slupphaug, B. Kavli, I. Alseth, H.E. Krokan, J.A. Tainer, Crystal structure and mutational analysis of human uracil-DNA glycosylase: structural basis for specificity and catalysis, Cell 80 (1995) 869­878. [13] G. Slupphaug, C.D. Mol, B. Kavli, A.S. Arvai, H.E. Krokan, J.A. Tainer, A nucleotide-flipping mechanism from the structure of human uracil-DNA glycosylase bound to DNA, Nature 384 (1996) 87­92. [14] C.T. McMurray, J.A. Tainer, Cancer, cadmium and genome integrity, Nat. Genet. 34 (2003) 239­241. [15] M.M. Thayer, H. Ahern, D. Xing, R.P. Cunningham, J.A. Tainer, Novel DNA binding motifs in the DNA repair enzyme endonuclease III crystal structure, EMBO J. 14 (1995) 4108­4120. [16] D.J. Hosfield, C.D. Mol, B. Shen, J.A. Tainer, Structure of the DNA repair and replication endonuclease and exonuclease FEN-1: coupling DNA and PCNA binding to FEN-1 activity, Cell 95 (1998) 135­146. [17] C.F. Kuo, D.E. McRee, C.L. Fisher, S.F. O'Handley, R.P. Cunningham, J.A. Tainer, Atomic structure of the DNA repair [4Fe-4S] enzyme endonuclease III, Science 258 (1992) 434­440. [18] Y. Guan, R.C. Manuel, A.S. Arvai, S.S. Parikh, C.D. Mol, J.H. Miller, R.S. Lloyd, J.A. Tainer, MutY catalytic core, mutant and bound adenine structures define specificity for DNA repair enzyme superfamily, Nat. Struct. Biol. 5 (1998) 1058­1064.

[19] C.D. Mol, A.S. Arvai, T.J. Begley, R.P. Cunningham, J.A. Tainer, Structure and activity of a thermostable thymine-DNA glycosylase: evidence for base twisting to remove mismatched normal DNA bases, J. Mol. Biol. 315 (2002) 373­384. [20] T. Hollis, Y. Ichikawa, T. Ellenberger, DNA bending and a flip-out mechanism for base excision by the helix-hairpin-helix DNA glycosylase, Escherichia coli AlkA, EMBO J. 19 (2000) 758­766. [21] S.D. Bruner, D.P. Norman, G.L. Verdine, Structural basis for recognition and repair of the endogenous mutagen 8-oxoguanine in DNA, Nature 403 (2000) 859­866. [22] D.E. Volk, P.G. House, V. Thiviyanathan, B.A. Luxon, S. Zhang, R.S. Lloyd, D.G. Gorenstein, Structural similarities between MutT and the C-terminal domain of MutY, Biochemistry 39 (2000) 7331­7336. [23] B. Hendrich, U. Hardeland, H.-H. Ng, J. Jiricny, A. Bird, The thymine glycosylase MBD4 can bind to the product of deamination at methylated CpG sites, Nature 401 (1999) 301­304. [24] F. Petronzelli, A. Riccio, G.D. Markham, S.H. Seeholzer, M. Genuardi, M. Karbowski, A.T. Yeung, Y. Matsumoto, A. Bellacosa, Investigation of the substrate spectrum of the human mismatch-specific DNA N-glycosylase MED1 (MBD4): fundamental role of the catalytic domain, J. Cell. Physiol. 185 (2000) 473­480. [25] S.S. Parikh, G. Walcher, G.D. Jones, G. Slupphaug, H.E. Krokan, G.M. Blackburn, J.A. Tainer, Uracil-DNA glycosylase-DNA substrate and product structures: conformational strain promotes catalytic efficiency by coupled stereoelectronic effects, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97 (2000) 5083­5088. [26] I. Ohki, N. Shimotake, N. Fujita, J.-G. Jee, T. Ikegami, M. Nakao, M. Shirakawa, Solution structure of the methyl-CpG binding domain of human MBD1 in complex with methylated DNA, Cell 105 (2001) 487­497. [27] R.I.D. Wakefield, B.O. Smith, X. Nan, A. Free, A. Soteriou, D. Uhrin, A.P. Bird, P.N. Barlow, The solution structure of the domain from MeCP2 that binds to methylated DNA, J. Mol. Biol. 291 (1999) 1055­1065. [28] F. Petronzelli, A. Riccio, G.D. Markham, S.H. Seeholzer, J. Stoerker, M. Genuardi, et al., Biphasic kinetics of the human DNA repair protein MED1 (MBD4), a mismatch-specific DNA N-glycosylase, J. Biol. Chem. 275 (2000) 32422­32429. [29] S.S. Parikh, C.D. Mol, G. Slupphaug, S. Bharati, H.E. Krokan, J.A. Tainer, Base excision repair initiation revealed by crystal structures and binding kinetics of human uracil-DNA glycosylase with DNA, EMBO J. 17 (1998) 5214­5226. [30] J.C. Fromme, A. Banerjee, S.J. Huang, G.L. Verdine, Structural basis for removal of adenine mispaired with 8-oxoguanine by MutY adenine DNA glycosylase, Nature 427 (2004) 652­656. [31] M.L. Michaels, J.H. Miller, The GO system protects organisms from the mutagenic effect of the spontaneous lesion 8-hydroxyguanine (7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine), J. Bacteriol. 174 (1992) 6321­6325. [32] A.S. Mildvan, D.J. Weber, C. Abeygunawardana, Solution structure and mechanism of the MutT pyrophosphohydrolase, Adv. Enzymol. Relat. Areas Mol. Biol. 73 (1999) 183­207. [33] A. Gogos, J. Cillo, N.D. Clarke, A.-L. Lu, Specific recognition of A/G and A/7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) mismatches by Escherichia coli MutY: removal of the C-terminal domain preferentially affects A/8-oxoG recognition, Biochemistry 35 (1996) 16665­16671. [34] D.M. Noll, A. Gogos, J.A. Granek, N.D. Clarke, The C-terminal domain of the adenine-DNA glycosylase MutY confers specificity for 8-oxoguanine.adenine mispairs and

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

425

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43] [44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

may have evolved from MutT, an 8-oxo-dGTPase, Biochemistry 38 (1999) 6374­6379. J.C. Fromme, G.L. Verdine, Structure of a trapped endonuclease III-DNA covalent intermediate, EMBO J. 22 (2003) 3461­3471. M.A. Massiah, V. Saraswat, H.F. Azurmendi, A.S. Mildvan, Solution structure and NH exchange studies of the MutT pyrophosphohydrolase complexed with Mg(2+) and 8-oxo-dGMP, a tightly bound product, Biochemistry 42 (2003) 10140­10154. N. Al-Tassan, N.H. Chmiel, J. Maynard, N. Fleming, A.L. Livingston, G.T. Williams, A.K. Hodges, D.R. Davies, S.S. David, J.R. Sampson, J.P. Cheadle, Inherited variants of MYH associated with somatic G:C  T:A mutations in colorectal tumors, Nat. Genet. 30 (2002) 227­232. N.H. Chmiel, A.L. Livingston, S.S. David, Insight into the functional consequences of inherited variants of the hMYH adenine glycosylase associated with colorectal cancer: complementation assays with hMYH variants and pre-steady-state kinetics of the corresponding mutated E. coli enzymes, J. Mol. Biol. 327 (2003) 431­ 443. T.C. Brown, J. Jiricny, A specific mismatch repair event protects mammalian cells from loss of 5-methylcytosine, Cell 50 (1987) 945­950. U. Hardeland, M. Bentele, T. Lettieri, R. Steinacher, J. Jiricny, P. Schar, Thymine DNA glycosylase, Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 68 (2001) 235­253. P. Gallinari, J. Jiricny, A new class of uracil-DNA glycosylases related to human thymine-DNA glycosylase, Nature 383 (1996) 735­738. T.E. Barrett, R. Savva, G. Panayotou, T. Barlow, T. Brown, J. Jiricny, L.H. Pearl, Crystal structure of a G:T/U mismatch-specific DNA glycosylase: mismatch recognition by complementary-strand interactions, Cell 92 (1998) 117­129. L.H. Pearl, Structure and function in the uracil-DNA glycosylase superfamily, Mutat. Res. 460 (2000) 165­181. T.E. Barrett, O.D. Scharer, R. Savva, T. Brown, J. Jiricny, G.L. Verdine, L.H. Pearl, Crystal structure of a thwarted mismatch glycosylase DNA repair complex, EMBO J. 18 (1999) 6599­6609. U. Hardeland, R. Steinacher, J. Jiricny, P. Schar, Modification of the human thymine-DNA glycosylase by ubiquitin-like proteins facilitates enzymatic turnover, EMBO J. 21 (2002) 1456­1464. R. Steinacher, P. Schar, Functionality of human thymine DNA glycosylase requires SUMO-regulated changes in protein conformation, Curr. Biol. 15 (2005) 616­623. D. Baba, N. Maita, J.G. Jee, Y. Uchimura, H. Saitoh, K. Sugasawa, F. Hanaoka, H. Tochio, H. Hiroaki, M. Shirakawa, Crystal structure of thymine DNA glycosylase conjugated to SUMO-1, Nature 435 (2005) 979­982. J. Song, L.K. Durri, T.A. Wilkinson, T.G. Krontiris, Y. Chen, Identification of a SUMO-binding motif that recognizes SUMO-modified proteins, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101 (2004) 14373­14378. ° M. Bjøras, E. Seeberg, L. Luna, L.H. Pearl, T.E. Barrett, Reciprocal "flipping" underlies substrate recognition and catalytic activation by the human 8-oxo-guanine DNA glycosylase, J. Mol. Biol. 317 (2002) 171­177. D.P. Norman, S.J. Chung, G.L. Verdine, Structural and biochemical exploration of a critical amino acid in human 8-oxoguanine glycosylase, Biochemistry 42 (2003) 1564­1572. J.C. Fromme, S.D. Bruner, W. Yang, M. Karplus, G.L. Verdine, Product-assisted catalysis in base-excision DNA repair, Nat. Struct. Biol. 10 (2003) 204­211.

[52] S.J. Chung, G.L. Verdine, Structures of end products resulting from lesion processing by a DNA glycosylase/lyase, Chem. Biol. 11 (2004) 1643­1649. [53] A. Banerjee, W. Yang, M. Karplus, G.L. Verdine, Structure of a repair enzyme interrogating undamaged DNA elucidates recognition of damaged DNA, Nature 434 (2005) 612­618. [54] J. Tchou, H. Kasai, S. Shibutani, M.H. Chung, J. Laval, A.P. Grollman, S. Nishimura, 8-Oxoguanine (8-hydroxyguanine) DNA glycosylase and its substrate specificity, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 88 (1991) 4690­4694. [55] J. Park, L. Chen, M.S. Tockman, A. Elahi, P. Lazarus, The human 8-oxoguanine DNA N-glycosylase 1 (hOGG1) DNA repair enzyme and its association with lung cancer risk, Pharmacogenetics 14 (2004) 103­109. [56] L. Le Marchand, T. Donlon, A. Lum-Jones, A. Seifried, L.R. Wilkens, Association of the hOGG1 Ser326Cys polymorphism with lung cancer risk, Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 11 (2002) 409­412. [57] I. Morland, L. Luna, E. Gustad, E. Seeberg, M. Bjoras, Product inhibition and magnesium modulate the dual reaction mode of hOgg1, DNA Repair (Amst) 4 (2005) 381­387. [58] M. Sugahara, T. Mikawa, T. Kumasaka, M. Yamamoto, R. Kato, K. Fukuyama, Y. Inoue, S. Kuramitsu, Crystal structure of a repair enzyme of oxidatively damaged DNA, MutM (Fpg), from an extreme thermophile, Thermus thermophilus HB8, EMBO J. 19 (2000) 3857­3869. [59] J.C. Fromme, G.L. Verdine, Structural insights into lesion recognition and repair by the bacterial 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase MutM, Nat. Struct. Biol. 9 (2002) 544­552. [60] R. Gilboa, D.O. Zharkov, G. Golan, A.S. Fernandes, S.E. Gerchman, E. Matz, J.H. Kycia, A.P. Grollman, G. Shoham, Structure of formamidopyrimidine-DNA glycosylase covalently complexed to DNA, J. Biol. Chem. 277 (2002) 19811­19816. [61] D.O. Zharkov, G. Golan, R. Gilboa, A.S. Fernandes, S.E. Gerchman, J.H. Kycia, R.A. Rieger, A.P. Grollman, G. Shoham, Structural analysis of an Escherichia coli endonuclease VIII covalent reaction intermediate, EMBO J. 21 (2002) 789­800. [62] L. Serre, K. Pereira de Jesus, S. Boiteux, C. Zelwer, B. Castaing, Crystal structure of the Lactococcus lactis formamidopyrimidine-DNA glycosylase bound to an abasic site analogue-containing DNA, EMBO J. 21 (2002) 2854­2865. [63] J.C. Fromme, G.L. Verdine, DNA lesion recognition by the bacterial repair enzyme MutM, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 51543­51548. [64] F. Coste, M. Ober, T. Carell, S. Boiteux, C. Zelwer, B. Castaing, Structural basis for the recognition of the FapydG lesion (2,6-diamino-4-hydroxy-5-formamidopyrimidine) by formamidopyrimidine-DNA glycosylase, J. Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 44074­44083. [65] S. Doublie, V. Bandaru, J.P. Bond, S.S. Wallace, The crystal structure of human endonuclease VIII-like 1 (NEIL1) reveals a zincless finger motif required for glycosylase activity, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101 (2004) 10284­10289. [66] G. Golan, D.O. Zharkov, H. Feinberg, A.S. Fernandes, E.I. Zaika, J.H. Kycia, A.P. Grollman, G. Shoham, Structure of the uncomplexed DNA repair enzyme endonuclease VIII indicates significant interdomain flexibility, Nucleic Acids Res. 33 (2005) 5006­5016. [67] S. Boiteux, E. Gajewski, J. Laval, M. Dizdaroglu, Substrate specificity of the Escherichia coli Fpg protein (formamidopyrimidine-DNA glycosylase): excision of purine lesions in DNA produced by ionizing radiation or photosensitization, Biochemistry 31 (1992) 106­110. [68] H. Miller, A.S. Fernandes, E. Zaika, M.M. McTigue, M.C. Torres, M. Wente, C.R. Iden, A.P. Grollman, Stereoselective excision of thymine glycol from oxidatively damaged DNA, Nucleic Acids Res. 32 (2004) 338­345.

426

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

[69] A. Katafuchi, T. Nakano, A. Masaoka, H. Terato, S. Iwai, F. Hanaoka, H. Ide, Differential specificity of human and Escherichia coli endonuclease III and VIII homologues for oxidative base lesions, J. Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 14464­14471. [70] H. Dou, S. Mitra, T.K. Hazra, Repair of oxidized bases in DNA bubble structures by human DNA glycosylases NEIL1 and NEIL2, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 49679­49684. [71] A. Das, L. Rajagopalan, V.S. Mathura, S.J. Rigby, S. Mitra, T.K. Hazra, Identification of a zinc finger domain in the human NEIL2 (Nei-like-2) protein, J. Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 47132­47138. [72] L. Wiederhold, J.B. Leppard, P. Kedar, F. Karimi-Busheri, A. Rasouli-Nia, M. Weinfeld, A.E. Tomkinson, T. Izumi, R. Prasad, S.H. Wilson, S. Mitra, T.K. Hazra, AP endonuclease-independent DNA base excision repair in human cells, Mol. Cell 15 (2004) 209­220. [73] A.E. Pegg, Repair of O(6)-alkylguanine by alkyltransferases, Mutat. Res. 462 (2000) 83­100. [74] M.H. Moore, J.M. Gulbis, E.J. Dodson, B. Demple, P.C. Moody, Crystal structure of a suicidal DNA repair protein: the Ada O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase from E. coli, EMBO J. 13 (1994) 1495­1501. [75] H. Hashimoto, T. Inoue, M. Nishioka, S. Fujiwara, M. Takagi, T. Imanaka, Y. Kai, Hyperthermostable protein structure maintained by intra and inter-helix ion-pairs in archaeal O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase, J. Mol. Biol. 292 (1999) 707­716. [76] D.S. Daniels, C.D. Mol, A.S. Arvai, S. Kanugula, A.E. Pegg, J.A. Tainer, Active and alkylated human AGT structures: a novel zinc site, inhibitor and extrahelical base binding, EMBO J. 19 (2000) 1719­1730. [77] J.E. Wibley, A.E. Pegg, P.C. Moody, Crystal structure of the human O(6)-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase, Nucleic Acids Res. 28 (2000) 393­401. [78] D.S. Daniels, T.T. Woo, K.X. Luu, D.M. Noll, N.D. Clarke, A.E. Pegg, J.A. Tainer, DNA binding and nucleotide flipping by the human DNA repair protein AGT, Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 11 (2004) 714­720. [79] E.M. Duguid, P.A. Rice, C. He, The structure of the human AGT protein bound to DNA and its implications for damage detection, J. Mol. Biol. 350 (2005) 657­666. [80] R. Wintjens, M. Rooman, Structural classification of HTH DNA-binding domains and protein­DNA interaction modes, J. Mol. Biol. 262 (1996) 294­313. [81] D.J. Hosfield, Y. Guan, B.J. Haas, R.P. Cunningham, J.A. Tainer, Structure of the DNA repair enzyme endonuclease IV and its DNA complex: double-nucleotide flipping at abasic sites and three-metal-ion catalysis, Cell 98 (1999) 397­408. [82] C.D. Mol, T. Izumi, S. Mitra, J.A. Tainer, DNA-bound structures and mutants reveal abasic DNA binding by APE1 and DNA repair coordination, Nature 403 (2000) 451­456. [83] J.J. Rasimas, S. Kanugula, P.M. Dalessio, I.J. Ropson, M.G. Fried, A.E. Pegg, Effects of zinc occupancy on human O6-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase, Biochemistry 42 (2003) 980­990. [84] L.C. Myers, M.P. Terranova, A.E. Ferentz, G. Wagner, G.L. Verdine, Repair of DNA methylphosphotriesters through a metalloactivated cysteine nucleophile, Science 261 (1993) 1164­1167. ¨ [85] C. He, J. Hus, L. Sun, P. Zhou, D. Norman, V. Dotsch, H. Wei, J. Gross, W. Lane, G. Wagner, A methylation-dependent electrostatic switch controls DNA repair and transcriptional activation by Ada, Mol. Cell 20 (2005) 117­ 129. [86] L. Arvind, E.V. Koonin, The DNA repair protein AlkB, EGL-9, and leprecan define new families of 2-oxoglutarate- and

[87]

[88]

[89]

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]

[96]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]

iron-dependent dioxygenases, Genome Biol. 2 (2001) 0007.1­0007.8. S.C. Trewick, T.F. Henshaw, R.P. Hausinger, T. Lidahl, B. Sedgwick, Oxidative demethylation by Escherichia coli AlkB directly reverts DNA base damage, Nature 419 (2002) 174­178. P.Ø. Falnes, R.F. Johansen, E. Seeberg, AlkB-mediated oxidative demethylation reverses DNA damage in Escherichia coli, Nature 419 (2002) 178­182. T. Duncan, S.C. Trewick, P. Koivisto, P.A. Bates, T. Lindahl, B. Sedgwick, Reversal of DNA alkylation damage by two human dioxygenases, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99 (2002) 16660­16665. ° P.A. Aas, M. Otterlei, P.Ø. Falnes, C.B. Vagbø, F. Skorpen, M. ° Akbari, O. Sundheim, M. Bjøras, G. Slupphaug, E. Seeberg, H.E. Krokan, Human and bacterial oxidative demethylases repair alkylation damage in both RNA and DNA, Nature 421 (2003) 859­863. P.Ø. Falnes, Repair of 3-methylthymine and 1-methylguanine lesions by bacterial and human AlkB proteins, Nucleic Acids Res. 32 (2004) 6260­6267. Y. Mishina, C.G. Yang, C. He, Direct repair of the exocyclic DNA adduct 1,N6-ethenoadenine by the DNA repair AlkB proteins, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127 (2005) 14594­14595. J.C. Delaney, L. Smeester, C. Wong, L.E. Frick, K. Taghizadeh, J.S. Wishnok, C.L. Drennan, L.D. Samson, J.M. Essigmann, AlkB reverses etheno DNA lesions caused by lipid oxidation in vitro and in vivo, Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 12 (2005) 855­860. Y. Mishina, C. He, Probing the structure and function of the Escherichia coli DNA alkylation repair AlkB protein through chemical cross-linking, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125 (2003) 8730­8731. ° P.Ø. Falnes, M. Bjøras, P.A. Aas, O. Sundheim, E. Seeberg, Substrate specificities of bacterial and human AlkB proteins, Nucleic Acids Res. 32 (2004) 3456­3461. Y. Mishina, C.-H.J. Lee, C. He, Interaction of human and bacterial AlkB proteins with DNA as probed through chemical cross-linking studies, Nucleic Acids Res. 32 (2004) 1548­1554. B. Yu, W.C. Edstrom, J. Benach, Y. Hamuro, P.C. Weber, B.R. Gibney, J.F. Hunt, Crystal structures of catalytic complexes of the oxidative DNA/RNA repair enzyme AlkB, Nature 439 (2006) 879­884. R.P. Hausinger, FeII/alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent hydroxylases and related enzymes, Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 39 (2004) 21­68. ° ° O. Sundheim, C.B. Vagbø, M. Bjøras, M.M.L. Sousa, V. Talstad, P.A. Aas, F. Drabløs, H.E. Krokan, J.A. Tainer, G. Slupphaug, Human ABH3 structure and key residues for oxidative demethylation to reverse DNA/RNA damage, EMBO J. 25 (2006) 3389­3397. Y. Kubota, R.A. Nash, A. Klungland, et al., Reconstitution of DNA base excision-repair with purified human proteins: interaction between DNA polymerase beta and the XRCC1 protein, EMBO J. 15 (1996) 6662­6670. ´ ¨ Z.O. Jonsson, R. Hindges, U. Hubscher, Regulation of DNA replication and repair proteins through interaction with the front side of proliferating cell nuclear antigen, EMBO J. 17 (1998) 2412­2425. K.Y. Hwang, K. Baek, H.-Y. Kim, Y. Cho, The crystal structure of flap endonuclease-1 from Methanococcus jannaschii, Nat. Struct. Biol. 5 (1998) 707­713. B. Chapados, D. Hosfield, S. Han, J. Qiu, B. Yelent, B. Shen, J. Tainer, Structural basis for FEN-1 substrate specificity and PCNA-mediated activation in DNA replication and repair, Cell 116 (2004) 39­50. S. Sakurai, K. Kitano, H. Yamaguchi, K. Hamada, K. Okada, K. Fukuda, M. Uchida, E. Ohtsuka, H. Morioka, T.

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

427

[105]

[106]

[107]

[108]

[109]

[110]

[111]

[112]

[113]

[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]

[120]

[121]

Hakoshima, Structural basis for recruitment of human flap endonuclease 1 to PCNA, EMBO J. 24 (2005) 683­ 693. T.S.R. Krishna, X.-P. Kong, S. Gary, P.M. Burgers, J. Kuriyan, Crystal structure of the eukaryotic DNA polymerase processivity factor PCNA, Cell 79 (1994) 1233­1243. R.W. Sobol, J.K. Horton, R. Kuhn, et al., Requirement of mammalian DNA polymerase-beta in base-excision repair, Nature 379 (1996) 183­186. F.D. Jay II, J.A. Robert, H. Zuzana, A.F. Rose, H. Zdenek, 2.3 A crystal structure of the catalytic domain of DNA polymerase beta, Cell 76 (1994) 1123­1133. H. Pelletier, M.R. Sawaya, A. Kumar, S.H. Wilson, J. Kraut, Structures of ternary complexes of rat DNA polymerase beta, a DNA template-primer, and ddCTP, Science 264 (1994) 1891­1903. M.R. Sawaya, H. Pelletier, A. Kumar, S.H. Wilson, J. Kraut, Crystal structure of rat DNA polymerase beta: evidence for a common polymerase mechanism, Science 264 (1994) 1930­1935. H. Pelletier, M.R. Sawaya, W. Wolfle, S.H. Wilson, J. Kraut, Crystal structures of human DNA polymerase beta complexed with DNA: implications for catalytic mechanism, processivity, and fidelity, Biochemistry 35 (1996) 12742­12761. M.R. Sawaya, R. Prasad, S.H. Wilson, J. Kraut, H. Pelletier, Crystal structures of human DNA polymerase beta complexed with gapped and nicked DNA: evidence for an induced fit mechanism, Biochemistry 36 (1997) 11205­11215. J.W. Arndt, W. Gong, X. Zhong, A.K. Showalter, J. Liu, C.A. Dunlap, Z. Lin, C. Paxson, M.D. Tsai, M.K. Chan, Insight into the catalytic mechanism of DNA polymerase beta: structures of intermediate complexes, Biochemistry 40 (2001) 5368­5375. J. Krahn, W. Beard, H. Miller, A. Grollman, S. Wilson, Structure of DNA polymerase beta with the mutagenic DNA lesion 8-oxodeoxyguanine reveals structural insights into its coding potential, Structure 11 (2003) 121­127. J.M. Krahn, W.A. Beard, S.H. Wilson, Structural insights into DNA polymerase beta deterrents for misincorporation support an induced-fit mechanism for fidelity, Structure 12 (2004) 1823­1832. S. Johnson, L. Beese, Structures of mismatch replication errors observed in a DNA polymerase, Cell 116 (2004) 803­816. V.K. Batra, W.A. Beard, D.D. Shock, L.C. Pedersen, H.W. Samuel, Nucleotide-induced DNA polymerase active site motions accommodating a mutagenic DNA intermediate, Structure 13 (2005) 1225­1233. Y. Matsumoto, K. Kim, Excision of deoxyribose phosphate residues by DNA polymerase beta during DNA repair, Science 269 (1995) 699­702. R. Prasad, V.K. Batra, X.-P. Yang, J.M. Krahn, L.C. Pedersen, W.A. Beard, S.H. Wilson, Structural insight into the DNA polymerase P deoxyribose phosphate lyase mechanism, DNA repair (Amst) 4 (2005) 1347­1357. A.E. Tomkinson, S. Vijayakumar, J.M. Pascal, T. Ellenberger, DNA ligases: structure, reaction mechanism, and function, Chem. Rev. 106 (2006) 687­699. Z.B. Mackey, C. Niedergang, J.M. Murcia, J. Leppard, K. Au, J. Chen, G. Murcia, A.E. Tomkinson, DNA ligase III is recruited to DNA strand breaks by a zinc finger motif homologous to that of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, J. Biol. Chem. 274 (1999) 21679­21687. A.W. Kulczyk, J.C. Yang, D. Neuhaus, Solution structure and DNA binding of the zinc-finger domain from DNA ligase III , J. Mol. Biol. 341 (2004) 723­738.

[122] M.S. Satoh, T. Lindahl, Role of poly(ADP-ribose) formation in DNA repair, Nature 356 (1992) 356­358. [123] V.V. Krishnan, K.H. Thornton, M.P. Thelen, M. Cosman, Solution structure and backbone dynamics of the human DNA ligase III BRCT domain, Biochemistry 40 (2001) 13158­13166. [124] A.E. Tomkinson, D.S. Levin, Mammalian DNA ligase, BioEssay 19 (1997) 893­901. [125] W. Ramos, N. Tappe, J. Talamantez, E.C. Friedberg, A.E. Tomkinson, Two distinct DNA ligase activities in mitotic extracts of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Nucleic Acids Res. 25 (1997) 1485­1492. [126] X. Zhang, S. Morera, P.A. Bates, P.C. Whitehead, A.I. Coffer, K. Hainbucher, et al., Structure of an XRCC1 BRCT domain: a new protein­protein interaction module, EMBO J. 17 (1998) 6404­6411. [127] J.M. Pascal, P.J. O'Brien, A.E. Tomkinson, T. Ellenberger, Human DNA ligase I completely encircles and partially unwinds nicked DNA, Nature 432 (2004) 473­478. [128] H. Nishida, S. Kiyonari, Y. Ishino, K. Morikawa, The closed structure of an archaeal DNA ligase from Pyrococcus furiosus, J. Mol. Biol. 360 (2006) 956­967. [129] C.D. Mol, A.S. Arvai, R.J. Sanderson, G. Slupphaug, B. Kavli, H.E. Krokan, D.W. Mosbaugh, J.A. Tainer, Crystal structure of human uracil-DNA glycosylase in complex with a protein inhibitor: protein mimicry of DNA, Cell 82 (1995) 701­708. [130] C.D. Putnam, M.J.N. Shroyer, A.J. Lundquist, C.D. Mol, A.S. Arvai, D.W. Mosbaugh, J.A. Tainer, Protein mimicry of DNA from crystal structures of the uracil-DNA glycosylase inhibitor protein and its complex with Escherichia coli uracil-DNA glycosylase, J. Mol. Biol. 287 (1999) 331­346. [131] C.D. Putnam, J.A. Tainer, Protein mimicry of DNA and pathway regulation, DNA Repair (Amst) 4 (2005) 1410­1420. [132] A. Sarker, S. Tsutakawa, S. Kostek, C. Ng, D. Shin, M. Peris, E. Campeau, J. Tainer, E. Nogales, P. Cooper, Recognition of RNA polymerase II and transcription bubbles by XPG, CSB, and TFIIH: insights for transcription-coupled repair and Cockayne Syndrome, Mol. Cell 20 (2005) 187­198. [133] C.D. Putnam, S.B. Clancy, H. Tsuruta, S. Gonzalez, J.G. Wetmur, J.A. Tainer, Structure and mechanism of the RuvB Holliday junction branch migration motor, J. Mol. Biol. 311 (2001) 297­310. [134] K. Hopfner, A. Karcher, D. Shin, L. Craig, L. Arthur, J. Carney, J. Tainer, Structural biology of Rad50 ATPase: ATP-driven conformational control in DNA double-strand break repair and the ABC-ATPase superfamily, Cell 101 (2000) 789­800. [135] R.S. Williams, J.A. Tainer, A nanomachine for making ends meet: MRN is a flexing scaffold for the repair of DNA double-strand breaks, Mol. Cell 19 (2005) 724­726. [136] D.S. Shin, L. Pellegrini, D.S. Daniels, B. Yelent, et al., Full-length archaeal Rad51 structure and mutants: mechanisms for RAD51 assembly and control by BRCA2, EMBO J. 22 (2003) 4566­4576. [137] M. Otterlei, B. Kavli, R. Standal, C. Skjelbred, S. Bharati, H.E. Krokan, Repair of chromosomal abasic sites in vivo involves at least three different repair pathways, EMBO J. 19 (2000) 5542­5551. [138] E.C. Chao, S.M. Lipkin, Molecular models for the tissue specificity of DNA mismatch repair-deficient carcinogenesis, Nucleic Acids Res. 34 (2006) 840­852. [139] J. de Boer, J.H. Hoeijmakers, Nucleotide excision repair and human syndromes, Carcinogenesis 21 (2000) 453­460. [140] J.J. Perry, L. Fan, J.A. Tainer, Developing master keys to brain pathology, cancer and aging from the structural biology of proteins controlling reactive oxygen species and DNA repair, Neuroscience (2006) Epub ahead of print. [141] Y. Doi, A. Katafuchi, Y. Fujiwara, K. Hitomi, J.A. Tainer, H. Ide, S. Iwai, Synthesis and characterization of

428

d n a r e p a i r 6 ( 2 0 0 7 ) 410­428

oligonucleotides containing 2 -fluorinated thymidine glycol as inhibitors of the endonuclease III reaction, Nucleic Acids Res. 34 (2006) 1540­1551. [142] J.M. Pascal, O.V. Tsodikov, G.L. Hura, W. Song, E.A. Cotner, S. Classen, A.E. Tomkinson, J.A. Tainer, T. Ellenberger, A flexible interface between DNA ligase and PCNA supports conformational switching and efficient ligation of DNA, Mol. Cell 24 (2006) 279­291. [143] S. Vijayakumar, B.R. Chapados, K.H. Schmidt, R.D. Kolodner, J.A. Tainer, A.E. Tomkinson, The C-terminal domain of yeast PCNA is required for physical and functional interactions with Cdc9 DNA ligase, Nucleic Acids Res. (2007) in press.

[144] L. Fan, S. Kim, C.L. Farr, K.T. Schaefer, K.M. Randolph, J.A. Tainer, L.S. Kaguni, A novel processive mechanism for DNA synthesis revealed by structure, modeling and mutagenesis of the accessory subunit of human mitochondrial DNA polymerase, J. Mol. Biol. 358 (2006) 1229­ 1243. [145] I. Ivanov, B.R. Chapados, J.A. McCammon, J.A. Tainer, Proliferating cell nuclear antigen loaded onto double-stranded DNA: dynamics, minor groove interactions and functional implications, Nucleic Acids Res. 34 (2006) 6023­6033.

