44

Ontologies for proteomics: towards a systematic de®nition of structure and function that scales to the genome level
Ning LanÃz, Gaetano T Montelione# and Mark GersteinÃy§
A principal aim of post-genomic biology is elucidating the structures, functions and biochemical properties of all gene products in a genome. However, to adequately comprehend such a large amount of information we need new descriptions of proteins that scale to the genomic level. In short, we need a uni®ed ontology for proteomics. Much progress has been made towards this end, including a variety of approaches to systematic structural and functional classi®cation and initial work towards developing standardized, uni®ed descriptions for protein properties. In relation to function, there is a particularly great diversity of approaches, involving placing a protein in structured hierarchies or more-generalized networks and a recent approach based on circumscribing a protein's function through systematic enumeration of molecular interactions.
Addresses Ã Departments of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry and yComputer Science and Northeast Structural Genomics Consortium, 266 Whitney Avenue, Yale University, PO Box 208114, New Haven, CT 06520, USA z e-mail: lan@bioinfo.mbb.yale.edu § Correspondence: e-mail: mark.gerstein@yale.edu # Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry and Northeast Structural Genomics Consortium, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854-5638, USA e-mail: guy@cabm.rutgers.edu

ultimately, organisms [1]. Such a task calls for the development of systems to conceptualize and represent key information on proteins that can scale up to genomic level and be suf®ciently standardized to support data mining (Figure 1). These systematic descriptions go by the formal term of ontologies [2,3]. Descriptions of protein structure and function, as well as the language used to describe experimental protocols in protein production, were originally crafted for individual proteins. These notions have progressed rapidly in recent years towards systematic representation, but are still isolated from one another, and are under intensive study and debate. In this paper, we review some of the currently established representation systems of structural and functional genomics, and then describe a grid-like structure that de®nes protein function through molecular interactions. We focus particularly on systems to organize protein properties (both biophysical and biochemical) ± as opposed to the classi®cation of 3D protein folds, a subject that has been reviewed extensively elsewhere. These systems are an essential part of the world-wide structural genomics effort.

Toward an ontology for structural genomics

Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2003, 7:44±54 This review comes from a themed issue on Proteomics and genomics Edited by Matthew Bogyo and James Hurley 1367-5931/03/$ ± see front matter ß 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. DOI 10.1016/S1367-5931(02)00020-0

Abbreviations BMRB BioMagResBank GO Gene Ontology NESG Northeast Structural Genomics Consortium PDB Protein Data Bank PRESAGE Protein Resource Entailing Structural Annotation of Genomic Entities SPINE Structural Proteomics in the Northeast SPINS Standardized Protein NMR Storage database

Introduction

Structural genomics has emerged as one of the core areas of post-genomic studies [4,5]. It has major goals of helping in the determination of biochemical functions for uncharacterized proteins and also in comprehensively surveying the range of folds adopted by proteins [6,7,8,9]. De®ning a classi®cation scheme for 3D protein folds is one of the main areas of ontological interest in structural genomics. Classifying protein folds can be done either manually or automatically by a computer programme. There has been considerable progress on this problem and there are currently several popular schemes organizing the protein structural universe including FSSP ([10]; http://www.ebi.ac.uk/dali/fssp/), CATH ([11]; http://www.biochem.ucl.ac.uk/bsm/cath_new/),andSCOP ([12]; http://scop.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/scop/). There have been quite a few recent reviews on this subject and we direct the reader to these for more details [1,13,14,15,16]. Here we focus on other ontological issues raised by structural genomics, namely the systematic description of protein properties. Structure determination requires a large number of experimental steps that go from cloning, expression, puri®cation and biophysical characterization, to structure determination by NMR spectroscopy or X-ray crystallography. Traditionally, experimental structural biology
www.current-opinion.com

After recent successes in genome-sequencing projects, the focus of large-scale biology has shifted from DNA to RNA and proteins, and the main challenge for bioinformatics is to integrate the ever growing amount of data to fully ascribe the biological role of proteins, cells, and
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2003, 7:44±54

Ontologies for proteomics Lan, Montelione and Gerstein 45

Figure 1

CHAOS

CURRENT

FUTURE

Structure

Actin

Function

DNA

Protein

kinase

pop in a lved Histo Invo ne s ynth etic letha l

bind

ing

tosis

_ Protein 1 Protein 2 Protein 3 Protein 4 Protein 5 Protein 6 ...... ......

Expression Solubility 8 6 9 5 0 8 ...... 5 3 3 0 4 ......

Oligomer Dimer Monomer Dimer Monomer Tetramer ......

HSQC Promising Good Aggregated Good ......

...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ......

Properties

Current Opinion in Chemical Biology

History, current status and future perspective of protein ontology Early descriptions of protein structure, function and biophysical properties consist of natural phrases as well as experimental data in diverse format. Genome-scale representation systems in the form of hierarchical structure, directed acyclic graph or grid-like structure are being developed to describe protein structure, function and properties, respectively. Future progress in this field (represented by the orange oval) is likely to tend towards a unified system with a higher level of standardization to support data mining.

has been labour-intensive, hypothesis-driven and conducted on single proteins. The success of the Human Genome Project has encouraged the construction of highthroughput pipelines aiming at the 3D characterization of proteins on a large-scale. Moreover, the highly variable characteristics of proteins make structural genomics projects fundamentally orders of magnitudes more complex than genome-sequencing projects [17]. It is therefore essential that speci®cations or ontologies be developed to standardize information about protein properties and make them amenable to retrospective analysis. Across the world, several large-scale structural genomics projects have been initiated [18±20]. In the United States, nine pilot studies have been started under the NIH Protein Structure Initiative to develop and implement
www.current-opinion.com

high-throughput technologies required for structural genomics [21]. Each of these centers is supported by database systems and underlining ontology structures. Here we use a database we created for one of the centers as an example to illustrate some key issues in developing speci®cations and ontologies for protein properties.

SPINE: an integrated tracking database for the NESG

Northeast Structural Genomics Consortium (NESG) [22] is a multi-institutional collaboration with an emphasis on proteins from eukaryotes. The consortium is geographically widespread, requiring a centralized repository to integrate and manage the data generated, which are accessible to all participating members. SPINE (Structural Proteomics in the Northeast) is the centralized
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2003, 7:44±54

46 Proteomics and genomics

Figure 2

Buffers buffer_name attribute value unit

Aggregation screen screen_id purification_id analysis_buffer analysis_column analysis_temp injected volume recovery % storage_buffer storage_time storage_temp ...... 1:M

Hydrodynamics screen_id species percentage Mw

Target target_id protein_name status length pI sequence function PDB_homolog ......

Construct construct_id target_id vector 1:M tag insert_type begin end forward_primer reverse_primer ......

Expression expression_id construct_id media bact_strain expression phase solubility ......

Purification purification_id expression_id protocol purified_yield soluble_yield concentratable oligomer_state sds_page_img ms_img ...... 1:M X-ray xray_id purification_id crystal_url xray_url xray_structure xray_resolution xray_rfactor xray_free_rfactor ......
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology

1:M

1:M

1:M

1:M NMR nmr_id purification_id hsqc_quality hsqc_url nmr_assignment nmr_structure nmr_url ......

CD cd_id purification_id alpha beta coil turn Tm cd_assignment cd_melt cd_score ......

Simplified schema of the SPINE database The major tables in SPINE and their relationship are shown. Some of the key attributes are listed. Standardized fields using numerical values are in red, whereas fields using controlled vocabulary are in green. Shaded fields are those we used in data mining of SPINE [23]. 1:M indicates a one-to-many relationship between tables.

tracking database for the consortium. As structural genomics is a new and rapidly evolving ®eld, it was important to allow for database evolution to follow the development of the high-throughput process, rather than to take a topdown approach in which the database could restrict the development of the experimental technologies. A critical issue in designing a system of this kind is determining the fundamental `unit' to be tracked by the database. Initially, the expression `construct' was chosen, and the best experimental results for the expression, puri®cation and characterization of each construct were recorded as attributes for this single entity. As the database expanded with more and more targets entered from various laboraCurrent Opinion in Chemical Biology 2003, 7:44±54

tories, it became obvious then than the primary objects being tracked were actually protein `targets', or the proteins (or protein domains) themselves, each of which was being produced in multiple `construct' forms. Moreover, the need emerged to record experimental information on different levels, including not only the best conditions of cloning, expression, puri®cation, etc., but also the suboptimal ones such that future data mining can be conducted on multiple fronts. The improved database schema (Figure 2) better captures the work¯ow of the structural genomics pipeline at the NESG. In the current conceptualization, each `target' can be cloned into multiple `constructs', which are subsequently `expressed'
www.current-opinion.com

Ontologies for proteomics Lan, Montelione and Gerstein 47

under various fermentation conditions and then puri®ed using multiple methods. The resulting protein `batches' are used for various biophysical characterizations (e.g. oligomerization state, monodispersity, crystallization, circular dichroism analysis) and structure determination by X-ray crystallography or NMR spectroscopy. The protein or nucleic acid (e.g. plasmid or cDNA) material generated at each step of the process is assigned a unique `Protein/ DNA Sample ID', which is associated through the database with the complete history of the sample, as well as its speci®c storage location in the laboratory, re¯ecting the fact that the properties of each protein are contingent on its particular preparation history. Each such sample is derived from a speci®c parent sample by a speci®c process, with one-to-many relationships from start to end. Relationships between samples (e.g. a set of plasmids within a 96-well plate), as well as the history of sample locations and transfers from one laboratory to another within the consortium, are also stored in these SPINE database records. Information with disparate formats and types creates dif®culty for data mining; therefore, another key issue of the system is the standardization of experimental datasets. Towards this end, we introduced numerical values in place of the text descriptors sometimes used by experimentalists, as highlighted in Figure 2. For a multi-institutional collaborative effort, it is important to accommodate the needs of various consortium projects in which different experimental methodologies are used. Fields from existing datasets were used to develop a consensus of experimental parameters, which was in turn adapted to the current database framework. Using standardized solubility data from SPINE we were able to conduct decision tree analysis for optimization of target selection [23]. Another critical component of the structural genomics pipeline is organizing the raw data, intermediate results and ®nal structure depositions into the public domain for the hundreds of experimental structures determined by X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy. Ontologies and databases for these processes, which will be invaluable to structural genomics and traditional structural biology projects, alike, are currently under active development [24±26]. An example of one such ontology and database is SPINS (Standardized Protein NMR Storage Database), a data dictionary and object-oriented relational database for archiving protein NMR spectra [27]. Modern protein NMR spectroscopy laboratories have a rapidly growing need for an easily queried local archival system of raw experimental NMR datasets. SPINS provides facilities for high-volume NMR data archiving, organization of analyses and dissemination of results to the public domain by automatic preparation of the header ®les required for submission of data to the
www.current-opinion.com

BioMagResBank (BMRB). SPINS coordinates the process from data collection to BMRB deposition of raw NMR data by standardizing and integrating the storage and retrieval of these data in a local laboratory ®le system. SPINS also includes a user-friendly internet-based graphical user interface, which is integrated with certain NMR data collection software. To ensure smooth integration of SPINS data into the NMRStar format used by the BMRB, efforts are made to keep the SPINS data model as consistent as possible with the related and partially overlapping NMRStar data model [28], as well as with the evolving CCPN data dictionary and model of experimental NMR data [26,29]. SPINS v1.0 and its associated data dictionary represent the ®rst phase of a multi-phase process integration project, providing organization, archiving, and simple submission to the BMRB of time domain FID ®les and all the information needed to describe and reproduce these data. Relatively few raw NMR datasets (FIDS) are currently available in the public domain and routine archiving of such data using tools such as SPINS will have signi®cant scienti®c value. Through the activities of the NESG, SPINS is evolving into a central agent that integrates the entire process of NMR-based protein structure determination. As the protein spectroscopist progresses through the resonance assignment and structure determination process, the evolving SPINS database serves as the central archive, logging important information critical for documenting and reproducing each step of the NMR data analysis process, and generating intermediate ®les in appropriate formats for the supported speci®c software applications, forming the core of an automated data analysis process. The SPINS data dictionary is also designed to be consistent with evolving structural genomics project databases, such as SPINE. Finally, SPINS will also be capable of auto-submission of the associated intermediate and ®nal data ®les generated in the process of NMR resonance assignments and structure analysis to the public domain BioMagResBank [25] and Protein Data Bank (PDB) [30] in a fully validated format. Similar efforts are in progress for NMR data organization by the CCPN Network [26,29], and for X-ray crystallographic data organization by the PHENIX project [24].

SPINS: standardized protein NMR storage

Other efforts to standardize structural genomics information

There are several prominent efforts to standardize structural genomics information. Currently, the information from various centers and laboratories is highly scattered. Before solved structures are deposited into the PDB, there needs to be coordination of the selection and production progress of protein targets to minimize the waste of resources and efforts on the overlapping target pools that have been identi®ed by the various centers. For this purpose, TargetDB [31] was created as a target registration database, originally for registration and tracking
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2003, 7:44±54

48 Proteomics and genomics

information for NIH P50 structural genomics centers, and later expanded to include target data from worldwide structural genomics and proteomics projects. Participating centers provide status and tracking information on the progress of their targets in XML format using the Document Type De®nition (DTD) de®ned by TargetDB, which in turn provides a display and query interface to the target information. The minimal contents of TargetDB was de®ned by a subcommittee of the International Structural Genomics Organization to enable its rapid implementation although, in the future, the range of structural genomics information consolidated in TargetDB and shared across the world-wide structural genomics community is envisioned to greatly expand. Another structural genomics database aimed at improving communication in the ®eld by providing a repository of project progress information is PRESAGE (Protein Resource Entailing Structural Annotation of Genomic Entities) [32]. The fundamental unit in PRESAGE is an annotation, either experimental or predicted, with subsidiary and additional varieties, as submitted by researchers worldwide. The PDB, as the sole comprehensive repository of macromolecular structural data, is aiming to validate all data in its archive and release a uniform data format as well as a guideline for future deposition, so as to facilitate systematic analyses and integration with other biological and structural databases. The depository is also expanding its data dictionary to include a comprehensive experimental data collection and re®nements that previously were embedded in unstructured REMARK records in PDB ®les [33].

tion through transposon insertion [38] or deletion [39,40], yeast two-hybrid assays [41±44], proteome microarrays [45±47] and the TAP-tagging method [48,49], or through homology-based annotation transfer from the idea that proteins of similar sequence and structure are presumably descended from a common ancestral protein, and have related functions [50±52]. Much caution needs to be taken in annotation transfer, in that the relationship between sequence or structure similarity and functional similarity is not as straightforward as that between sequence and structure similarity. For protein pairs that share the same fold, usually 30±40% sequence identity is required for function to be conserved [53,54]. Examples also exist where proteins of high sequence and structural similarity perform disparate functions, such as lysozyme and a-lactalbumin; or proteins with different structural folds have identical function, such as subtilisin and chymotrypsin [55].

Systematic representation of protein function

Early functional annotation tended to be recorded as simple phrases, which are non-standard, highly unstable, and have no organized structure among functions. Many humorous examples can be taken from the ¯y (e.g. Redtape, roadblock, starry night) [56]. Moreover, function has been described from different angles dependent on the experimental perspective. Biochemists often characterize protein function in terms of molecular reactions. Cell biologists describe protein function as its role in a cellular process. Geneticists characterize genes by the phenotype of their mutations. Standard ontology systems that integrate these various conceptualizations in genomics and de®ne exact speci®cations of function need to be established. One approach is the hierarchical representation adopted by most functional ontologies such as the Gene Ontology (GO) [57], the MIPS Functional Classi®cation Catalogue [58] and the Enzyme Commission (EC) classi®cation [59]. Figure 3a shows a simpli®ed hierarchy in [26] to represent enzyme and non-enzyme function. Sharing of classi®cation numbers indicates functional similarity. One can trace up and down the hierarchy to ®nd whether one function is part of another function, and whether or not (but not quantitatively) there is any commonality between two functions (i.e. whether they descend from the same broad function). The Gene Ontology Consortium has been highly successful in creating a structured and precisely de®ned controlled vocabulary for describing gene function across several organisms [57]. GO classi®es genes into three parallel categories (i.e. three directed acyclic graphs: biological process, molecular function and cellular component). This is for de®ning the function of a gene product at various levels, including its biochemical activities, biological roles as well as cellular structure. Nodes can often be reached from multiple paths, which facilitates the
www.current-opinion.com

Toward an ontology for functional genomics

It is important to recognize that functional characterization must be done on several levels. A particular gene product can be characterized with respect to its genetic or physiological function (e.g. expression of the gene product codes for a particular cellular fate or lineage), a cellular function (e.g. the protein regulates microtubule assembly), the biochemical function (e.g. the protein is a kinase), and the biophysical function (e.g. the details of individual residue pKa values and local electrostatic potential in determining the speci®city and mechanism of phosphorylation). Solving the structure of a protein can often provide valuable clues towards elucidating its biochemical and biophysical function, and there are numerous examples in structural genomics of how having a structure suggested a function for a previously uncharacterized protein [34±37]. However, structure rarely provides deep insights into genetic, physiological or cellular function. These other levels of protein function can also be characterized by various high-throughput functional genomics methods, using oligonucleotide and cDNA microarrays, gene disrupCurrent Opinion in Chemical Biology 2003, 7:44±54

Ontologies for proteomics Lan, Montelione and Gerstein 49

Figure 3

(a)

All of SCOP entries

(b)
RFA3 CDC45 ORC1 RFA2 RFC5 MCD1 RSC3 CDC6 CCL1 KAR1 RFA1 POL30 POL2 SPC98 STH1 CDC5 CDC1 APC1 PAN1 UBC9

ENZYME 1 Oxidoreductases 3 Hydrolases

NON-ENZYME 1 Metabolism 3 cell structure

1.1 Acting on CH-OH

1.5 Acting on CH-NH

3.1 Acting on ester bonds

3.4 Acting on peptide bonds

1.2 Nucleotide metab.

1.1 Carb. metab.

3.1 Nucleus

3.8 Extracel. matrix

CDC48 RPN6 RPN2 RPT6 PRE7 RPT2 PUP2 RPT3 RPT1 RPN1

1.1.1 NAD and NADP acceptor

3.1.1 Carboxylic ester hydrolases

1.1.1 Polysach. metab.

3.8.2 Extracel. matrix glycoprotein
SDH1

RPN12 UBI4 TPS1 ATH1 LSC2 GLK1 UBC5 TPS2 CIT1 NTH1 PGM2 HXK1 SDH4 SDH2 RIP1 CYC7 INH1

RPT4 RPN3

1.1.1.1 Alcohol dehydro genase

1.1.1.3 Homo serine dehydro genase

3.1.1.1 Carboxyl esterase

3.1.1.8 Choline esterase

1.1.1.2 Starch metab.

1.1.1.1 Glycogen metab.

3.8.2.1 Fibronectin

3.8.2.2 Tenascin

ATP4 ATP3

Precise functional similarity

General similarity

Functional class similarity Current Opinion in Chemical Biology

Systematic representation of protein function. (a) Hierarchical scheme for functional classification, adapted from [26]. In a tree structured schema, functional similarity is measured by the height of common ancestor. In practice, the path of each node from the root is encoded into a classification number, and comparison is done by scanning the classification numbers from left to right. If two proteins are both enzymes or both non-enzymes, then they possess general functional similarity. If they share the first component of their classification numbers, then they are in the same functional class. If they share the first three components of their enzyme numbers (or the equivalent for non-enzyme numbers, depending on category) then they have the same precise function. (b) Example of a yeast protein network. The green edges represent protein±protein interactions from the MIPS complexes catalogue [58], two yeast-two hybrid datasets [43,44], and two in vivo pull-down datasets [48,49]. The grey edges stem from a computational analysis of different data indicating protein±protein interactions; these data include information on whether two proteins are localized in the same subcellular compartment, whether they are co-expressed under the same physiological conditions, and whether they are involved in the same biological processes [69±71].

representation and comparison of genes with multiple functions or involved in more than one process. GO Consortium has recently launched an umbrella website called GOBO (Global Open Biological Ontologies) for structured shared controlled vocabularies for use within the genomics and proteomics domain [60]. Another approach to global representation of gene function is through network graphs, including pathway maps and protein±protein interaction maps. These graphs differ from the hierarchical representation in that each node is not a function, but a protein or a substrate/product of a reaction. The link between two nodes indicates an interaction. They can provide a framework from which complex regulatory information can be extracted. One example of a pathway graph is EcoCyc, an ontology that describes metabolic pathways and other cell functions of the Escherichia coli genome by encoding information about the molecular interaction of E. coli genes [61].
www.current-opinion.com

It uses distinct frames to represent the molecule and its chemically modi®ed forms, and then models its interactions by labeling it substrate, catalyst, modulator or cofactor in a reaction. Protein±protein interaction maps represent a population of interacting proteins displayed as networks or circuits. An example is shown in Figure 3b. The yeast two-hybrid system is one of the major methodologies for large-scale analysis of protein±protein interactions. Interaction maps combining yeast two-hybrid studies with previous annotations have been generated [42]. The more recently developed proteome microarray technology enables direct analysis of a variety of interactions, including interactions between proteins [45±47]. Protein interactions have also been predicted by computational methods on the basis of genomic sequence [62] or mRNA expression [63]. We found that gene expression data are sometimes more meaningful when they are grouped under a protein complex scheme rather then a functional classi®cation scheme [64].
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2003, 7:44±54

50 Proteomics and genomics

Figure 4

(a)

Nucleic acids

Small molecules

Proteins
CDC28 0 0 0 0 0.9 Calmodulin 0 0 0 1.0 0

Protein 1 Protein 2 Protein 3 Protein 4 Protein 5 Protein 6 Protein 7

DNA RNA ATP Metal CoA NAD G protein 1.0 0 0 0 0 0 ...... 0 0 0.9 0 0 0 0 ...... 0 1.0 0 1.0 0 0 0 ...... 0 0 0 0 0 0.8 0 ...... 0 1.0 0 0 0 0 0 ...... 0 ...... 0.9 0 ...... 0 0.8

......
(b) Expression
(>104)

...... ...... ......

......

...... ...... ...... ......

......

......

...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ......

Sequence
(~102)

Structure
(~103)

Biophysical behavior
(~101)

Other
(~102)

Function
(~104)

a.a. composition Predicted motifs

Secondary structure

Crystalization ......

Phenotype

Homologs

TRIPLES ......

Domains ......

Folds

NMR

Stanford cell cycle Rosseta compendium

Solubility

Charge & hydrophobicity ......

Essentiality

......

Interaction

Location

......

Nucleic acid

Lipid

Small molecule Protein

Human

Fly

......

Metal ion

Cofactor ......

Membrane Mitochondrion

......

Fatty acid

Phospholipid Nulceotide Amino acid

Sterol

Nucleus

Cytoplasm

Individual

Grouped

Chromosome position Bent DNA Random coil Structure Z DNA ...... Sequence

(c) Protein kinase C MAPKK kinase MAPK kinase PKC1 BCK1 Mkk1 or Mkk2

MAP kinase Transcription factor

SLT2 RLM1

(d)
Condition Condition Condition Condition d ed te at ed l la ry t ry ho yla ho Evidence Evidence Evidence Evidence Evidence d sp hor sp o te o Ph osp yla Ph h or P ph Action Action Action Action Action nk nk nk os nk Li Li Li nk Li Ph i L DNA te ink Mkk1/Mkk2 BCK1 te SLT2 nk ATP e Li se tra tra e L as Prob. Prob. Prob. Prob. Prob. ubs na bs trat n Ki Ki S Su bs e 1 1 Mkk1 1 as nd Su in Bi 1 SLT2 1 K 1 1 RLM1
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology

Condition

Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2003, 7:44±54

Telomere Centromere ......

mRNA tRNA snRNA ......

Sequence

......

......

Type

www.current-opinion.com

Secreted

DNA

RNA

Ontologies for proteomics Lan, Montelione and Gerstein 51

Protein±protein interaction maps have not only con®rmed the existence of previously known complexes and pathways but also revealed new complexes and crosstalk between previously unlinked pathways [43,65]. An interaction map generated in one species can potentially be used to predict interactions in another species, presuming that large numbers of physically interacting proteins in one organism have evolved in a correlated fashion such that their respective orthologues in other organisms also interact [66].

different regulation, for example, myoglobin and hemoglobin [67]. Consider the following more complex questions. Is the function of protein X more similar to protein Y than to protein Z? Among a group of proteins with known functions, are there subgroups that are more closely related? Can novel function be deduced from known function and other features of a protein. These questions could potentially be easy to solve if function were represented in numerical form. Here we describe a grid-like structure that represents protein function in term of interaction probabilities (recently proposed in [64]) and discuss its potential application in function prediction.

Limitations of the current ontology systems

Up to now, ontologies that de®ne gene function as a hierarchical structure are all based on natural language. Although a protein's function can be de®ned with relative accuracy through a controlled vocabulary and cross-linked hierarchical structures, the use of natural language limits the precision of function de®nition and potential applications of computational automation. The most basic question in functional computation is whether two proteins have the same function. Functional equality is relative and approximate since natural language-based ontologies may not be ®ne-tuned enough to re¯ect the complex cellular function and regulation of each gene product. To answer the question of functional equality more precisely, one needs to integrate functional information from a variety of resources including pathway and interaction maps. For two non-identical but related functions, the degree of similarity is much harder if not impossible to answer using natural language-based ontologies. When comparing two GO terms, their names and positions in the hierarchy often do not provide full information on the level of similarity between them. Moreover, there are multifunctional proteins or proteins involved in multiple cellular processes that can be associated with more than one GO term in each of three level categories. On the other hand, certain functions may only be meaningful in terms of protein complexes. In such cases the interaction network graph may provide a more accurate picture of the protein. Another situation is that two gene products may have the same cellular function but are under

Construction and potential application of the function grid

In the function grid, the proteome interaction map is represented as a matrix, as each protein is associated with a row vector that consists of the probability of binding to various ligands (Figure 4a). The dimension of each row vector can potentially be in®nite, as it expands when experimental data for previously unknown ligands become available. Functional similarity between two proteins can be de®ned by the cosine of the angle between the two corresponding vectors. Then, proteins can be grouped according to function similarity using several clustering methods. There are several issues that need to be addressed in designing the interaction grid. First, there needs to be a systematic way to de®ne a binding probability, which determines the accuracy of the calculations. Second, we need to consider what, and how many ligands to put into the grid, and the relationship between these ligands. On the one hand, we want to collect every possible piece of information on molecular interactions. In the meantime, these ligands need to be grouped into a hierarchical structure, allowing the function grid to be viewed and mined at multiple levels (Figure 4b). Third, when information on molecular interaction from multiple organisms is collected, how are we going to integrate them (i.e. should homologs be treated as different ®elds of the same protein

(Figure 4 legend) A functional grid and its application in functional prediction. (a) A simplified example of an Interaction Grid. The function of each protein is defined as a row vector that consists of the probability of binding to various ligands. The grid is filled with data collected from GO, EC, yeast two-hybrid system interactions and proteome chip experiments. For information gathered from GO, based on the GO evidence code associated with each entry (defined at http://www.geneontology.org/GO.evidence.html), we assigned probabilities from 0.8 (NR) to 1.0 (TAS and IDA). Using the data from proteome chip experiments, we define the binding probability of each protein by normalizing its binding signal against the lowest value of all proteins that are known to bind the ligand. The value is left empty when binding probability is unknown. The dimension of each row vector can be expanded when experimental data for previously unknown ligands become available. (b) Hierarchical organization of the functional grid. The fields in the functional grid can be grouped into a hierarchical structure, such that data mining can be performed at various levels. The range of potential number of fields (columns) for each group is indicated in parentheses. Areas where rapid expansion is expected in the near future are in italic. (c,d) Representation of part of a signal transduction pathway. Here we show (c) a schematic representation of some of the main components of yeast protein kinase C cascade and (d) how part of this cascade is represented in the interaction grid. Mkk1 phosphorylates SLT2 when phosphorylated by BCK1. SLT2 phosphorylates RLM1 SLT2 when phosphorylated by Mkk1 or Mkk2. RLM1 binds DNA when phosphorylated by SLT2. The `link' in the evidence field refers to the original publication. www.current-opinion.com Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2003, 7:44±54

52 Proteomics and genomics

or different proteins?). One reasonable decision is to construct individual matrices for each organism, and keep evolutionary relations between homologs in another table. This way the similarity and difference between interaction partners among homologs can be easily calculated by calculating the distance between the respective binding vectors. The fourth point is concerned not so much with data-mining but more with the power of this interaction grid system to represent gene function in the context of cellular regulation. Apart from probability and evidence, each reaction has two extra ®elds of action and condition, to indicate the reaction type and regulation of this interaction. Figure 4c,d show how two steps in the MAP kinase pathway involved in the maintenance of cellular integrity [42] are represented in the interaction grid. The interaction grid can be combined with sequence and structural features, cellular localization as well as expression data, to make up a more comprehensive grid, which can be used for data-mining as we deduce novel interactions based on known ones.

1. 2. 3. 4.

Thornton JM: From genome to function. Science 2001, 292:2095-2097. Genesereth M, Nilsson N: Logical Foundations of Arti®cial Intelligence. Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann; 1987. Gruber TR: A translation approach to portable ontologies. Knowledge Acquisition 1993, 5:199-220. Zarembinski TI, Hung LW, Mueller-Dieckmann HJ, Kim KK, Yokota H, Kim R, Kim SH: Structure-based assignment of the biochemical function of a hypothetical protein: a test case of structural genomics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:15189-15193. Cort JR, Koonin EV, Bash PA, Kennedy MA: A phylogenetic approach to target selection for structural genomics: solution structure of YciH. Nucleic Acids Res 1999, 27:4018-4027. Montelione GT, Anderson S: Structural genomics: keystone for a Human Proteome Project. Nat Struct Biol 1999, 6:11-12. Burley SK, Almo SC, Bonanno JB, Capel M, Chance MR, Gaasterland T, Lin D, Sali A, Studier FW, Swaminathan S: Structural genomics: beyond the human genome project. Nat Genet 1999, 23:151-157.

5.

6. 7.

8. Montelione GT: Structural genomics: an approach to the protein  folding problem. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:13488-13489. The author reviews recent progress of genomic-scale 3D protein structure determination and its role in elucidating the protein folding problem. 9. Vitkup D, Melamud E, Moult J, Sander C: Completeness in structural genomics. Nat Struct Biol 2001, 8:559-566.

Conclusion

The availability of fully sequenced genomes challenges bioinformatics to elucidate the structure, interactions and functions of proteins on genomic scale. Ontology systems are needed that can facilitate calculation of function together with other biological data. Such ontologies should aim at capturing all dimensions of protein structure and function and should keep up with the phenomenal rate at which biological data are being produced. Although there is a well-studied link between protein structure and function [55,68], the ontologies adopted in each ®eld, such as CATH, which describes protein folds, SPINE, which delineates biophysical characteristics, and GO, which represents function, have been developed separately and remain largely isolated. One potential connection point would be the description of active sites in protein structure that illustrate its function. Current structural and functional ontology systems are mainly based on natural language, which has limitations in the precision of function de®nition and therefore cannot readily support calculation of functional similarity. Future progress in this ®eld is likely to tend towards increased uniformity, more re®ned data structure and a higher level of standardization to support data mining.

10. Holm L, Sander C: The FSSP database: fold classi®cation based on structure-structure alignment of proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 1996, 1:206-209. 11. Orengo CA, Michie AD, Jones S, Jones DT, Swindells MB, Thornton JM: CATH±a hierarchic classi®cation of protein domain structures. Structure 1997, 5:1093-1108. 12. Hubbard TJ, Ailey B, Brenner SE, Murzin AG, Chothia C: SCOP: a structural classi®cation of proteins database. Nucleic Acids Res 1999, 27:254-256. 13. Hadley C, Jones DT: A systematic comparison of protein structure classi®cations: SCOP, CATH and FSSP. Structure Fold Des 1999, 7:1099-1112. 14. Thornton JM, Todd AE, Milburn D, Borkakoti N, Orengo CA: From structure to function: approaches and limitations. Nat Struct Biol 2000, (Suppl):991-994. 15. Teichmann SA, Murzin AG, Chothia C: Determination of protein  function, evolution and interactions by structural genomics. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2001, 11:354-363. The authors review recent efforts on the determination of the function and evolutionary relationships of proteins by experimental structural genomics and the discovery of protein±protein interactions by computational structural genomics. 16. Brenner SE, Levitt M: Expectations from structural genomics. Protein Sci 2000, 9:197-200. 17. Stevens RC, Yokoyama S, Wilson IA: Global efforts in structural  genomics. Science 2001, 294:89-92. The authors describe the worldwide initiative in structural genomics and highlight the Second International Structural Genomics Meeting of 2001. 18. Heinemann U: Structural genomics in Europe: slow start, strong ®nish? Nat Struct Biol 2000, (Suppl):940-942. 19. Terwilliger TC: Structural genomics in North America. Nat Struct Biol 2000, (Suppl):935-939. 20. Yokoyama S, Hirota H, Kigawa T, Yabuki T, Shirouzu M, Terada T, Ito Y, Matsuo Y, Kuroda Y, Nishimura Y, Kyogoku Y, Miki K, Masui R, Kuramitsu S: Structural genomics projects in Japan. Nat Struct Biol 2000, (Suppl):943-945. 21. Burley FC, Bonanno JB: Structuring the universe of proteins. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2002, 3:243-262. 22. On World Wide Web URL: http://www.nesg.org. www.current-opinion.com

Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by grant P50-GM62413 from the Protein Structure Initiative of the Institute of General Medical Sciences, National Institutes of Health.

References and recommended reading
 of special interest  of outstanding interest Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2003, 7:44±54

Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

Ontologies for proteomics Lan, Montelione and Gerstein 53

23. Bertone P, Kluger Y, Lan N, Zheng D, Christendat D, Yee A,  Edwards AM, Arrowsmith CH, Montelione GT, Gerstein M: SPINE: an integrated tracking database and data mining approach for identifying feasible targets in high-throughput structural proteomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:2884-2898. The authors describe a structural genomics project tracking database speci®cally designed to enable distributed scienti®c collaboration via the Internet as well as an active vehicle to standardize proteomics data in a form that would enable systematic data mining. 24. Adams PD, Grosse-Kunstleve RW, Hung LW, Ioerger TR, McCoy AJ, Moriarty NW, Read RJ, Sacchettini JC, Sauter NK, Terwilliger TC: PHENIX: building new software for automated crystallographic structure determination. Acta Crystallogr D 2002, 58:1948-1954. 25. Seavey BR, Farr EA, Westler WM, Markley JL: A relational database for sequence-speci®c protein NMR data. J Biomol NMR 1991, 1:217-236. 26. Fogh R: The CCPN project: an interim report on a data model for the NMR community. Nat Struct Biol 2002, 9:416-418. 27. Baran M, Moseley HNB, Sahota G, Montelione GT: SPINS: A data  dictionary and object-oriented relational database for archiving protein NMR spectra. J Biomol NMR 2002, 24:113-121. The authors describe SPINS, an object-oriented relational database that provides facilities for high-volume NMR data archival, organization of analyses, and automatic submission of results to the public domain. 28. On World Wide Web URL: http://www.bmrb.wisc.edu. 29. On World Wide Web URL: http://www.bio.cam.ac.uk/nmr/ccp. 30. Berman HM, Battistuz T, Bhat TN, Bluhm WF, Bourne PE, Burkhardt  K, Feng Z, Gilliland GL, Iype L, Jain S et al.: The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res 2000, 28:235-242. The authors describe the short-term and long-term goals of the PDB, the data deposition systems, and how to obtain further information. 31. On World Wide Web URL: http://www.targetdb.rutgers.edu/  index.html. A centralized registration database created by the PDB for target sequences from the nine P50 NIH structural genomics centers and from other genomics centers worldwide, updated weekly. 32. Brenner SE, Barken D, Levitt M: The PRESAGE database for structural genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 1999, 27:251-253. 33. Westbrook J, Feng Z, Jain S, Bhat TN, Thanki N, Ravichandran V,  Gilliland GL, Bluhm W, Weissig H, Greer DS et al.: The Protein Data Bank: unifying the archive. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:245-248. The authors describe a validation process of all data in the PDB archive and the release of a uniform archive for the structural genomics community. 34. Newkirk K, Feng W, Jiang W, Tejero R, Emerson SD, Inouye M, Montelione GT: Solution NMR structure of the major cold shock protein (CspA) from Escherichia coli: Identi®cation of a binding epitope for DNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994, 91:5114-5118. 35. Feng W, Tejero R, Zimmerman DE, Inouye M, Montelione GT: Solution NMR structure and backbone dynamics of the major cold shock protein (CspA) from Escherichia coli: Evidence for conformational dynamics in the proposed ssRNA-binding site. Biochemistry 1998, 37:10881-10896. 36. Cort JR, Chiang Y, Zheng D, Montelione GT, Kennedy MA: NMR structure of conserved eukaryotic protein ZK652.3 from C. elegans: a ubiquitin-like fold. Prot Struct Funct Genet 2002, 48:733-736. 37. Yang H, Jeffrey PD, Miller J, Kinnucan E, Sun Y, Thoma NH, Zheng N, Chen PL, Lee WH, Pavletich NP: BRCA2 function in DNA binding and recombination from a BRCA2-DSS1-ssDNA structure. Science 2002, 297:1837-1848. 38. Ross-Macdonald P: Large-scale analysis of the yeast genome by transposon tagging and gene disruption. Nature 1999, 402:413-418. 39. Ni L, Snyder M: A genomic study of the bipolar bud site selection pattern in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol Biol Cell 2001, 12:2147-2170. www.current-opinion.com

40. Winzeler EA, Shoemaker DD, Astromoff A, Liang H, Anderson K, Andre B, Bangham R, Benito R, Boeke JD, Bussey H et al.: Functional characterization of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome by comprehensive and precise gene deletion and massively parallel analysis. Science 1999, 285:901-906. 41. Ito T, Tashiro K, Muta S, Ozawa R, Chiba T, Nishizawa M, Yamamoto K, Kuhara S, Sakaki Y et al.: Toward a protein-protein interaction map of the budding yeast: A comprehensive system to examine two-hybrid interactions in all possible combinations between the yeast proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:1143-1147. 42. Schwikowski B, Uetz P, Fields S: A network of protein-protein interactions in yeast. Nat Biotechnol 2000, 18:1257-1261. 43. Uetz P, Giot L, Cagney G, Mans®eld TA, Judson RS, Knight JR, Lockshon D, Narayan V, Srinivasan M, Pochart P et al.: A comprehensive analysis of protein-protein interactions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature 2000, 403:623-627. 44. Ito T, Chiba T, Ozawa R, Yoshida M, Hattori M, Sakaki Y: A comprehensive two-hybrid analysis to explore the yeast protein interactome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:4569-4574. 45. MacBeath G, Schreiber SL: Printing proteins as microarrays for high throughput function determination. Science 2000, 289:1760-1762. 46. Zhu H, Klemic JF, Chang S, Bertone P, Casamayor A, Klemic KG, Smith D, Gerstein M, Reed MA, Snyder M: Analysis of yeast protein kinases using protein chips. Nat Genet 2000, 26:283-289. 47. Zhu H, Bilgin M, Bangham R, Hall D, Casamayor A, Bertone P, Lan N, Jansen R, Bidlingmaier S et al.: Global analysis of protein activities using proteome chips. Science 2001, 293:2101-2105. 48. Gavin AC, Bosche M, Krause R, Grandi P, Marzioch M, Bauer A, Schultz J, Rick JM, Michon AM, Cruciat CM et al.: Functional organization of the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein complexes. Nature 2002, 415:141-147. 49. Ho Y, Gruhler A, Heilbut A, Bader GD, Moore L, Adams SL, Millar A, Taylor P, Bennett K, Boutilier K et al.: Systematic identi®cation of protein complexes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by mass spectrometry. Nature 2002, 415:180-183. 50. Bork P, Koonin EV: Protein sequence motifs. Curr Opin Struct Biol 1996, 6:366-376. 51. Zhang Z, Schaffer AA, Miller W, Madden TL, Lipman DJ, Koonin EV, Altschul SF et al.: Protein sequence similarity searches using patterns as seeds. Nucleic Acids Res 1998, 26:3986-3990. 52. Attwood TK, Flower DR, Lewis AP, Mabey JE, Morgan SR, Scordis P, Selley JN, Wright W et al.: PRINTS prepares for the new millennium. Nucleic Acids Res 1999, 27:220-225. 53. Hegyi H, Gerstein M: Annotation transfer for genomics: measuring functional divergence in multi-domain proteins. Genome Res 2001, 11:1632-1640. 54. Wilson CA, Kreychman J, Gerstein M: Assessing annotation transfer for genomics: quantifying the relations between protein sequence, structure and function through traditional and probabilistic scores. J Mol Biol 2000, 297:233-249. 55. Todd AE, Orengo CA, Thornton JM: Evolution of function in  protein superfamilies, from a structural perspective. J Mol Biol 2001, 307:1113-1143. The authors explore the functional variation of homologous enzyme superfamilies containing two or more enzymes and ®nd that almost all superfamilies exhibit functional diversity generated by local sequence variation and domain shuf¯ing. 56. Vacek M: A gene by any other name. American Scientist 2001, 89: on World Wide Web URL http://www.sigmaxi.org/amsci/Issues/ Sciobs01/sciobs0111gene.html. 57. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM,  Davis AP, Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT et al.: Gene ontology: tool for the uni®cation of biology. Nat Genet 2000, 25:25-29. The authors describe GO, a structured and precisely de®ned controlled vocabulary for describing gene function across several organisms. GO consists of three DAGs: biological process, molecular function Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2003, 7:44±54

54 Proteomics and genomics

and cellular component, which de®ne gene function at various levels, including its biochemical activities, biological roles as well as cellular structure. 58. Mewes HW, Frishman D, Guldener U, Mannhaupt G, Mayer K, Mokrejs M, Morgenstern B, Munsterkotter M, Rudd S, Weil B: MIPS: a database for genomes and protein sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 2000, 30:31-34. 59. Webb EC: Enzyme Nomenclature 1992. Recommendations of the Nomenclature Committee of the International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. New York: Academic Press; 1992. 60. On World Wide Web URL: http://www.geneontology.org/doc/ gobo.html. 61. Karp PD: An ontology for biological function based on  molecular interactions. Bioinformatics 2000, 16:269-285. The author describes the functional ontology developed for the EcoCyc database, which encodes a diverse array of biochemical processes. The ontology is validated through its use to support complex functional queries for the EcoCyc DB. 62. Marcotte EM, Pellegrini M, Ng HL, Rice DW, Yeates TO, Eisenberg D: Detecting protein function and protein-protein interactions from genome sequences. Science 1999, 285:751-753. 63. Jansen R, Greenbaum D, Gerstein M: Relating whole-genome  expression data with protein-protein interactions. Genome Res 2002, 12:37-46. The authors investigate the relationship of protein±protein interactions with mRNA expression levels, by integrating a variety of data sources for yeast and ®nd that subunits of the same protein complex show signi®cant coexpression, both in terms of similarities of absolute mRNA levels and expression pro®les.

64. Lan N, Jansen R, Gerstein M: Towards a systematic de®nition of protein function that scales to the genome level: de®ning function in terms of interactions. Proc IEEE, in press. 65. Fromont-Racine M, Mayes AE, Brunet-Simon A, Rain JC, Colley A, Dix I, Decourty L, Joly N, Ricard F, Beggs JD, Legrain P: Genome-wide protein interaction screens reveal functional networks involving Sm-like proteins. Yeast 2000, 17:95-110. 66. Matthews LR, Vaglio P, Reboul J, Ge H, Davis BP, Garrels J, Vincent S, Vidal M: Identi®cation of potential interaction networks using sequence-based searches for conserved protein-protein interactions or interologs. Genome Res 2001, 11:2120-2126. 67. Antonini E, Brunoni M: Hemoglobin and Myoglobin in their Reactions with Ligands. Amsterdam, Holland: Borth-Holland; 1971. 68. Hegyi H, Gerstein M: The relationship between protein structure and function: a comprehensive survey with application to the yeast genome. J Mol Biol 1999, 288:147-164. 69. Kumar A, Agarwal S, Heyman JA, Matson S, Heidtman M, Piccirillo S, Umansky L, Drawid A, Jansen R, Liu Y et al.: Subcellular localization of the yeast proteome. Genes Dev 2002, 16:707-719. 70. Cho R, Campbell MJ, Winzeler EA, Steinmetz L, Conway A, Wodicka L, Wolfsberg TG, Gabrielian AE, Landsman D, Lockhart DJ, Davis RW: A genome-wide transcriptional analysis of the mitotic cell cycle. Mol Cell 1998, 2:65-73. 71. Hughes T, Marton MJ, Jones AR, Roberts CJ, Stoughton R, Armour CD, Bennett HA, Coffey E, Dai H, He YD et al.: Functional discovery via a compendium of expression pro®les. Cell 2000, 102:109-126.

Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2003, 7:44±54

www.current-opinion.com

