Developmental Cell, Vol. 7, 457­463, October, 2004, Copyright 2004 by Cell Press

Previews

The Structure of an Endosomal Protein Sorter

Three "endosomal sorting complexes required for transport," ESCRT-I, -II, and -III, mediate sorting of ubiquitinated membrane proteins into intraluminal endosomal vesicles that are destined for degradation in lysosomes. Two recent reports, one in Nature and one in this issue of Developmental Cell, reveal the crystal structure of the yeast form of ESCRT-II. Lysosomes are organelles that are filled with hydrolytic enzymes. Protein transport from endosomes to the lumen of lysosomes is required for lysosome biogenesis and for proper degradation of endocytosed membrane proteins such as growth factor receptors (Gruenberg and Stenmark, 2004). Because lysosomal dysfunction is involved in a number of genetic diseases and because proper degradation of endocytosed growth factor receptors is essential in order to avoid hyperproliferation and cancer, it is important to understand how membrane proteins are sorted into the degradative endocytic pathway. The sorting of membrane proteins into this pathway usually begins with their conjugation to the small protein ubiquitin. Ubiquitination serves as an entry ticket into intraluminal vesicles that pinch off from the limiting membrane of the endosome. When these vesicles are exposed to hydrolytic enzymes upon fusion of the multivesicular endosome with a lysosome, the vesicles and their content are degraded. The most successful approach to identify the molecular machinery responsible for lysosomal protein sorting has been the isolation of vacuolar protein sorting (vps) mutants in yeast. The yeast vacuole is the functional equivalent of mammalian lysosomes, and the basic machinery for vacuolar/lysosomal protein sorting has turned out to be conserved from yeast to man (Katzmann et al., 2002). The so-called class E vps mutants are defective in sorting membrane proteins to the vacuole lumen. Current evidence indicates that the class E Vps proteins mediate the recognition of ubiquitinated cargo in endosome membranes as well as the formation of intraluminal vesicles of endosomes, in a budding process that is topologically opposite to most other budding events of cellular membranes. Remarkably, a number of enveloped viruses, including HIV, have been shown to hijack this machinery to accomplish their own budding (Pornillos et al., 2002). A further clarification of the mechanisms involved could perhaps lead to the development of novel antiviral drugs. Work from Scott Emr's group has shown that ten of the yeast Vps class E proteins participate in three protein complexes, coined ESCRT-I, -II, and -III. ESCRT-I consists of one molecule of Vps23 and several Vps28 and Vps37 subunits (Katzmann et al., 2001). ESCRT-III consists of two subcomplexes, one composed of Vps20

and Vps32/Snf7 and one composed of Vps2 and Vps24. This complex is less well characterized than the two other ESCRTs but forms high-order multimers on membranes that might be involved in membrane involution (Babst et al., 2002a). The crystal structure of ESCRT-II, which appears to function downstream of ESCRT-I and upstream of ESCRT-III in protein sorting (Babst et al., 2002b), has now been solved by the groups of James Hurley (in collaboration with Emr) and Roger Williams (Hierro et al., 2004; Teo et al., 2004 [this issue of Developmental Cell]). Both groups present similar structures of ° 3.6 A resolution consisting of two molecules of Vps25, one molecule of Vps22, and one molecule of the C-terminal part of Vps36. Hurley's group has performed a mutational analysis to characterize interactions between the subunits of ESCRT-II. They find that an intact heterotetrameric complex is essential for the vacuolar protein-sorting function of ESCRT-II. In complementary experiments, the Williams group has examined the interaction of ESCRT-II with ESCRT-III and with liposome membranes. The overall structure of ESCRT-II has three lobes, two formed by the two Vps25 subunits and the third consisting of a subcomplex of Vps22 and Vps36 (see Figure 1). Vps22 and Vps36 form equivalent contacts with their respective Vps25 molecules at the center of the structure. Surprisingly, even though Vps22, Vps25, and the Vps36 C terminus show no discernable sequence similarities, the three molecules are all composed of a similar pair of "winged helix" folds, a building block found previously in functionally unrelated proteins such as transcription factors. Both the Hurley and Williams groups note that the structure of ESCRT-II may make it well suited for engaging in multimeric protein networks on membranes. The most conspicuous feature of the ESCRT-II structure is an exposed helical domain at the N terminus of Vps22 that protrudes from the body of the complex (see Figure 1). In the crystal, a helix from this domain forms a coiled-coil dimer with another Vps22 molecule. Since ESCRT-II is a monomer in solution, dimerization might not be the normal function of the Vps22 N terminus. Instead, it has been proposed that it could serve to form coiled-coil interactions with ESCRT-III and thus contribute to recruitment of this complex (Babst et al., 2002b). However, Williams and coworkers now show that the protruding Vps22 helical domain does not interact in vitro with Vps20, the ESCRT-III subunit thought to represent the interface with ESCRT-II. Rather, such an interaction is mediated by Vps25 (Teo et al., 2004), consistent with two-hybrid interaction data for the human homologs of Vps25 and Vps20 (von Schwedler et al., 2003). What, then, is the function of the Vps22 N terminus? It might interact with ESCRT-I or serve in membrane-specific homodimerization of ESCRT-II. A third possibility, favored by Williams and coworkers, is that it mediates direct interactions with membranes. Sometimes the missing part of a structure can be as informative as the solved part. The N-terminal 380 residues of Vps36 were not included in either of the

Developmental Cell 458

Even though the structure of ESCRT-II does not yield any definitive mechanism of function for this complex in protein sorting, it does provide testable models for how ESCRT-II may interact with cargo, membranes, and with other ESCRTs. While we are still awaiting the determination of the structures of ESCRT-I and ESCRT-III, the ESCRT-II structure will serve as an excellent template for the further design of biochemical and cell biological experiments that will contribute to the determination of the molecular mechanisms of lysosomal protein sorting. Thomas Slagsvold and Harald Stenmark Department of Biochemistry The Norwegian Radium Hospital Montebello N-0310 Oslo Norway
Selected Reading Babst, M., Katzmann, D.J., Estepa-Sabal, E.J., Meerloo, T., and Emr, S.D. (2002a). Dev. Cell 3, 271­282. Babst, M., Katzmann, D.J., Snyder, W.B., Wendland, B., and Emr, S.D. (2002b). Dev. Cell 3, 283­289. Gruenberg, J., and Stenmark, H. (2004). Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 5, 317­323. Hierro, A., Sun, J., Rusnak, A.S., Kim, J., Prag, G., Emr, S.D., and Hurley, J.H. (2004). Nature 431, 221­225. Katzmann, D.J., Babst, M., and Emr, S.D. (2001). Cell 106, 145­155. Katzmann, D.J., Odorizzi, G., and Emr, S.D. (2002). Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3, 893­905. Pornillos, O., Garrus, J.E., and Sundquist, W.I. (2002). Trends Cell Biol. 12, 569­579. Teo, H., Perisic, O., Gonzalez, B., and Williams, R.L. (2004). Dev. ´ Cell 7, this issue, 559­569. Published online September 16, 2004. 10.1016/S1534580704003235. von Schwedler, U.K., Stuchell, M., Muller, B., Ward, D.M., Chung, H.Y., Morita, E., Wang, H.E., Davis, T., He, G.P., Cimbora, D.M., et al. (2003). Cell 114, 701­713.

Figure 1. The Structure of ESCRT-II strands are colored in blue. Helices are colored red in Vps25, cyan in Vps36, and green in Vps22. The protruding N-terminal helices of Vps22 are colored in orange and presented as surface-covered rods. Image courtesy of Roger Williams.

solved structures. Apparently, the flexible nature of this part of Vps36 disfavors highly diffracting crystals. Ironically, this missing part contains a ubiquitin binding NZF zinc finger domain that is a key element in the current models for ESCRT function. The region of Vps36 leading to this NZF domain protrudes from the same region as the Vps22 helical domain, suggesting that the NZF domain may be at the end of a flexible arm that could contact ubiquitinated cargo or ubiquitinated components of the endosomal sorting machinery. The ESCRT-I subunit Vps23 also has a ubiquitin binding domain at the end of a putative flexible linker, so it is possible to imagine cargo transfer from ESCRT-I to ESCRT-II via these flexible arms (Hierro et al., 2004). However, a caveat of this model is the fact that mammalian Vps36 does not contain any NZF domain.

Caveolae Meet Endosomes: A Stable Relationship?

The endocytic trafficking of caveolae has been the subject of some controversy for many years. A new study (Pelkmans et al.) shows that budded caveolae can interact with both the caveosome and the early endosome and that caveolin-enriched regions of the early endosomal membrane form unusually stable domains that can incorporate cargo in a regulated manner.

The plasma membrane of mammalian cells forms a highly dynamic interface with the external milieu. Rather

than being a homogeneous mixture of lipids and proteins, the plasma membrane is a mosaic of distinct domains, each with specialized functions and specific dynamics. Caveolae are distinct surface features that lack readily identifiable coat proteins as seen by electron microscopy but, like clathrin-coated pits, appear as deeply invaginated pits in the plasma membrane. Rather than being covered in a layer of coat proteins and accessory proteins, the major marker protein of caveolae, caveolin-1, is an oligomeric integral membrane protein that binds cholesterol. Expression of caveolin-1 in a cell lacking caveolae is sufficient for caveolae formation, and ablation of caveolin-1 expression causes loss of caveolae. However, the exact functions of caveolae have proved elusive. An attractive theory has been that caveolae are the entry portal in an alternative endocytic pathway, but the idea has been controversial (Parton and Richards, 2003). A study in Cell (Pelkmans et al., 2004) sheds new light on the trafficking of caveolae between the cell surface and endocytic compartments

