doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2006.05.061

J. Mol. Biol. (2006) 360, 1053­1066

Population of On-pathway Intermediates in the Folding of Ubiquitin
Maria D. Crespo, Emma R. Simpson and Mark S. Searle
Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, School of Chemistry, University Park, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK The role that intermediate states play in protein folding is the subject of intense investigation and in the case of ubiquitin has been controversial. We present fluorescence-detected kinetic data derived from single and double mixing stopped-flow experiments to show that the F45W mutant of ubiquitin (WT*), a well-studied single-domain protein and most recently regarded as a simple two-state system, folds via on-pathway intermediates. To account for the discrepancy we observe between equilibrium and kinetic stabilities and m-values, we show that the polypeptide chain undergoes rapid collapse to an intermediate whose presence we infer from a fast lag phase in interrupted refolding experiments. Double-jump kinetic experiments identify two direct folding phases that are not associated with slow isomerisation reactions in the unfolded state. These two phases are explained by kinetic partitioning which allows molecules to reach the native state from the collapsed state via two possible competing routes, which we further examine using two destabilised ubiquitin mutants. Interrupted refolding experiments allow us to observe the formation and decay of an intermediate along one of these pathways. A plausible model for the folding pathway of ubiquitin is presented that demonstrates that obligatory intermediates and/or chain collapse are important events in restricting the conformational search for the native state of ubiquitin.
© 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

*Corresponding author

Keywords: ubiquitin; protein folding; reaction kinetics; folding intermediates; peptide isomerisation

Introduction
Until recently, the observation that a growing number of small proteins fold via apparent two-state kinetics has questioned the role that intermediate states play in the formation of native protein structures.1­3 However, the increasingly frequent observation of non-linear effects in denaturantdependent folding and unfolding kinetics of some of these apparent two-state folding proteins suggests folding mechanisms that involve sequential

 M.D.C. and E.R.S. contributed equally to this work. Present address: M.D. Crespo, Biozentrum der Universität Basel, Abteilung Biophysikalische Chemie, Klingelbergstrasse 70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland. Abbreviation used: GdmCl, guanidinium hydrochloride. E-mail address of the corresponding author: mark.searle@nottingham.ac.uk

barriers and high energy partially folded states that represent obligatory staging-points along the folding pathway.4­6 These observations indicate that the difference between two-state and multi-state folding pathways is no longer a question of whether intermediate states exist, or whether they are important in guiding the folding process, but is focused on how transiently they are populated and hence their relative stability.5,6 In addition to these sequential pathway models, and consistent with statistical models based around rugged folding energy landscapes,7­9 different molecules are predicted to follow different trajectories from the unfolded to native state via distinct parallel folding channels where the flux of molecules down each route depends on the relative effects of denaturants on transition state stabilities.10,11 Complex kinetics, resulting in distinct kinetic phases arising from parallel folding pathways, have now been reported for a number of systems of moderate size, complexity and with different domain structure.12­19 The

0022-2836/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1054 partitioning between slow and fast folding channels from a homogeneous unfolded state has shown that a proportion of fast-track molecules can fold via a two-state kinetic pathway avoiding significantly populated partially folded states, while others are retarded by becoming trapped in non-productive conformations en route to the native structure. Multiple pathways on a rough energy landscape have been suggested to be an intrinsic consequence of the diffusional nature of early folding dynamics.20 Ubiquitin is a small single domain protein of 76 residues that has been the subject of numerous structural and stability studies. 21­26 Despite a significant body of kinetic data27­37 the exact details of its folding mechanism have been contentious following earlier suggestions that the protein folds via a populated intermediate state.29,30 More recent studies, using the same fluorescent F45W mutant of ubiquitin (WT*) originally described by Khorasanizadeh et al.,29 report apparent two-state kinetics once potential aggregation effects and artifacts due to data fitting at fast folding rates are taken into consideration.27,31­35 Fluorescence-detected kinetic experiments have shown clear evidence for at least three folding phases, dominated by a primary fastfolding pathway. The two slower folding phases observed for WT* (10­20% of the fluorescence amplitude) have been assigned repeatedly to parallel folding pathways arising from cis-trans proline isomerisation in the unfolded state.27,30,35 However, we show for yeast ubiquitin that these slow phases are not eliminated in a proline-free (P37A/P38A) mutant. Indeed, the presence of these proline residues in WT* appears to have little observable influence on the number of folding phases and their relative amplitudes, suggesting that these are nonessential residues in the folding reaction. Using a combination of fluorescence-detected kinetic data, including interrupted unfolding and refolding experiments, we establish that ubiquitin, a wellstudied single-domain protein and most recently regarded as a simple two-state system, folds via onpathway intermediates representing obligatory staging-points on a rugged energy landscape.

Intermediates in the Folding of Ubiquitin

Results
Equilibrium versus kinetic stabilities: validity of the two-state folding model for ubiquitin An important test of the two state model for protein folding is that protein stability measured using equilibrium denaturation methods and kinetic data are in good agreement, satisfying the assumption that the equilibrium constant is equivalent to the ratio of the refolding and unfolding rate constants under those conditions. Subsequently, equilibrium and kinetic m-values, reflecting the dependence of the equilibrium constant and rate constants on denaturant concentration should also be directly correlated (meq = mNU - mUN), reflecting

changes in buried surface area in formation of the native state and transition state. We examined the folding of yeast ubiquitin, hitherto regarded as a two-state model system, using these criteria. Equilibrium denaturation experiments were measured using wild-type yeast ubiquitin containing the F45W mutation (WT*) at 298K in 25 mM sodium acetate buffer (pH 5.0). The transition mid-point occurs at 2.74 M guanidinium hydrochloride (GdmCl) with a denaturant dependence of the equilibrium constant meq = 10.8 (±0.1) kJ mol-1 M-1. The folding kinetics were analysed using stoppedflow experiments under identical conditions. The refolding traces for WT* in the range 0­2.5 M GdmCl require a multi-exponential fit reflecting at least three resolvable folding phases (1, 2 and 3) with relative amplitudes of 82%, 16% and 2%, respectively, when extrapolated to [GdmCl] = 0. The slower refolding phases (2 and 3), which are only clearly evident at denaturant concentrations below 2 M, also vary approximately linearly with concentration of denaturant (Figure 1(a) and (b)), indicating extrapolated folding rates spanning greater than two orders of magnitude (1, 324(±10) s-1; 2, 42(±2) s-1 and 3, 1.8(±0.5) s -1 ). Since the slopes of the dependence of the refolding rate constants on denaturant concentration (m-values) of the three phases are different, the relative stabilities of the various species are also expected to change as a function of denaturant concentration. While the population of species corresponding to 3 is both small and invariant to [GdmCl], the amplitudes of 1 and 2 change with [GdmCl] in a manner indicating that the two folding phases are coupled (Figure 1(c)). The unfolding kinetics for WT* have been reported to fit well to a single phase; however, in our hands we are able to resolve a second slow phase. The change in fluorescence intensity for this phase is opposite in sign to the main unfolding phase, accounting for only 1% of the signal amplitude change, and has only a very weak dependence on denaturant concentration (see Figure 1(a)). Constructing a logarithmic plot of the kinetic data for the dominant refolding and unfolding processes yields a linear Vshaped chevron (Figure 1(a)) that has been presented as evidence for a two-state folding model. However, the sum of the kinetic m-values (mkin = mUN + mNU) for the fastest phase (1) falls short of the equilibrium value. The equilibrium unfolding data is shown in Figure 2(a) with the best fit overlayed with the forced fit using the experimentally derived mkin value. The inconsistency between the two fits is clearly apparent. In assessing 31 mutants with non-disruptive surface substitutions (see Materials and Methods) we show that meq is systematically 20% greater than mkin (Figure 2(b)), giving the following mean values ± standard deviation: meq = 10.6(±0.6) kJ mol-1 M-1, mkin = 8.5(±0.3) kJ mol-1 M-1 and meq-mkin = 2.1 (±0.6) kJ mol-1 M-1. This is despite earlier conclusions that m-values and stabilities derived from equilibrium and kinetic measurements are in good agreement.27 Using these criteria, yeast ubiquitin appears not to conform to a simple two-state mechanism.

Intermediates in the Folding of Ubiquitin

1055 We further examined the refolding data at low denaturant concentrations for evidence of a burst phase in the fluorescence intensity that might be indicative of the rapid compaction of the polypeptide chain occurring during the dead-time of the stopped-flow experiment, and which might account for the discrepancy in equilibrium and kinetic mvalues. We were tentatively able to identify nonlinear effects in the raw fluorescence intensity data

Figure 1. (a) Analysis of the denaturant-dependence of the logarithm of the observed rate constants for the three refolding phases (1, 2 and 3) and two unfolding phases of WT*. The data for 1 are fit to a two-state model. The unfolding data are resolved into two phases one of which has only a small amplitude (1%), which appears to be insensitive to denaturant concentration (open circles). (b) Expanded region of the refolding data at denaturant concentrations below 2 M. Extrapolated refolding rate constants at [GdmCl] = 0 are 1, 324(±10) s-1; 2, 42(±2) s-1 and 3, 1.8(±0.5) s-1. (c) Change in relative amplitude of 1, 2 and 3 as a function of denaturant concentration over the range 0.6 M-2.0 M. The amplitude of 3 is very small and independent of [GdmCl].

Figure 2. (a) Equilibrium unfolding curve for WT* using fluorescence-detected GdmCl denaturation (a) showing the best fit through the raw fluorescence data (meq = 10.8 kJ mol-1 M-1) and the forced-fit (dotted line) assuming a fixed m-value equivalent to that derived from the two-state analysis of the chevron plot shown in Figure 1(a), (mkin = mNU ­ mUN = 8.4 kJ mol-1 M-1); the residuals show that the latter deviates significantly from the experimental data. (b) Equilibrium and kinetic m-values and the difference between them determined from data on 31 ubiquitin mutants (mean value ± standard deviation is as follows: meq = 10.6(±0.6) kJ mol-1 M-1; mkin = 8.5(±0.3) kJ mol-1 M -1 and meq - mkin = 2.1(±0.6) kJ mol-1 M-1). All data were collected at 298K, in 25 mM sodium acetate buffer (pH 5.0).

1056 below 1 M, even though roll-over effects in the kinetic data are not evident (Figure 1(a)). However, it is well known that the uncertainty in the burstphase amplitude is substantial when the measured rate constants for folding approach the instrumental dead-time, as is the case here. It has been demonstrated that such a burst phase is, however, visible under stabilising conditions in the presence of salts.30,33,36 In contrast, earlier studies have also suggested that tryptophan burial may not be a feature of an initial fast equilibration step and hence invisible to fluorescence detection. Kinetic experiments with ubiquitin at low temperature, using multiple probes including CD and small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), support rapid formation of such a compact ensemble.37 Multi-phase kinetics in a proline-free ubiquitin mutant All of the folding phases identified above have been reported in earlier studies of mammalian ubiquitin;27,30,35,36 however, the complex multiphase behaviour has been assigned to heterogeneity in the unfolded state due to slow rate-limiting cistrans isomerisation reactions associated with proline residues at positions 19, 37 and 38.27,30,35 In the yeast protein described here, Pro19 is substituted with Ser. The origins of the heterogeneity in the kinetic data were examined in more detail using the proline-free P37A/P38A (AA) yeast mutant which is slightly less stable than WT* by 3 kJ mol-1.36 Despite the complete absence of proline from this mutant, the kinetic data still show the same three-phase behaviour described for WT* with comparable amplitudes (87%, 11% and 2%) and refolding rate constants for 1 and 3 which are similar, although 2 is lower. Thus, attempts to simplify the folding kinetics of WT* by minimising conformational heterogeneity in the unfolded state appear to have been unsuccessful. The slowest phase (3) that we observe for both WT* and the AA mutant shows the smallest dependence on denaturant concentration and is consistent with an isomerisation reaction that is only weakly influenced by changes in protein­solvent interactions. In the case of the AA mutant we are able to eliminate the possibility of a contribution to the heterogeneity of the unfolded state from cis-trans proline isomerisation; however, alternate cis-trans equilibria involving non-prolyl peptide bonds also need to be considered, since these have been reported to contribute significantly to conformational heterogeneity.38­42 Although the cis content of each peptide bond is low in polypeptides (0.15­ 0.5%)38,40,43,44 the accumulated effects of the 76 residues of ubiquitin suggest that a significant fraction of molecules may have at least one cis-peptide bond in the unfolded state; this value is close to 3% for tendamistat with an observed rate constant of 2 s-1,40 which is in good agreement with our analysis where 3 contributes 2% of the amplitude change with an associated rate constant of 1.8(±0.5) s-1.

Intermediates in the Folding of Ubiquitin

Heterogeneity in the unfolded state due to slow peptidyl isomerisation The amplitudes of the various refolding phases were further examined using double-jump (interrupted unfolding) experiments to determine whether slow equilibration processes in the unfolded state are responsible for the slower folding phase 2, and to confirm that 3 is an isomerisation process.40,45,46 In the first mixing step, WT* was allowed to unfold for a variable equilibration or ``aging'' time (40 ms to 5 s), followed by kinetic analysis of the refolding reaction in a second mixing step. This allows discrimination between unfolded states that are populated immediately after unfolding and unfolded states populated only after slow equilibration is allowed to take place. The amplitude of any slow refolding phases that arise from cis-trans isomerisation in the unfolded polypeptide chain will be limited by the time allowed for the equilibration process to take place. Thus, over short ``aging'' times the population of the non-native cis-isomer in the unfolded state would be expected to be small;40 however, direct folding pathways should be evident as soon as the refolding reaction is initiated. Kinetic traces from the refolding reaction at short aging times are well represented by a double-exponential fit, with a third phase of low amplitude only apparent after >400 ms. Data derived from double mixing experiments for WT* are shown in Figure 3. These refolding reactions take place with rate constants (k1 = 8.1(±0.3) s-1 and k2 = 2.0(±0.2) s-1) very similar to those measured directly by singlejump experiments under these conditions (1.5 M GdmCl). The amplitudes of the refolding phases were measured as a function of the duration of the initial unfolding step to reveal two direct unfolding phases with rate constants of 19.6(±0.8) s-1 and 10.6(±3.2) s-1 (Figure 3(a)). The former correlates well with the data from the single-jump experiments; however, the larger uncertainty in the latter and its smaller amplitude suggests that the two rate constants are probably too similar to be resolved in the single-jump experiments where the unfolding kinetics are described predominantly by a single exponential. Data for the proline-free AA mutant are shown in Figure 4, and reveal rate constants in double-jump experiments (21.3(±0.6) s-1 and 14.3(±2.2) s-1) similar to those for WT* (Figure 4(b)). The relative amplitudes of the two phases identified in the double-jump experiments of both WT* and AA are constant and not dependent on aging time (see Figure 4(c)), which is consistent with two direct refolding events not associated with a slow equilibration process. In both cases, a third phase forms significantly more slowly than the rate of the unfolding reaction and fits with a lag of 2­3 s-1 (Figures 3(a) and 4(b)). This is consistent with the assignment of 3 to a small subpopulation of molecules associated with a ratelimiting isomerisation event such as non-prolyl cistrans equilibration.40 Thus, although 3 can be

Intermediates in the Folding of Ubiquitin

1057 were employed in which the protein is initially allowed to refold for a variable period (aging time) before being transferred into denaturing buffer to initiate unfolding. The experiment measures the increase in the amplitude of the unfolding reaction but as a function of the refolding time after the initial mixing step. In this way, the time course for formation of native protein molecules in the unfolding reaction can be monitored.39,40,47,48 Interrupted refolding data were collected for WT* over a time range of 40 ms to 5 s after an initial refolding step initiated in 1.6 M GdmCl. The rate constant for the major unfolding phase induced by the second mixing step over this range of aging times is equivalent to that of the directly detected unfolding reaction in the single-jump experiment (9.1(±0.2) s-1). A minor slower unfolding phase with very low amplitude (1%) was also evident (k = 0.2(±0.15) s-1). The time-course of the change in amplitude of the major unfolding reaction as a function of the refolding aging time is shown in Figure 3(b). An important feature of the amplitude data is that in the early time region the extrapolated fit does not pass through the origin (negative amplitude at t = 0 s; dotted line in Figure 3(b) and (c)). This evidence for an initial lag phase is indicative of molecules reaching the native state in a two-step reaction. The lag phase provides evidence for folding through an obligatory on-pathway intermediate and excludes folding mechanisms where molecules are able to fold from U to N directly.12,17,39 We are able to fit the data to a double exponential (rate constants of 12(±0.3) s-1 and 4(±1) s-1) with a lag phase of 100 s-1 (Figure 3(c)). The double exponential fit is in good agreement with rate constants and amplitudes for 1 and 2 derived from single-jump refolding experiments at 1.6 M GdmCl (rate constants 8 s-1 and 3 s-1), but the lag phase is clearly
Figure 3. Double-mixing stopped-flow kinetic data for WT*. (a) Double-jump interrupted unfolding data used to determine the contribution to the kinetics of slow equilibration processes in the unfolded state of WT*. The change in the amplitude of the three folding phases is shown as a function of the "aging" time (40 ms to 5 s) prior to the initiation of the refolding step. At very short aging times (<400 ms), the amplitude of the slowest phase (a3) is accompanied by a lag phase (2 s-1) as the population of cis-isomers in the unfolded state increases. The data for a2 and a3 have been increased by a factor of 2. (b) Interrupted refolding data showing the increase in amplitude with aging time (40 ms to 10 s plotted on a logarithmic scale) for data collected under refolding conditions corresponding to 1.6 M GdmCl. The dotted line shows the best fit to a double exponential showing that the amplitude becomes negative at t = 0 s. The continuous line represents the best fit to a double exponential (12(±0.3) s-1 and 4(±1) s-1) each with a fast lag phase of 100 s-1. The amplitudes of the two slower phases were fixed to the values observed in single-jump experiments (85% and 15%, respectively). (c) Expansion of the data in (b) at short aging times (0­0.12 s, linear scale) to illustrate the fast initial lag phase indicating that molecules reach the native state via an obligatory intermediate.

attributed to a slow isomerisation event, we have identified 1 and 2 as direct folding pathways to the native state, demonstrating kinetic partitioning along two different routes. Time course for formation of native molecules during interrupted refolding Directly detected refolding experiments monitored by fluorescence are not able to distinguish between kinetic phases that lead directly to the formation of native ubiquitin molecules and those that proceed through on-pathway partially folded intermediate states. However, these can be distinguished on the basis of the time course of the formation of the native state in interrupted refolding experiments.39,40,47,48 Two consecutive mixing steps

1058

Intermediates in the Folding of Ubiquitin

Figure 4. Kinetic data for the P37A/P38A alanine-free mutant of ubiquitin. (a) Refolding data (298K, 25 mM acetate buffer (pH 5.0)) are resolved into the same three phases observed for WT* (see Figure 1), with extrapolated rate constants and amplitudes as follows: 1 = 273(±15) s-1, a1 = 87%; 2 = 14(±3) s-1, a2 = 11%; 3 = 2.2(±1.0) s-1, a3 = 2%. (b) Double-jump interrupted unfolding data used to determine the contribution to the kinetics of slow equilibration processes in the unfolded state. The change in the amplitude of the three folding phases observed for the AA mutant are shown as a function of the "aging" time (40 ms to 5 s) prior to the initiation of the refolding step. At very short aging times (<400 ms), the amplitude of the slowest phase (a3) is very small but increases with a lag phase (2 s-1) as the population of cis-isomers in the unfolded state increases. The data for a2 and a3 have been multiplied by a factor of 4 to improve visibility (see the scale on the right-hand axis). (c) Relative amplitudes of the two faster phases a1 and a2 as a function of aging time showing the absence of any lag phase in the amplitude curves.

Roder et al. of a fast phase identified using continuous flow methods, which appeared to correlate with their observations of roll-over effects in the chevron plot at low denaturant concentrations.49 In our data, the lag phase also provides evidence for a third rapid kinetic process that precedes the two directly observable phases (1 and 2). The possibility of the rapid formation of an initial collapsed state not evident in directly detected stopped-flow experiments would offer an explanation for the discrepancy between equilibrium and kinetic m-values. We repeated interrupted refolding experiments and varied the denaturant concentrations for both the first refolding step (refolding in 1.0 M GdmCl) and the second unfolding step. In the second step, when denaturing conditions were employed that lie closer to the transition mid-point (5.17 M GdmCl), we observe both major and minor unfolding phases as described above and an additional low amplitude fast unfolding phase which is clearly evident when double and triple exponential fits to the data are compared (Figure 5(a)). The fast unfolding phase (rate constant 151(±13) s-1) has an amplitude which decreases with aging time, consistent with the formation (88(±30) s-1) and decay of a significantly populated intermediate state (Figure 5(b)).47 Two phases are required to describe the decay of the intermediate state, with the faster of the two phases (14.9(±1.4) s -1 ) accounting for the majority of molecules (80 %). The second low amplitude slow phase (0.33(±0.13) s-1) is determined with less certainty and has a decay constant suggesting an isomerisation-limited event. The decay of the faster phase correlates reasonably well with the rate constant observed for 2 (10 s-1) in single-jump experiments under similar conditions, but less well with 1 which gives a faster rate constant of 32 s-1. This suggests that we are observing the formation and decay to the native state of an intermediate corresponding to 2. We note that varying the conditions under which this intermediate is populated does not help to resolve its rate of formation, which is rapid compared with the shortest accessible aging time of the experiment (40 ms). It is important to emphasise that the fast unfolding phase observed in the interrupted refolding experiment shown in Figure 5(a) is not detected in singlejump experiments. We conclude that the intermediate is only transiently populated under these conditions such that it either decays within the dead-time of the stopped-flow experiment or has a very small amplitude at the limit of resolution. However, this species appears to be stabilised, and consequently more significantly populated, under the conditions employed in the double mixing scheme. Four-state kinetic model for the folding of ubiquitin

much faster than any other phase that we observe under these conditions. However, the fast lag phase appears to be consistent with the observations of

The results of single and double mixing experiments have identified three apparent rate constants,

Intermediates in the Folding of Ubiquitin

1059 both single and double-jump experiments provides strong evidence for partitioning between two different folding pathways. The observation that molecules reach the native state via two distinct routes excludes the simplest four-state sequential model (UI1I2N). In addition, the fast lag phase observed in interrupted refolding experiments confirms the formation of native molecules via an obligatory intermediate state that lies onpathway. One possible scheme that captures the features of the kinetic data is shown below.

which require a four-state model for ubiquitin folding. The observation of two distinct nonisomerisation limited kinetic phases (1 and 2) in

Figure 5. Interrupted refolding data for WT* ubiquitin. (a) Raw fluorescence intensity data collected in an interrupted refolding experiment using a denaturing second step (5.17 M GdmCl) following a refoldinginduced first step where the denaturant concentration was jumped from 6.0 M to 1.0 M GdmCl. This reaction scheme was designed to enhance the visibility of the intermediate state. Data show the fit to either a double (dotted line) or triple exponential (continuous line) with the latter showing the better fit as evident from the random distribution of residuals. A fast unfolding phase was detected (151(±13) s-1), which was not evident in directly detected single-jump experiments, as well as two slower phases (3.6(±0.01) s-1 and 0.048(±0.07) s-1). (b) Interrupted refolding data showing the change in amplitude of the major phase (which fits to a double exponential, with rate constants of 26.9(±1.5) s-1 and 8.4(±0.7) s-1, with a barely detectable fast lag phase of >200 s-1. The amplitude of the fast phase shows evidence for the formation (88(±30) s-1) and decay of a significantly populated intermediate state (the data for the fast phase have been multiplied by a factor of 2). The decay fits to a double exponential with the two phases showing quite different rate constants of 14.9(±1.4) s-1 and 0.33 (±0.13) s-1, with the former representing 80% of the amplitude change. While we can associate the former with the 2 phase in single-jump experiments, the latter is less readily assigned but has a decay constant suggesting isomerisation-limited events.

In this model, the two pathways are linked by an initial collapse to I1 which gives rise to a common lag phase for UI1. The two phases 1 and 2 describe the folding to N along two possible routes, a direct route I1N (1) and an indirect route I1I2N (2). In the triangular part of this scheme, involving the three species I1, I2 and N, we expect to see two observable rate constants (1 and 2) even though it features two additional microscopic rate constants. Under these circumstances, the three equilibria will couple and merge to give only two observable phases.13 The amplitudes of the two pathways are 82% and 16% (direct and indirect, respectively), indicating that I2 is lower in energy than I1 and presents a larger barrier to folding that accounts for the different extents to which molecules are partitioned along these two routes. We are able to directly detect the appearance and decay of an intermediate state which we assign to I2 on the basis of similarities between the rate of decay of this intermediate and the kinetics for the I2N folding phase described by 2 in single-jump refolding experiments. We were unable to observe the formation and decay of I1 directly but implied its presence from the lag phase in the time-dependence of the amplitude data in interrupted refolding experiments (Figure 3(c)). The rate constant for its formation is estimated to be 100 s-1, but this is subject to some uncertainty because this phase is defined by a relatively small number of data points at short aging times (Figures 3 and 5). Analysis of equilibrium and kinetic m-values (as discussed above) has enabled us to estimate that 20% of the solvent accessible surface area of the native state is buried in the initial UI1 collapse. Calculated m-values for the triangular portion of the folding scheme shown above, assuming that the sum of the m-values in clockwise and anti-clockwise directions must be equal, suggest that the UI1 and I1I2 transitions bury similar amounts of the surface area. The higher stability of I2 is accounted for by this higher degree of compaction, which implies that I2 may represent a trapped state sampled by only a minor subpopulation of

1060 molecules. The model also suggests that N can unfold along two parallel pathways. However, we are not able to resolve two distinct unfolding phases for WT* in single-jump experiments. This suggests that the unfolding rate constants are either too similar to separate (similar unfolding transition state for both NI1 and NI2), or that one unfolding route is significantly less populated than the other. We attempted to distinguish between these two possibilities by examining the refolding and unfolding kinetics of two destabilised mutants (Figure 6). The first contained the T12A/T14A double substitution in the N-terminal -hairpin. This region of the structure has already been identified as a nucleation site for folding.32,34,35 The second mutant contained the T66A/H68A double substitution within the Cterminal -strand in a low -value region of the structure.34,35 Here the destabilising effects on the protein are largely manifested in an acceleration of the unfolding rate. Thus, these two sets of mutations should enable us to probe the proposed folding mechanism through -sheet mutations that significantly affect the energy barriers to both refolding and unfolding. Effects of destabilising -sheet mutations on the folding pathway The effect of the T12A/T14A and T66A/H68A double mutations on the number of observable refolding and unfolding phases was immediately apparent. Both sets of mutations have a destabilising effect on ubiquitin which in the case of T12A/T14A is manifested in a 5-fold reduction in the rate of refolding of the major phase (1), with only a small effect on the unfolding kinetics (Figure 6). The refolding data fit to a triple exponential comprising a major phase (85% of the amplitude) and two minor phases. The slower of the minor phases is
Figure 6. Kinetic data for the T12A/T14A mutant of ubiquitin at 298K in 25 mM acetate buffer (pH 5.0). (a) Ribbon structure of ubiquitin showing the position of residues T12 and T14 within the N-terminal -hairpin, and T66 and H68 within the adjacent C-terminal parallel strand. (b) Refolding data at denaturant concentrations between 0-2 M GdmCl are resolved into three phases; 1 and 3 appear to correlate with equivalent phases observed for WT*; however, the equivalent of 2 appears to be absent from the data, suggesting that the folding pathway involving I2 is no longer significantly populated. In contrast, a minor fast folding phase (open circles) is now evident that is consistent with the UI1 initial collapse that is too fast to detect directly for WT*; the scatter in the data precludes a meaningful fit. (c) Full chevron plot for T12A/T14A also showing the unfolding data which is well represented by a single exponential process. The dotted line corresponds to 1 for WT* and shows that the destabilising mutations are manifested in fivefold slower rates of refolding and much smaller effects on unfolding rates. The data for 3 have been omitted from (c) for clarity. Linearly extrapolated rate constants for the T12A/ T14A mutant in (b) were determined as follows: 1 = 68(±3) s-1, 3 = 1.3(±0.3) s-1. The unfolding rate constant in (c) is 0.022(±0.002) s-1.

Intermediates in the Folding of Ubiquitin

completely analogous to 3 for WT*, and has an extrapolated rate constant of 1 s-1 with only a weak dependence on denaturant concentration, typical of an isomerisation-limited process. However, the second minor phase is associated with a rate constant that is faster than the major refolding phase. The scatter in the data for this phase does not permit a detailed analysis; however, in the light of the model described above a plausible hypothesis is that the destabilising effects of the mutations have brought the rapid UI1 initial collapse, which is not visible in the data for WT*, within the detectable range of the stopped-flow experiment. The main

Intermediates in the Folding of Ubiquitin

1061

difference between the data for T12A/T14A and WT* is that the phase corresponding to 2 is no longer present, suggesting that the I1I2N pathway is no longer significantly populated. The unfolding kinetics for T12A/T14A fit to a single exponential process in accord with this mutant folding and unfolding predominantly along the UI1N pathway. In our earlier analysis we suggested that I2 may be a trapped state that is visited by only a minor subpopulation of folding molecules. The mutational data suggest that destabilising the N-terminal -hairpin, which is already known to be a key folding nucleation site, goes someway to side-stepping this kinetic "pot-hole" in the folding landscape. We then considered the effects of the T66A/ H68A mutations on the kinetics. The refolding data for this mutant show very similar characteristics to WT* and resolve into three phases with similar rate constants and amplitudes that suggest analogous parallel folding pathways and intermediate states (Figure 7). However, the destabilising effects of the mutations are manifested in a significant 20-fold increase in the rate of unfolding of T66A/H68A. Although we are unable to resolve two significantly populated unfolding phases in the data for WT*, two unfolding phases are now clearly visible in the accelerated unfolding data for T66A/H68A (Figure 7(b)), with the amplitude of the major unfolding phase varying as a function of denaturant concentration in the range 70%­90%. Both of the unfolding phases (which we tentatively assign to NI2 and NI1) have faster unfolding rate constants than WT* but have extrapolated rate constants that differ from each other by only a factor of 2 (Figure 7(b)). Thus, the kinetic data from two sets of mutations appear to shed some additional light on the nature of the intermediate states and the parallel folding pathways represented schematically above.

Discussion
Folding mechanism of ubiquitin Ubiquitin has been widely used as a model system for folding studies; however, there have been conflicting reports as to whether it folds via an apparent two-state model or a more complex process involving rapid formation of a collapsed significantly populated intermediate state within the dead-time of the stopped-flow experiment.27,29,30 In the presence of stabilizing inorganic salts (0.4 M Na2SO4) there is, however, clear evidence for non-linear effects consistent with rapid collapse to a compact intermediate.30,34,36 The earlier work of Roder et al.30 demonstrated a pronounced roll-over for the major folding phase (in our case 1) inferring the formation of a rapidly forming intermediate state. This could not be detected directly but was evident from a burst-

Figure 7. Kinetic data for the T66A/H68A mutant of ubiquitin at 298K in 25 mM acetate buffer (pH 5.0). (a) Refolding data at denaturant concentrations between 0-2 M GdmCl are resolved into three phases all of which appear to correlate with the refolding phases observed for WT*, suggesting that the folding involves a very similar set of intermediates and two parallel pathways. (b) The mutations produce a 20-fold acceleration of the unfolding rate (see the dotted line for WT*) with the unfolding kinetics now resolved into two phases with the major and minor phases (black dots) accounting for 70­90% of the amplitude. Extrapolation shows that the rate constants for these two unfolding processes differ only by a factor of 2, but are resolved largely because of differences in their m-values. The data for 3 have been omitted from (b) for clarity. Linearly extrapolated rate constants for the T66A/H68A mutant in (a) were determined as follows: 1 = 217(±28) s-1, 2 = 45(±13) s-1, 3 = 0.86(±0.4) s-1. The unfolding rate constants for the two phases in (b) are 0.27(±0.04) s-1 and 0.14(±0.04) s-1.

phase change in the fluorescence amplitude, although the latter is subject to some uncertainty when considering folding rates that are approaching the dead-time of the experiment. Krantz & Sosnick more recently re-measured the folding kinetics and, in agreement with our conclusions, found a linear rate profile at low denaturant concentrations but no evidence for a burst phase.27 They also referred to double-jump experiments that eliminated 2 as an isomerisation-

1062 limited folding phase, which is inconsistent with our conclusions and those of others.50 More recent work from Roder et al.49 using continuous-flow fluorescence methods has enabled the time course of folding to be measured down to 100 s, and has identified four separate phases in the 0.1 ms to 1 s time window. Now a fast phase is observed which shows a distinct shallow rate profile and results in a concomitant roll-over effect in the rate profile for the major folding phase (equivalent to 1 in our data). Both of these features are consistent with a threestate mechanism and a fast-forming intermediate. Interestingly, fitting this same data to only three phases, rather than four, results in the averaging of the very fast phase and elimination of the roll-over effect with the data appearing to revert to a linear two-state chevron plot as presented here and in the work of Krantz & Sosnick.27 Thus, although we are unable to directly resolve the very fast phase in our data for WT*, its presence is implied by the fast lag phase in the interrupted refolding experiments. However, we do observe a fast low amplitude phase in the refolding data for the destabilised T12A/T14A mutant (Figure 6) that is consistent with this model and that proposed by Roder et al.49 on the basis of continuous flow experiments. In other recent studies, we have extended the folding nucleus of ubiquitin by inserting an autonomously folding 14 residue -hairpin extension into the native Nterminal -hairpin sequence.51 The stabilising effects of these substitutions result in clear evidence for rollover effects in the refolding data and rapid population of an intermediate state, suggesting that hurdles to rapid folding can arise from the stabilisation of local interactions. A fast low amplitude phase is also now evident that appears to correlate with the same rapid initial collapse (unpublished results). Complementary kinetic data of others, collected using multiple probes including CD and SAXS at low temperature, also support rapid formation of a compact ensemble.37,52 Implications for -value analysis Several recent -value (and -value) studies, including our own work, have described the transition state for folding of ubiquitin based on an analysis of the effects of mutations on the major folding phase 1, assuming that this represents an apparent two-state UN transition.32,34­36 However, the analysis presented here suggests that 1 corresponds to the transition from a collapsed state I1 to N, with I1 forming rapidly within the deadtime of the instrument. On the basis of the model presented, we conclude that 1 still represents the major folding pathway, and that the previous value studies provide a valuable assessment of the principle folding transition state along this route.32,34,35 Our analysis extends this model and shows that the collapse from UI1 appears to account for a relatively small proportion of the total surface area buried during folding (20%), with an estimated free energy difference between

Intermediates in the Folding of Ubiquitin

the two states U and I1 of only 2­3 kJ mol-1. Analysis of m-values for the 1 phase, and taking into account the initial collapse UI1, suggests that the major I1N transition state is more native-like than previously suggested (75% surface burial). More recently, several studies of the folding pathway of ubiquitin from all-atom molecular dynamics (MD) simulations 53 and G-type models54 have been used to monitor the evolution of protein secondary structure and hydrophobic surface burial, with both methods proposing the formation of populated intermediates. The MD analysis 53 suggests that the intermediate is a collapsed species with very little although some fluctuating secondary structure that the authors conclude should form rapidly within the dead-time of stopped-flow experiments. Interestingly, they also conclude that the denatured state is compact with fluctuating elements of non-native secondary structure, although our model suggests greater solvent accessibility than proposed from the simulations. A number of kinetic studies with other proteins have shown that an initial collapse to a compact "denatured state", driven largely by hydrophobic interactions, appears to proceed the main folding event.55­58 While some views suggest that this process accelerates folding by effectively reducing the conformational space that needs to be sampled, others indicate that this may represent a kinetic trap that is detrimental to rapid folding.58 Folding heterogeneity in proline-free mutants of ubiquitin The kinetic data for the proline-free mutant reveal several unexpected features. All three folding phases identified for WT* ubiquitin appear with similar amplitudes and rate constants for the proline-free mutant, indicating that cis-trans isomerisations involving P37 and P38 in WT* do not appear to introduce rate limiting barriers to folding. The observation of a wide variation in the amplitude of slow folding phases associated with prolyl isomerisation (in many cases less than expected on the basis of frequency of occurrence in the primary amino acid sequence) suggests that not all non-native cis proline residues influence the folding kinetics, and that cis-trans isomerisation need not be a rate-limiting process.59­65 In some cases, folding intermediates have been shown to accommodate the non-native isomer with evidence that the isomerisation reaction can be accelerated or decelerated according to structural context.66­68 In other contexts the effects are expected to be significant leading to well-defined proline-limited slow phases.59 Indeed, proline-rich sequences have been reported to represent slowly switchable parts of proteins.69,70 Intermediate energy barriers between these extremes are predicted to lead to variable decelerating effects on folding rates.59

Intermediates in the Folding of Ubiquitin

1063
buffer (pH 5.0) at 298K. Refolding experiments were performed by 1:10 dilution of unfolded protein (15 M in 7 M GdmCl) into buffered solutions of different GdmCl concentrations yielding a final protein concentration of 1.36 M. For unfolding experiments, a buffered solution of native protein was unfolded by a 1:10 dilution to yield final concentrations of GdmCl near or above the midpoint of the equilibrium unfolding transition (concentrations of GdmCl in the range 3.7 M to 7.3 M). Kinetics measurements for both unfolding and refolding reactions were averaged four to six times at each GdmCl concentration. In all cases, the GdmCl concentration was determined using a refractometer.74 Double-jump (interrupted unfolding) experiments were performed as originally described by Brandts et al.45 and others.40,46 The native protein at 36 M concentration was unfolded in the first step by a 1:5 dilution into 8 M GdmCl and 25 mM sodium acetate buffer (pH 5.0, 25 °C) to give a final concentration of 6 M protein in 6.67 M GdmCl. After a delay time (between 40 ms and 5 s), the denatured protein solution contained in the aging loop was refolded with buffered 0.5 M GdmCl following a second 1:5 dilution to reach a final denaturant concentration of 1.5 M GdmCl and protein concentration of 1 M. For short age times (40 ms-400 ms), the slowest refolding reaction (3) had a very small amplitude and the data were adequately represented by a double exponential. At longer aging times (0.4 s-5 s) all kinetic traces were fit to a triple exponential analysis. The data were averaged two to four times in each case. Interrupted refolding experiments were conducted as originally proposed by Schmid,75 and more recently described by Kiefhaber.39,47,48 The formation of native molecules during refolding was monitored by stoppedflow experiments using a double mixing approach. Completely unfolded ubiquitin was diluted 1:5 at 36 M concentration in 6-7 M GdmCl, 25 mM sodium acetate buffer (pH 5.0), to initiate refolding at a protein concentration of 6 M and denaturant concentrations in the range 1.0 M-1.6 M GdmCl in acetate buffer (pH 5.0). After various times (delay time of 40 ms to 5 s) refolding was interrupted by transferring the solution in a 1:5 dilution step to a final denaturant concentration of 4.25 M-6.1 M GdmCl (25 mM sodium acetate buffer (pH 5.0)). The unfolding transition fitted to a double or triple exponential and the amplitude for the major reaction was used as a measure of the amount of native protein present after the delay time. The observed unfolding amplitude after various delay times of refolding was normalised against the amplitude of completely unfolded ubiquitin to yield the fraction of native molecules that were present after the delay time. The formation and decay of the intermediate species in interrupted refolding experiments was observed when the final unfolding step occurred under denaturing conditions (4.25-5.17 M GdmCl) close to the mid-point of the folding transition. Analysis of kinetic data The kinetic data were analysed using a multi-exponential fitting procedure (typically three refolding phases or two unfolding phases) with the quality of the fit determined from an analysis of the distribution of residuals. The chevron plot for 1 in Figure 1(a) was generated based on a two-state analysis using standard equations previously described.32,36 The fluorescencedetected unfolding data showed evidence for a second phase of low amplitude (1%) and opposite sign to that of

Experimental studies with homologous ribonucleases have established that refolding rates and amplitudes can be independent of sequence variations with regard to the number of proline residues,61,65 supporting the theoretical conclusions that some proline residues play non-essential roles in folding. Similarly, in folding studies with BPTI, the amplitudes of slow folding phases were observed to be lower than predicted on the basis of proline content, suggesting that proline isomerisation may occur after formation of the structured intermediate.60 Other proline-rich proteins such as the fibronectin type III module, which are also expected to contain a high population (70­90%) of cis-isomers in the unfolded state, fold rapidly with only a modest contribution (20­30%) from slow folding prolyl isomerisation phases.71 Thus, there appear to be many examples where incorrectly configured non-essential proline residues appear to be accommodated during folding without significantly distorting the energy of the folding transition state. This also appears to be the case for ubiquitin, where isomerisation of non-native cis peptide bonds (prolyl and non-prolyl) in the unfolded ensemble appears to be rate-limiting for only a small fraction (<3%) of molecules.

Materials and Methods
Protein expression A pKK223-3 plasmid construct containing the yeast ubiquitin gene was used to express the wild-type protein in Escherichia coli strain BL21(DE3) under the control of the IPTG-inducible tac promoter. The F45W mutant gene was cloned by overlap PCR methodology using the wildtype yeast ubiquitin gene in pKK223-3 (Pharmacia Biotech) as a template. Mutations were confirmed by DNA sequencing and proteins expressed and purified as previously described.32,36 While wild-type mammalian ubiquitin carries proline residues at position 19, 37 and 38, the yeast protein contains the P19S substitution. We also assessed the stabilities and folding kinetics of 31 ubiquitin mutants (all containing the background F45W substitution) to provide the data for Figure 2(b). The complete list of mutants is as follows and includes a number that have already been described: WT*, P38A, P37S/P38Q, P37Q/P38L, P37A/P38A, P37V/P38V and S19P;36 turn mutants in which solvent-exposed residues 7­11 (TLTGK) were replaced with TVGK, ANGK, TG3K, V N G K , W N G K , N P D G , N P D G K , T VA K a n d TVVK;32,72,73 -strand mutations T12A/T14A, F4A, L69A, and L69A with an FNGK turn;51,73 and helix mutants D32G, S28A, S28G, N25G, I36A, I36T, I36L, Q31A/D32A, D24E/N25A/V26L, N25G/D32G and D24E/N25A/V26L/Q31A/D32A (unpublished data). Kinetics experiments Kinetic unfolding and refolding measurements were performed using an Applied Photophysics Pi-star 180 spectrophotometer. Temperature was regulated using a Neslab RTE-300 circulating programmable water bath. All kinetics experiments were performed in 25 mM acetate

1064
the major unfolding phase. This phase can not be accounted for by a simple linear slope in the fluorescence decay, as previously suggested,33 but fits with a rate constant of 0.32(±0.02) s-1 in 6.7 M GdmCl, and shows very little dependence on denaturant concentration (Figure 1(a)). We conclude that this may be an isomerisation-limited process which occurs in the unfolded state in one or a number of peptide bonds close in sequence to Trp45. Given the very small amplitude of this phase, it is not possible to completely exclude the possibility that a low level impurity or a small amount of oligomerised protein may account for this phase.

Intermediates in the Folding of Ubiquitin

14.

15. 16.

17.

Acknowledgements
M.D.C. is grateful to the University of Nottingham, Astex Technology Ltd and Roche Products Ltd for financial support. E.R.S. thanks the EPSRC of the UK for funding. We thank Professor Thomas Kiefhaber at the Biozentrum der Universität Basel, Switzerland for useful discussions in the interpretation of the kinetic data.

18.

19. 20.

References
1. Kim, P. S. & Baldwin, R. L. (1990). Intermediates in the folding reactions of small proteins. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 59, 631­660. 2. Jackson, S. E. & Fersht, A. R. (1991). Folding of chymotrypsin inhibitor 2: Evidence for a two-state transition state. Biochemistry, 30, 10428­10435. 3. Jackson, S. E. (1998). How do small single-domain proteins fold? Fold. Des. 3, R81­R91. 4. Tanford, C. (1970). Protein dentauration part C. Theoretical models for the mechanism of denaturation. Advan. Protein Chem. 24, 1­95. 5. Bachmann, A. & Kiefhaber, T. (2001). Apparent twostate tendamistat folding is a sequential process along a defined route. J. Mol. Biol. 306, 375­386. 6. Sanchez, I. E. & Kiefhaber, T. (2003). Evidence for sequential barriers and obligatory intermediates in apparent two-state protein folding. J. Mol. Biol. 325, 367­376. 7. Onuchic, J. N., Luthey-Schulten, Z. & Wolynes, P. G. (1997). Theory of protein folding: the energy landscape perspective. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 48, 545­600. 8. Dobson, C. M., Sali, A. & Karplus, M. (1998). Protein folding: a perspective from theory and experiment. Angew. Chem. In. Ed. 37, 868­893. 9. Baldwin, R. L. (1995). The nature of protein folding pathways: the classical versus the new view. J. Biomol. NMR, 5, 103­109. 10. Wright, C. F., Lindorff-Larsen, K., Randles, L. G. & Clarke, J. (2003). Parallel protein-unfolding pathways revealed and mapped. Nature Struct. Biol. 8, 658­662. 11. Wright, C. F., Steward, A. & Clarke, J. (2004). Thermodynamic characterization of two transition states along parallel protein folding pathways. J. Mol. Biol. 338, 445­451. 12. Kiefhaber, T. (1995). Kinetic traps in lysozyme folding. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 92, 9029­9033. 13. Wildegger, G. & Kiefhaber, T. (1997). Three-state model for lysozyme folding: triangular folding

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27. 28. 29.

30.

mechanism with an energetically trapped intermediate. J. Mol. Biol. 270, 294­304. Dinner, A. R., Sali, A., Smith, L. J., Dobson, C. M. & Karplus, M. (2000). Understanding protein folding via free energy surfaces from theory and experiment. Trends Biochem. Sci. 25, 331­339. Zadi, F. N., Nath, U. & Udgaonkar, J. B. (1997). Multiple intermediates and transition states during protein folding. Nature Struct. Biol. 4, 1016­1023. Krantz, B. A., Mayne, L., Rumbley, J., Englander, S. W. & Sosnick, T. R. (2002). Fast and slow intermediate accumulation and the initial barrier mechanism in protein folding. J. Mol. Biol. 324, 359­371. Kamagata, K., Sawano, Y., Tanokura, M. & Kuwajima, K. (2003). Multiple parallel-pathway folding of proline-free staphyloccal nuclease. J. Mol. Biol. 332, 1143­1153. Jennings, P. A., Finn, B. E., Jones, B. E. & Matthews, C. R. (1993). A re-examination of the folding mechanism of dihydrofolate reductase from E. coli: verification and refinement of a four-channel model. Biochemistry, 32, 3783­3789. Wallace, L. A. & Matthews, C. R. (2002). Highly divergent dihydrofolate reductases conserve complex folding mechanisms. J. Mol. Biol. 315, 193­211. Goldbeck, R. A., Thomas, Y. G., Chen, E., Esquerra, R. M. & Kliger, D. S. (1999). Multiple pathways on a protein-folding energy landscape: kinetic evidence. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 96, 2782­2787. Vijay-Kumar, S., Bugg, C. E., Wilkinson, K. D., Vierstra, R. D., Hatfield, P. M. & Cook, W. J. (1987). Comparison of the three-dimensional structures of human, yeast and oat ubiquitin. J. Biol. Chem. 262, 6396­6399. Makhatadze, G. I., Loladze, V. V., Ermolenko, D. M., Chen, X. F. & Thomas, S. T. (2003). Contribution of surface salt bridges to protein stability: guidelines for protein engineering. J. Mol. Biol. 327, 1135­1148. Ermolenko, D. N., Thomas, S. T., Aurora, R., Gronenborn, A. M. & Makhatadze, G. I. (2002). Hydrophobic interactions at the C-cap position of the C-capping motif of -helices. J. Mol. Biol. 322, 1123­1135. Loladze, V. V., Ermolenko, D. N. & Makhatadze, G. I. (2002). Thermodynamic consequences of burial of polar and non-polar amino acid residues in the protein interior. J. Mol. Biol. 320, 343­357. Jourdan, M. & Searle, M. S. (2000). Co-operative assembly of a native-like ubiquitin structure through peptide fragment complexation: energetics of peptide association and folding. Biochemistry, 39, 12355­12364. Jourdan, M. & Searle, M. S. (2001). Insights into the stability of native and partially folded states of ubiquitin: effects of co-solvents and denaturants on the thermodynamics of protein folding. Biochemistry, 40, 10317­10325. Krantz, B. A. & Sosnick, T. R. (2000). Distinguishing between two-state and three-state models for ubiquitin folding. Biochemistry, 39, 11696­11701. Briggs, M. S. & Roder, H. (1992). Early hydrogen bonding events in the folding reaction of ubiquitin. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 89, 2017­2021. Khorasanizadeh, S., Peters, I. D., Butt, T. R. & Roder, H. (1993). Folding and stability of a tryptophan containing mutant of ubiqutin. Biochemistry, 32, 7054­7063. Khorasanizadeh, S., Peters, I. D. & Roder, H. (1996). Evidence for a three state-model of protein folding from kinetic analysis of ubiquitin variants with altered core residues. Nature Struct. Biol. 3, 193­205.

Intermediates in the Folding of Ubiquitin

1065
48. Bachmann, A. & Kiefhaber, T. (2005). Kinetic mechanisms in protein folding. In Protein Folding Handbook (Kiefhaber, T. & Buchner, J., eds), part I, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany. 49. Roder, H., Maki, K., Latypov, R. F., Cheng, H. & Ramachandra Shastry, M. C. (2005). Early events in protein folding explored by rapid mixing methods. In Protein Folding Handbook (Kiefhaber, T. & Buchner, J., eds), part I, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany. 50. Vallee-Belisle, A., Turcotte, J.-F. & Michnick, S. W. (2004). raf RBD and ubiquitin proteins share similar folds, folding rates and mechanisms despite having unrelated amino acid sequences. Biochemistry, 43, 8447­8458. 51. Bofill, R., Simpson, E. R., Platt, G. W., Crespo, M. D. & Searle, M. S. (2005). Extending the folding nucleus of ubiquitin with an independently folding -hairpin finger: hurdles to rapid folding arising from the stabilisation of local interactions. J. Mol. Biol. 349, 205­221. 52. Qin, Z., Ervin, J., Larios, E., Gruebele, M. & Kihara, H. (2002). Formation of a compact structured ensemble without fluorescence signature early during ubiquitin folding. J. Phys. Chem. ser. B. 106, 13040­13046. 53. Marianayagam, N. J. & Jackson, S. E. (2004). The folding pathway of ubiquitin from all-atom molecular dynamics simulations. Biophys. Chem. 111, 159­171. 54. Zhang, X., Qin, M. & Wang, W. (2005). Multiple folding mechanisms of protein ubiquitin. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Bioinf. 59, 565­579. 55. Ferguson, N. & Fersht, A. R. (2003). Early events in protein folding. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 13, 75­81. 56. Magg, C. & Schmid, F. X. (2004). Rapid collapse precedes the fast two-state folding of the cold shock protein. J. Mol. Biol. 335, 1309­1323. 57. Arai, M., Ito, K., Inobe, T., Nakao, M., Maki, K., Kamafgata, K. et al. (2002). Fast compaction of lactalbumin during folding studied by stopped-flow X-ray scattering. J. Mol. Biol. 321, 121­132. 58. Roder, H. & Colon, W. (1997). Kinetic role of early intermediates in protein folding. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 7, 15­28. 59. Levitt, M. (1981). Effect of proline residues on protein folding. J. Mol. Biol. 145, 251­263. 60. Jullien, M. & Baldwin, R. L. (1981). The role of proline residues in the folding kinetics of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor derivative RCAM (14-38). J. Mol. Biol. 145, 265­280. 61. Krebs, H., Schmid, F. X. & Jaenicke, R. (1983). Folding of homologous proteins: the refolding of different ribonucleases is independent of sequence variations, proline content and glycosylation. J. Mol. Biol. 169, 619­635. 62. Kiefhaber, T., Quaas, R., Hahn, U. & Schmid, F. X. (1990). Folding of ribonuclease T1. 2. Kinetic models for the folding and unfolding reactions. Biochemistry, 29, 3061­3066. 63. Pappenburger, G., Bachmann, A., Muller, R., Aygun, H., Engels, J. W. & Kiefhaber, T. (2003). Kinetic mechanism and catalysis of a native-state prolyl isomerisation reaction. J. Mol. Biol. 326, 235­246. 64. Schindler, T., Herrler, M., Marahiel, M. A. & Schmid, F. X. (1995). Extremely rapid protein folding in the absence of intermediates. Nature Struct. Biol. 2, 663­673. 65. Plaxco, K. W., Guijarro, J. L., Morton, C. J., Pitkeathly, M., Campbell, I. D. & Dobson, C. M. (1998). The folding kinetics and thermodynamics of the Fyn-SH3 domain. Biochemistry, 37, 2529­2537.

31. Gladwin, S. T. & Evans, P. A. (1996). Structure of the very early protein folding intermediates: new insights through a variant of hydrogen exchange labelling. Fold. Des. 1, 407­417. 32. Platt, G. W., Simpson, S. A., Layfield, R. & Searle, M. S. (2003). Stability and folding kinetics of a ubiquitin mutant with a strong propensity for non-native hairpin conformation in the unfolded state. Biochemistry, 42, 13726­13771. 33. Went, H. M., Benitez-Cardoza, C. G. & Jackson, S. E. (2004). Is an intermediate state populated on the folding pathway of ubiquitin? FEBS Letters, 567, 333­338. 34. Krantz, B. A., Dothager, R. S. & Sosnick, T. R. (2004). Discerning the structure and energy of multiple transition states in protein folding using psi-analysis. J. Mol. Biol. 337, 463­475. 35. Went, H. M. & Jackson, S. E. (2004). Ubiquitin folds through a highly polarized transition state. Protein Eng. 18, 239­246. 36. Crespo, M. D., Platt, G. W., Bofill, R. & Searle, M. S. (2004). Context-dependent effects of proline residues on the stability and folding of ubiquitin. Eur. J. Biochem. 271, 4474­4484. 37. Larios, E., Li, J. S., Schulten, K., Kihara, H. & Gruebele, M. (2004). Multiple probes reveal a native-like intermediate during low-temperature refolding of ubiquitin. J. Mol. Biol. 340, 115­125. 38. Odefey, C., Mayr, L. M. & Schmid, F. X. (1995). Nonprolyl cis-trans peptide bond isomerisation as a ratedetermining step in protein unfolding and refolding. J. Mol. Biol. 245, 69­78. 39. Sanchez, I. E., Morillas, M., Zobeley, E., Kiefhaber, T. & Glockshuber, R. (2004). Fast folding of the two-domain semliki forest virus capsid protein explains co-translational proteolytic activity. J. Mol. Biol. 338, 159­167. 40. Pappenberger, G., Aygun, H., Engels, J. W., Reimer, U., Fischer, G. & Kiefhaber, T. (2001). Non-prolyl cis peptide bonds in unfolded proteins cause complex folding kinetics. Nature Struct. Biol. 8, 452­458. 41. Walkenhurst, W. F., Green, S. M. & Roder, H. (1997). Kinetic evidence for folding and unfolding intermediates in staphylococcal nuclease. Biochemistry, 36, 5795­5805. 42. Maki, K., Ikura, T., Hayano, T., Takahashi, N. & Kuwajima, K. (1999). Effects of proline mutations on the folding of staphylococcal nuclease. Biochemistry, 38, 2213­2223. 43. Scherer, G., Kramer, M. L., Schutkowski, M., Reimer, U. & Fischer, G. (1998). Barriers to rotation of secondary amide peptide bonds. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 120, 5568­5574. 44. Reimer, U., Scherer, G., Drewello, M., Kruber, S., Schutkowski, M. & Fischer, G. (1998). Side-chain effects on petidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerisation. J. Mol. Biol. 279, 449­460. 45. Brandts, J. F., Halvorson, H. R. & Brennan, M. (1975). Consideration of the possibility that the slow step in protein denaturation reactions is due to cis trans isomerism of proline residues. Biochemistry, 14, 4953­4963. 46. Kiefhaber, T. (1995). Protein folding kinetics. In Methods in Molecular Biology, Protein Stability and Folding Protocols (Shirley, B. A., ed), vol. 40, pp. 313­341, Humana Press, Totowa, NJ. 47. Bieri, O., Wildegger, G., Bachmann, A., Wagner, C. & Kiefhaber, T. (1999). A salt-induced kinetic intermediate is on a new parallel pathway of lysozyme folding. Biochemistry, 38, 12460­12470.

1066
66. Cook, K. H., Schmid, F. X. & Baldwin, R. L. (1979). Role of proline isomerisation in the folding of ribonuclease A at low temperatures. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 76, 6157­6161. 67. Krebs, H., Schmid, F. X. & Jaenicke, R. (1985). Refolding of four RNases. Biochemistry, 24, 3848­3852. 68. Kiefhaber, T., Grunert, H. P., Hahn, U. & Schmid, F. X. (1992). Folding of RNase T1 is decelerated by a specific tertiary contact in a folding intermediate. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 12, 171­179. 69. Williamson, M. P. (1994). The structure and function of proline-rich regions of proteins. Biochem. J. 197, 249­260. 70. Siligardi, G. & Drake, A. F. (1995). The importance of extended conformations and, in particular, the PII conformation for the molecular recognition of peptides. Biopolymers, 37, 281­292. 71. Plaxco, K. W., Spitzfaden, C., Campbell, I. D. & Dobson, C. M. (1996). Rapid refolding of a proline-rich

Intermediates in the Folding of Ubiquitin all -sheet fibronectin type III module. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 10703­10706. Simpson, E. R., Meldrum, J. K., Bofill, R., Crespo, M. D., Holmes, E. & Searle, M. S. (2005). Engineering enhanced protein stability through -turn optimisation: insights for the design of stable peptide -hairpin systems. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 44, 4939­4944. Simpson, E. R., Meldrum, J. K. & Searle, M. S. (2006). Engineering diverse changes in -turn propensities in the N-terminal -hairpin of ubiquitin reveals significant effects on stability and kinetics but a robust folding transition state. Biochemistry, 45, 4220­4230. Pace, N. C. & Scholtz, J. M. (1997). In Protein StructureA Practical Approach (Creighton, T. E., ed), 2nd Edit, IRL Press, New York. Schmid, F. X. (1983). Mechanism of folding of ribonuclease A. Slow refolding is a sequential reaction via structural intermediates. Biochemistry, 22, 4690­4696.

72.

73.

74. 75.

Edited by K. Kuwajima (Received 9 February 2006; received in revised form 24 May 2006; accepted 25 May 2006) Available online 12 June 2006

