AGA Abstracts

HIF-1 signaling in response to Cdif toxin. Results: Caco-2 cells exposed to Cdif toxin displayed a significant increase in HIF-1 transcription, protein levels and DNA binding. Cdif toxin-induced HIF-1 protein accumulation was attenuated by nitric oxide synthase inhibitors. Loss of HIF-1 increased Cdif toxin-induced injury In Vitro and resulted in impaired barrier function and wound repair. In Vivo, loss of HIF-1 resulted in markedly more severe intestinal injury and inflammation as assessed by histological scoring, tissue MPO levels and serum nitric oxide levels. Up-regulation of HIF-1, with a HIF-1-stabilizing agent, significantly reduced Cdif toxin-induced injury and inflammation. The mechanisms involved in these HIF-1-mediated protective events involved enhanced expression of VEGFa, CD73 and intestinal trefoil factor and down-regulation of proinflammatory molecules TNF and KC. Conclusions: Our studies are the first to describe that HIF-1 plays an innate protective role in CDAD and that Cdif toxin can directly enhance HIF-1 activity. Harnessing the innate protective actions of HIF-1 in response to Cdif may represent a novel form of therapy for CDAD. 502 Increased Folate Transport During Folate Deficiency Is Associated with Upregulation of Reduced Folate Carrier and Proton Coupled Folate Transporter in Rat Intestine Nissar Ahmad Wani, Jyotdeep Kaur Folate deficiency is associated with various health related problems like cardiovascular disease, fetal abnormalities, neurological disorders, and cancer. Mammals require the ingestion and absorption of preformed folate to meet their needs for one-carbon moieties to sustain key biosynthetic reactions. The most well-characterized folate transporter, the reduced folate carrier (RFC) and the recently discovered, proton coupled folate transporter (PCFT) are believed to be involved in intestinal transport of folate. The regulation of intestinal folate transport during folate deficiency is not much studied. Aim: We studied the effect of folate deficiency on kinetic characteristics of folate transport across intestinal brush border membrane along with the transcriptional and translational regulation of different folate transport systems in rats. Methods: The rats in the control group were given semi synthetic diet containing 2 mg folate/kg diet whereas the folate deficient group was given identical diet with folate omitted and with 10 g sccinylsulfathiozole/kg diet for three months. The [3H] folic acid transport across the intestinal brush border membrane (BBM) vesicles was studied using rapid filtration technique. RNA and protein expression of the transporters were determined using semi quantitative RT-PCR and immunoblotting respectively. Results: The [3H] folic acid uptake was found to be highest at 30 sec time intervals both in control and folate deficient rats. However, the uptake was 53-64% more in folate deficient rats (p<0.001) as compared to controls at different time intervals. Determination of kinetic constants by Lineweaver Burke plot revealed the Vmax for control and folate deficient rats to be 135 and 222 pmol/30 sec/mg protein respectively with no change in Km. The uptake was found to be maximum at pH 5.5 in both the groups. However, the uptake was significantly high in folate deficient diet fed rats as compared to control at different pH values. The transport was inhibited in presence of structural analogues and stimulated in presence of various divalent cations in both the groups. RFC and PCFT mRNA in jejunum of folate deficient animals was significantly (p<0.001) upregulated as compared to controls. Moreover, the immunoblot analysis using polyclonal antibobies against RFC revealed the RFC protein to be almost 2-fold higher in isolated BBM from rats fed folate deficient diet. Conclusion: Folate deficiency results in a significant increase in intestinal folate transport without altering the affinity of the transporters but mainly by upregulating the expression of the transporters, RFC and PCFT in the intestine. 503 Glucose-Dependent Insulinotropic Polypeptide (GIP) Increases Dipeptide Transport in Mouse Small Intestine Aaron C. Bartoo, John H. Schwartz, M. Michael Wolfe, Satish K. Singh PURPOSE: Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) is a physiological incretin released by intestinal K-cells in response to nutrient ingestion. We have previously shown that GIP increases intestinal glucose transport by a direct action on the intestinal epithelium (Singh et al., Obesity 2008), presumably as a component of the anabolic response to feeding. Intestinal transport of di- & tripeptides is the major mechanism for the uptake of aminonitrogen derived from dietary protein. In the small intestine, peptides are transported together with protons via the electrogenic dipeptide transporter, PEPT1. AIM: These studies were directed to determine whether GIP increases dipeptide transport in the small intestine via the activation of GIP receptors. METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was performed on fresh frozen sections of jejunum from both wild type (WT) and GIP receptor knockout (KO) mice using an antibody directed against an N-terminal sequence of the GIP receptor (US Biological). In addition, stripped segments of jejunum were mounted in thermostaticallycontrolled Ussing chambers bathed with physiological Ringer-bicarbonate saline. Tissue was voltage-clamped to 0 mV in order to monitor changes in short circuit current (Isc). Following a 20-min equilibration period, GIP (1 M; Bachem) was added to both the mucosal and serosal bathing chambers. After a 40-min incubation with GIP, 10 mM mannitol was added to the serosal chamber while 10 mM glycylglycine (gly-gly) was added to the mucosal chamber. The change in Isc was then monitored for 30 min. RESULTS: GIP receptor-like immunoreactivity was observed within the mouse mucosa, most prominently in the villus epithelium; no immunoreactivity was observed in GIP-receptor KO mouse intestine. In isolated mucosa mounted in Ussing chambers, GIP significantly increased Isc by 11-fold after addition of gly-gly (Isc: 50±17.3A/cm2 GIP vs. 4.5±3.9A/cm2 control; n=6, p0.03). To determine if this effect was due to receptor activation, Isc was monitored in KO animals lacking functional GIP receptors. In GIP receptor KO mice, a GIP-mediated increase in Isc was not observed (Isc: 32.7±15.9A/cm2 wildtype vs. 5.5±4.0A/cm2 GIP receptor KO; n=6, p0.03, t-test). CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that, along with increasing transepithelial glucose transport, GIP also increases dipeptide transport via interaction with epithelial GIP receptors. These studies provide further evidence for the physiological importance of GIP in intestinal nutrient uptake - and the anabolic response to feeding - consistent

with an etiologic role for this important incretin hormone in the pathogenesis of obesity and related disorders. 504 Alterations in Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) and Tumor Necrosis Factor Signaling with Total Parenteral Nutrition (TPN): A Potential Mechanism for Mucosal Atrophy Yongjia Feng, Daniel H. Teitelbaum Background: TPN leads to a decline in epithelial cell (EC) proliferation and an increase in EC apoptosis, resulting in intestinal mucosal atrophy. Previously we noted decreased PI3K/ p-Akt activity with TPN. EGF is a critical EC growth factor, and a prominent intracellular pathway for its activity is via PI3K signaling. Based on this we hypothesized that EGF signaling would decrease with TPN, and account for some of the mucosal atrophy with TPN. Methods: C57BL/6J mice received enteral nutrition (control) or TPN for 7 days. EGF and EGFR expression were measured with real-time PCR and EGFR was confirmed by Western immunoblotting. Immunofluorescent microscopy was used to localize EGFR. TNF, TNFR1, TNFR2, phospho-p38 and p21 expression were measured with PCR and/or Westerns, EC apoptosis with TUNEL staining, and proliferation with BrdU. Results: TPN significantly down-regulated RNA expression of EGF and EGFR; immunoblots confirmed EGFR protein decreased almost 10-fold vs. controls. Immunofluorescent staining showed strong expression along crypts and lower one-third of villi in controls; staining was markedly decreased with TPN. Additionally, EGFR internalization was found in the TPN group, which was not seen in controls. p21 protein expression (a downstream factor of EGF-signaling) decreased 2fold with TPN. We next examined the implications of EGFR loss. Tumor necrosis factoralpha (TNF) and its promotion of EC apoptosis is in careful balance with EGF signaling (anti-apoptotic, and proliferative); therefore we examined TNF signaling with this loss of EGF expression. We noted a 2.6-fold increase in membrane(26KDa) TNF protein expression with TPN (vs. controls) and for TNFR1 a 2.5-fold increase with mRNA and 5-fold upregulation with protein; whereas TNFR2 expression did not change. Coincident with this increase was a 2.0-fold increase in phospho-p38 expression with TPN, demonstrating intracellular activation of MAP kinase. Finally, EC proliferation and apoptosis were examined. There was an almost 50% loss of BrdU staining with TPN, and a 1.5-fold increase in EC apoptosis with TPN. Conclusions: TPN led to an up-regulation of TNF signaling, and a simultaneous marked down-regulation of EGF signaling. These changes may account for the mechanisms promoting our previously observed loss of PI3K/p-Akt signaling, and may well lead to the findings of mucosal atrophy associated with TPN.

Results are mean±SD, n=5-6 per group, statistical analysis with t-tests. 505 Chylomicron Formation Promotes Oral Tolerance By Promoting Intestinal Absorption and Lymphatic Transport of Dietary Protein Yuehui Wang, Sarbani Ghoshal, Willem J. de Villiers, Jerold G. Woodward, Erik Eckhardt BACKGROUND. Intestinal absorption of dietary proteins typically leads to oral tolerance, i.e. systemic non-responsiveness to the proteins, which prevents adverse immune responses. Although mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN) are involved, it is unclear how soluble antigens cross the intestinal epithelium and reach the MLN. AIM. We hypothesized that enterocytes internalize undigested dietary proteins and secrete dietary proteins together with chylomicrons. These lipoproteins transport dietary fat through the MLN and, like other lipoproteins, may have affinity for various proteins and peptides. We therefore hypothesized that chylomicron formation promotes oral tolerance. METHODS. Absorption of ovalbumin (OVA) as a function of chylomicron formation was studied in CaCo-2 cells and mice. Chylomicron formation was induced In Vitro by adding oleic acid (OA) and In Vivo by gavaging triolein (TO). Chylomicron formation was prevented or blocked In Vitro by using butyric acid (BA) and In Vivo by gavaging medium-chain triglycerides (MCT) or TO plus the chylomicron inhibitor Pluronic L-81 (Pl-81). RESULTS. Enterocyte-like CaCo-2 cells acquired OVA but, compared with RAW 264.7 macrophages, degraded significantly less of it in lysosomes. Chylomicron formation resulted in significant release of intact cell-associated OVA from the CaCo-2 cells and in its concomitant uptake by RAW 264.7 cells. Mice gavaged with TO absorbed significantly more 125I OVA or DQ-OVA from the intestinal lumen into MLN than mice gavaged with MCT or TO plus Pl-81. Moreover, chylomicron remnants isolated from the plasma of mice gavaged with TO plus OVA stimulated proliferation of T-cells from DO11.10 mice to a significantly higher extent than remnants isolated from mice gavaged with TO and bovine albumin, suggesting that the antigen was transported in association with chylomicrons. In Vitro studies confirmed the affinity of chylomicron-like emulsion particles for OVA, which also enhanced uptake of 125I OVA by macrophages. Lastly, Balb/ C mice fed OVA during suppression of chylomicron formation with oral Pl-81 or a MCTbased diet produced significantly more anti-OVA IgG after subsequent intraperitoneal sensitization with OVA than mice fed OVA while on a standard diet. CONCLUSION. Intestinal epithelial cells postprandially secrete more dietary protein antigens into the MLN when chylomicrons are formed. The antigens are likely transported through the MLN in association with chylomicrons, which promotes the development of oral tolerance. This novel absorption pathway may have important implications for food allergies or celiac disease and may be exploited to treat auto-immune diseases.

AGA Abstracts

A-82

