52

POSTER PRESENTATIONS P-4: Receptors

143 THE BINDING OF TISSUE PLASMINOGEN ACTIVATOR (tPA)
TO ENDOTHELIAL CELLS IS LARGELY MEDIATED BY A LIGAND IN THE B-CHAIN. THE ACTIVITY IS STIMULATED AND PROTECTED AGAINST INHIBITION. Wallen P, Chena X-F, Brohlin M, Pohl G and Bsck 0' Depts of Medical Biochemistry andlDermatologY, Umea University, Ume& Sweden One purpose of this study has been to investigate the effect of binding of tPA to the endothelial cell (EC) surface on its
function as plasminogen activator. Another aim has been to

inhibitor type 1 (PAI- ). Quenching of the binding of ` *?-tPA by an excess of unlabelled tPA and tPA-derivates was obtained by tPA (75%) and isolated B-chain (65%) whereas the A-chain had little effect. A synthetic decapeptide, AKHRRSGER, which occurs in the N-terminal part of the Bchain, was also a good competitor (50%). This is interesting, since a secondary binding site for PAI- has earlier been found in this part of tPA (Madison et al. 1989). In conclusion:
Receptor(s) for tPA on EC induce significant stimulation of the activity and protect tPA from inhibition by PAL1, possibly by interaction with the secondary binding site for PAI- in the B-

corroborate our earlier finding that the B-chain of tPA contains a ligand of importance for the binding of tPA to EC and localize it in the B-chain structure. ` 251-labelled tPA was adsorbed to isolated EC and the plasminogen activator activity measured in suspension using chrome enic plasmin substrate. 9 I-tPA adsorbed to The plasminogen activator activity of ' ` isolated EC was compared to the activity of the same amount of tPA in the liquid phase. The binding induced an about 1 OOfold stimulation of activity, which was of the same magnitude as the increase obtained by fibrin. The binding furthermore induced a 90% protection against plasminogen activator

chain of tPA.

144 RECEPTOR-MEDIATED INHIBITOR-DEPENDENT CATABOLISM
OF TISSUE TYPE AND UROKINASE PLASMINOGEN ACTIVATOR BY HEP G2 CELLS IS DISTINCT FROM OTHER CHARACTERISED RECEPTOR SYSTEM. ` Norm le J F ` Brandt. R.A. ` Joulianos. G., ` :t?::&!GC.N~and " 20wens&, D.A. ` Centre for Thrombosis and Vascular Research, Prince of Wales Hospital, University of New South Wales, Sydney and 2111awarra Regional Hospital, Wollongong, Australia. exhibit receptor mediated Human Hep G2 hepatocytes endocytosis and catabolism of tissue type plasminogen activator-plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (t-PA.PAI-1) complexes. This process IS rnrtrated by exogenous t-PA forming complexes with endogenous PAI- in extracellular matrix, with subsequent binding to a cellular receptor. Whether the other major plasminogen activator urokinase (U-PA) which also complexes with PAI- is metabolised by a similar mechanism is not known. Moreover the relationship between the receptor for t-PA.PAI-1 and other receptor systems for PAS and their complexes with inhibitors has not been established. To determine whether U-PA.PAI-I is bound catalytically active 1251-

labelled high and low molecular weight (hmw, Imw) forms of uPA were incubated with Hep G2 cells at 4' for 2 hr in the C absence or presence of 1OO-fold excess unlabelled ligand. For both forms of U-PA specific binding was observed. Scatchard analysis implied a homogenous population of high affinity binding sites (85,000 sites/cell; Kd hmw U-PA 4.1 nM, Imw U-PA 3.9 nM) and binding correlated with formation of ` 251-~-PA.PAI-1 complexes. Binding was inhibited in a dose dependent fashion by unlabelled t-PA, hmw-u-PA, Imw-u-PA and anti-PAl-1 antibodies. At 37°C bound ` 251-~-PA.PAI-1 complexes were internalised rapidly and degraded. A variety of ligands for other PA and PA.PAI-1 receptor systems were tested for capacity to inhibit PAI- dependent t-PA and U-PA binding to Hep G2 cells. Absence of inhibition by single chain U-PA, ae-macroglobulin receptor associated protein or peptides specific for the serpin enzyme complex receptor indicated that receptors for these ligands are not involved. These findings indicate that specificity of the Hep G2 receptor system for t-PA.PAI-1 extends to complexes of U-PA with PAI- and suggests that the mechanism responsible is distinct from other known receptor systems.

145 INVESTIGATION

OF WHOLE CELLS AS PROMOTERS ACTIVITY. Sinniaer V, Merton RE and Lonqstaff C NIBSC, South Mimms, UK.

OF tPA

We have investigated whole cells as promoters of tPA activation and identified structural aspects Activation of lysof tPA involved in binding. and/or glu-plasminogen has been studied with four cell types (also previously studied with "PA) as possible promoters of tPA-catalysed U937 and THPl (both also known to activation: and Nalm6 (both plus Molt4 express "PAR) A continuous method for negative for uPAR). studying activation assays in microtitre plates was used consisting of cells over a range of tPA (up to 70 PM), plasminogen (50 densities, This nM) and chromogenic substrate (S-2251). format allows rapid and simple analysis of up to with different simultaneously 96 reactions All cell types studied reagents or conditions. gave similar results and all were very effective assays sctPA activation promoters in accelerating rates up to 70 fold, at optimum cell densities from 10" to lO'/ml, depending on rates over a range of Activation cell type.

bell-shaped cell densities gives a curve template requiring suggesting a mechanism binding of tPA and plasminogen to the cell. However, in detailed analysis with THPl and MOLT4, promoter activity is found to be SctPA and sensitive to the form of tPA used. tctPA behave identically but tPA lacking the finger domain (LMW tPA) is not stimulated at all by either cell type. Other experiments using radiolabelled LMW tPA also suggest it interacts weakly with cells, in contrast to full length tPA. Thus the finger region appears to be This is in important for tPA-cell interactions. contrast to studies using fibrin as promoter where LMW tPA approaches the activity of sc-or tctPA. Furthermore, non-glycosylated tPA is only stimulated up to 6 fold by cells, even though it is of comparable specific activity in other also assays. Cell stimulation is completely abolished by 2 mM tranexamic acid which may operate by blocking plasminogen-cell interactions. These findings may be important to the regulation of tPA activity in viva and for the design of fibrin specific tPA variants for thrombolytic therapy.

