Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175 ­ 190 www.bba-direct.com

Review

Elongation by RNA polymerase II: structure­function relationship
Averell Gnatt *
Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics and Department of Pathology, University of Maryland Baltimore, 655 West Baltimore St., Baltimore, MD 21201, USA Received 21 June 2002; accepted 21 June 2002

Abstract RNA polymerase II is the eukaryotic enzyme that transcribes all the mRNA in the cell. Complex mechanisms of transcription and its regulation underlie basic functions including differentiation and morphogenesis. Recent evidence indicates the process of RNA chain elongation as a key step in transcription control. Elongation was therefore expected and found to be linked to human diseases. For these reasons, major efforts in determining the structures of RNA polymerases from yeast and bacteria, at rest and as active enzymes, were undertaken. These studies have revealed much information regarding the processes involved in transcription. Eukaryotic RNA polymerases and their homologous bacterial counterparts are flexible enzymes with domains that separate DNA and RNA, prevent the escape of nucleic acids during transcription, allow for extended pausing or ``arrest'' during elongation, allow for translocation of the DNA and more. Structural studies of RNA polymerases are described below within the context of the process of transcription elongation, its regulation and function. D 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: RNA polymerase II; Transcription; X-ray crystallography; Structure; Elongation; Regulation

1. Introduction Transcription is the crucial point in the regulation of gene expression. Considering that the blueprint of the human genome has recently been published [1,2], the disclosure of the mechanisms involved in the ``reading'' of the genome acquires an ever-increasing importance. Transcription by RNA polymerase II is the mechanism by which the eukaryotic genome is ``read'' to generate mRNA. Regulation of the process underlies fundamental biological processes such as development, morphogenesis and oncogenesis. In the case of cancer, a clear link between transcription and oncogenesis exists. For example, tumor suppressor proteins associated with breast cancer such as P53 and those encoded by the BRCA1 gene function as regulators of the transcription apparatus [3 ­8]. Other oncoproteins, such as EWS/Fli1, the prime candidate involved in Ewing tumors, have also

been found to interact with the human transcription machinery [9]. Recent evidence indicates the stage of RNA chain elongation as a key point in the regulation of transcription and as playing a role in human disease [10]. With this in mind, structural and functional studies of the motors of transcription, the RNA polymerases, are crucial for revealing mechanisms underlying cellular and physiological function in the normal and diseased states. Although the focus of this review is the structural and functional relationships of RNAP during the process of transcription elongation, the steps taken to arrive at the RNAP elongation complex structure could be applied to most large macromolecular complexes as well.

2. The transcription motors At the heart of eukaryotic transcription lie three multisubunit RNA polymerases, RNA polymerases I, II and III, which are targets of complicated mechanisms of regulation. Subunits of the three eukaryotic RNA polymerases either are identical and shared or are homologous [11,12]. Eukaryotic polymerases consist of a dozen or so polypeptides with total masses of over 500 kDa. Of the three forms of RNA

Abbreviations: CTD, C-terminal domain; RNAP, RNA polymerase II; TB, tuberculosis; tRNAP, Taq RNA polymerase; GTF, general transcription factor; yRNAP, yeast RNA polymerase II * Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, University of Maryland Baltimore, 655 West Baltimore St., Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. Fax: +1-410-7060032. E-mail address: agnat001@umaryland.edu (A. Gnatt).

0167-4781/02/$ - see front matter D 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: S 0 1 6 7 - 4 7 8 1 ( 0 2 ) 0 0 4 5 1 - 7

176

A. Gnatt / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175­190

polymerases found in eukaryotes, RNA polymerase II (RNAP) alone is responsible for generating all the mRNA, which in turn acts as the information template for protein production. For this reason, a major effort in determining the structure of RNAP alone and in its functional state as an elongation complex was undertaken. To grasp the relationship between RNAP structure and its function during elongation of the RNA chain, a brief introduction to RNAP elongation as disclosed by biochemical studies is essential.

3. RNAP transcript elongation Transcription consists of several distinct stages including initiation at a promoter, elongation of the RNA chain and the last stage of termination where RNAP completes the synthesis of RNA. Initiation is the first step prior to transcript elongation and follows promoter binding in which RNAP, with the aid of additional general transcription factors (GTFs), recognizes a promoter. Global regulation of promoter binding and initiation is a highly modulated process and can involve tens to hundreds of proteins including a large regulating complex termed mediator [13] and/or the GTF, TFIID at promoters lacking a TATA box [14 ­16]. During initiation, the DNA template is melted by the helicase activity of TFIIH, a GTF, to generate an ``open'' complex containing an upstream, unwound ``bubble'' region [17,18]. After synthesis of the first phosphodiester bond, two to three nucleotide transcripts are generated to form unstable ternary complexes. The instability of the initial transcription is indicated by evidence that two to three nucleotide RNAs are synthesized and abortively released by RNA polymerase II under conditions of limited nucleotides [19]. Since RNAP interactions with GTFs allow it to recognize the promoter, escape from some of the GTFs and the promoter must take place for transcription to proceed. Promoter escape appears to be rate-limiting in the process of transcript elongation and is in turn determined by the kinetics of early abortive transcription [20,21]. TFIIH has a key role in this early stage for promoter escape, where it suppresses arrest of very early RNA polymerase II elongation intermediates [22]. Another GTF, TFIIF, has also been noted to suppress the frequency of abortive transcription by very early RNA polymerase II elongation intermediates by increasing RNAP processivity [23]. For this reason, both TFIIH and F may be considered elongation factors as well as initiation factors. Determining the structure of RNAP complexed with GTFs would therefore be invaluable in shedding light on mechanisms of their regulation of transcript elongation. The synthesis of two to three base transcripts in early elongation complexes is followed by the generation of longer transcripts of approximately 11­ 15 bases and the closing of the initially opened upstream DNA region [19]. The downstream part of the transcription bubble can then continue to expand with concomitant closure of the

upstream region as synthesis progresses. Until the RNA chain reaches 11­ 15 bases, a degree of instability in the elongation complex remains [24]. After reaching approximately 15 bases of RNA, there appears to be a switch from unstable to productive transcription and promoter clearance is complete. Substantial regulation of the elongation process occurs as evidenced in subsequent chapters in this Special Edition. Finally, the RNAP interaction with termination factors allows for its dissociation from the DNA and RNA and its recycling for use in another round of initiation. Regarding the structure of the elongation complex, biochemical evidence suggested that during elongation, 12­ 15 bases of DNA are unwound to form the transcription ``bubble'' and an eight- to nine-base DNA/RNA hybrid is maintained [25,26]. Some evidence also suggested a threebase-pair hybrid [27]. Structural information brought below will attempt to account for these and other biochemical findings. 3.1. Regulation of transcript elongation It is now accepted that after promoter clearance, transcript elongation occurs in a discontinuous fashion. RNA polymerase II comes across blocks to elongation, resulting in a paused RNAP bound to DNA, unable to complete synthesis of the RNA chain. It is this state that is affected by an increasing number of elongation factors which have been identified [28 ­ 30]. Indeed, the rate of RNAP transcription in vitro is only 100 ­300 nucleotides per minute [31], yet it is four times that in vivo. It is therefore clear that elongation factors must regulate the rate of transcription in vivo [10]. Key elongation factors for RNAP such as TFIIS, P-TEFb, FCP1, DSIF, NELF, Elongin (SIII), ELL, Elongator, FACT and the HIV-1 Tat transcription factor have been shown to regulate elongation and the amount of transcript by complex mechanisms [32 ­ 39]. The precise mechanisms of regulation of transcript elongation have not been disclosed, though some general features are known. Elongation factors can act as negative or positive factors by several possible routes including: altering the phosphorylation state of a heptapeptide repeat on the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II termed the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD), affecting nucleic acid or chromosome structures such as hairpins or chromatin, or by directly altering RNAP biochemistry [40,41]. The CTD of the largest RNAP subunit that can be heavily phosphorylated is a crucial domain involved in RNAP regulation and deserves special attention. The CTD contains the sequence Tyr-Ser-Pro-Thr-Ser-Pro-Ser repeated 26 times in Saccharomyces cervisiae, 42 times in Drosophila melanogaster and 52 times in humans and mice [42]. It is generally accepted that unphosphorylated RNAP is recruited into the preinitiation complex whereas phosphorylated RNAP is associated with the elongating enzyme [43]. Several CTD kinases have been disclosed to phosphorylate either serine 2 or serine 5 of the consensus repeat [44].

A. Gnatt / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175­190

177

Differences in the roles of the kinases in initiation or elongation may be due to substrate preference within the CTD but also to the timely action of kinases during the transcription cycle [45]. An example of a transcription elongation factor with CTD kinase activity is that of the Cdk9 component of pTEFb. The kinase subunit is associated with cyclin T or K. The human immunodeficiency virus Tat is another elongation factor that can associate with pTEFb and is required for elongation of the human HIV type 1 genome [46]. Inhibition of pTEFb function prevents the transcription of HIV-1 RNA. The localization of the CTD relative to other RNAP domains could therefore lead to insight on the regulation of transcription as affected by pTEFb phosphorylation. The CTD is also associated with other RNA processing enzymes such as the polyadenylation factor IA [47] and, termination and splicing factors [48]. In these cases, as with the GTFs, structural studies of elongation factors complexed with RNAP would be quite informative as to their mechanisms of action. A major cause of transcript pausing results in the total arrest of transcription. RNAP frequently becomes blocked during transcript elongation by intrinsic DNA sequences. These sites of RNAP pausing occur at DNA sequences rich in thymidine residues on the non-template strand, similar to those that appear in a large number of human coding sequences (unpublished results). At such sequences, RNAP ``backtracks'' or slides backward on the templates as shown in Fig. 1 below. This results in an inappropriate positioning of the 3V end of the RNA in relation to the active site and an inability of the polymerase to continue synthesis. TFIIS is the key factor able to relieve such arresting of transcription. TFIIS acts on RNAP, which then cleaves the nascent transcript 2­ 10 bases from the end of the transcript realigning the 3V end of the mRNA with the catalytic center [see Fish and Kane, this volume] and allowing for continued elonga-

tion [49]. The structure of the three domains of TFIIS has been resolved [50 ­53] though the mechanism by which TFIIS causes RNAP to become an endoribonuclease is not known. Possible means of TFIIS function will be discussed below in relation to the RNAP structures.

4. Choice of model for structural analysis The wealth of biochemical data raises many questions as to the mechanisms underlying transcription elongation and its regulation by RNAP such as how the transcription bubble is generated and maintained, how DNA and RNA are separated, and what affects elongation complex stability. The improper regulation of transcription, a fundamental element of the cancer cell, further inspired the need for determining the structure of RNAP alone, as an elongation complex and in complex with regulatory proteins such as those described above. Although human RNAP would be the desired enzyme of study, quantities of high-quality human cells necessary for production of pure homogeneous RNAP would not have been attainable. In effect a proper model system needed to be chosen, and preferably one that is homologous to the human. Fortunately, it appears that transcription in general seems to involve universal mechanisms. A remarkable degree of conserved structure and function of RNAP was shown to exist across species. Indeed, 10 human RNAP subunits tested were able to replace their yeast counterparts in vivo [54] and the primary sequence identity of RNAP from yeast and human is amazingly 53% with overall homology of over 80% [55]. It is for this reason that structural and functional studies of yeast RNAP were justly pursued to reveal important principles of eukaryotic transcription across species. Saccharomyces cerevisiae RNAP (yRNAP) has turned out to be an ideal choice for structural determination for a number of reasons. First, it is highly homologous to the human enzyme as mentioned above. Second, RNAP is not an abundant enzyme and not easily purified in an intact form due to its size and complexity. Amounts necessary for structural studies could not have been generated from human cell culture. Third, yeast cells are highly amenable to genetic manipulation, which turned out to be a crucial advantage in structural determination of yRNAP and the actively engaged elongation complex thereof (see below).

5. Subunit structure of RNA polymerase II yRNAP contains 12 subunits, RNA polymerase Beta 1­ 12 (RPB1 ­ 12), with a molecular mass of over 500 kDa. The two largest subunits, RPB1 and RPB2, together account for over half the mass of RNAP and contain all the necessary biochemical elements for synthesizing RNA from a template. All subunits besides Rpb4 and Rpb7 are found as a single copy within the enzyme.

Fig. 1. Transcription elongation and arrest. Double-stranded DNA is depicted as ``railroad tracks'', the unwound DNA shown as a ``bubble'' and the active site magnesium as a star. In the top image the 3V -hydroxyl of the RNA is adjacent to the active site whereas in the arrested elongation complex on the bottom image, the 3V -hydroxyl is no longer aligned with the active site magnesium. TFIIS interacts with RNAP and allows it to read through the arrest site. See text for a further description of TFIIS function.

178

A. Gnatt / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175­190

Two subunits, RPB4 and RPB9, are not essential for cell survival as has been shown by the generation of deletions of these subunits in viable yeast strains [56,57]. RNAP purified from RPB4 deletion strains lacks both RPB4 and -7, indicating that subunit 7 is anchored to RNAP through RPB4. The Rpb4 ­ Rpb7 subassembly binds to singlestranded DNA and RNA [56 ­60] and may play a role in mediation to stress and in a post-recruitment step in initiation [61]. It was also found that subunits 4 and 7 are present in RNAP in sub-stoichiometric amounts. As such, RNAP protein preparations contained a nonhomogeneous mixture of polymerases, which was a major impediment for initial structural studies. The use of RPB4 deletion strains was to play a key role in structural studies [62] (see below). The 4/ 7 RNAP (polymerase lacking subunits four and seven) was shown to be efficient in nonspecific initiation in vitro though it was not efficient at initiation at a promoter in in vitro assays [61].

Fig. 2. Transcription elongation and halting on RNAP. RNA polymerase II is schematically depicted initiating on a tailed template. The template consists of a 3V single-stranded template strand and a double-stranded downstream region. Transcription is shown to begin randomly at any of three bases located three, four or five bases from the single-stranded/ double-stranded DNA junction. The three T bases indicate the halt site where the first UTP is required for RNA synthesis. Withholding UTP therefore causes RNAP to halt, until the next UTP is added.

6. Low-resolution structure of RNAPII The first low-resolution structures of RNAPII were accomplished by generating two-dimensional RNAP crystals on lipid layers, which were subjected to electron microscope (EM) structural techniques [63] and revealed the ° molecules' topography at 16 A. The structure contained a cleft and several grooves that could accommodate nucleic acids. The successful structural determination had additional important implications for the high-resolution work, which was to follow. Through these studies, it was found that the subunit 4 deletion strain was suitable for structural work whereas the wild-type strain containing substoichiometric amounts of subunits 4 and 7 would not crystallize as well. It also showed that epitaxial growth of three-dimensional crystals was possible [64], and gave hope for the generation of high-resolution diffraction of three-dimensional RNAP crystals, which was to follow.

7. Generation of elongation complexes of RNAPII With the low-resolution EM structure at hand, an efficient means of generating homogeneous complexes of RNAP engaged in transcription was needed prior to its structural determination. Although as mentioned above, RNA polymerase II requires a set of additional protein factors to start transcription at a promoter, the polymerase alone is capable of initiation on a single strand protruding from the 3V -end of duplex DNA (Fig. 2) [65]. Such a tailed template may be viewed as half of an unwound ``bubble'', known to occur at the active site of RNA polymerase molecules during transcription. Consistent with this idea, transcription starts within the single-stranded region, about three bases from the junction with duplex DNA, in both tailed templates and in the unwound bubble of an elongation

complex [66] and proceeds into the double-stranded region. These characteristics are conducive to structural studies and crystallization. Elongation complexes are formed with tailed templates, not only to circumvent the requirement for additional GTFs necessary to initiate transcription at a promoter, but also because initiation on a tailed template is highly efficient. This is in contrast with in vitro promoter utilization of a few percent of the template at best. Tailed templates could also be synthesized using standard phosphoamidite chemistry, purified and are readily available. Stalled elongation complexes are formed by transcription in the absence of UTP, stalling the polymerase before the first A residue in the template is reached at the ``halt'' site. These templates are advantageous for several reasons (Fig. 2). First, the elongation complexes are relatively homogeneous in their content of DNA and RNA sequences. Second, the position of the stall site is readily varied, and in the case of the Escherichia coli enzyme, the stability of the elongation complex was known to depend on the particular site [24]. And third, addition of UTP to paused complexes in solution or as crystals would allow the assessment of elongation competence. In employing tailed templates for the generation of elongation complexes, a partial early arrest of transcription was observed before the halt site, when the RNA reached a size of 16 bases [67]. This early arrest site was observed by earlier efforts and appears to exist with utilization of any 3V tailed template [68 and personal observation]. The ``early'' arrest site appears to have a normal arrest configuration since the elongation factor TFIIS has the ability to allow RNAP to read through the site [67]. Crystals of elongation complexes would not be homogeneous though, if they contained the early arrested RNAP and those paused at the latter halt site. To overcome this possible cause of nonhomogeneity, elongation complexes employed in structural work were paused at a single base immediately before the early arrest site, using a template with a three-T halt site

A. Gnatt / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175­190

179

similar to that of Fig. 2. Halting was planned to allow for the generation of a 15-base-pair RNA. Upon addition of UTP, some RNAP would arrest at the early arrest site as the RNA size increased to 16, with the remainder reaching the end of the template. At a length of 15 though, all halted elongation complexes could actively continue RNA chain elongation and could be used for structural analysis. Attention was also given to the size of the DNA template. Too long of a downstream region in the template would result in DNA protruding from the enzyme and would inevitably be an impediment to the formation of threedimensional crystals necessary for high-resolution analysis. The length of the downstream region of the template maintaining the capacity for efficient elongation was then determined in transcription assays with various sized templates to be between 16 and 22 bases after the UTP halt site [67]. DNAase I footprinting analyses indeed showed protection of 20 ­24 base pairs upstream and 19 ­23 base pairs downstream of the pause site [27]. Purification of the active complex from inactive molecules was also necessary in order to generate a homogeneous complex suitable for structural determination. It was known that heparin is able to inhibit initiation of transcription but not elongation of an actively engaged RNAP [69]. It was assumed that heparin may bind nucleic acid binding sites on the polymerase blocking the formation of an initiation complex. In the elongation complex, however, channels containing DNA or RNA would be occupied and the elongation complex therefore immune to heparin inhibition. For this reason, elongation complexes were passed through a heparin ­ sepharose column for purification. Molecules not engaged in elongation bound the heparin whereas elongation complexes halted in the midst of transcription did in fact flow through the column [67]. These advances were crucial prior to crystallization of RNAP engaged in transcription. An additional prerequisite to crystallization of the active enzyme was in the stability of elongation complexes, since several weeks are required for growth of three-dimensional crystals. Evidence for highly stable complexes existed from elongation complexes formed with E. coli RNA polymerase [24], which remained fully active in transcription following exposure to concentrated salt solutions (1 M NH4Cl) or storage for long periods. Complexes containing RNA polymerase II from tailed templates were generated and tested for their stability. They were shown not only to remain functional for the duration of time necessary for generating crystals but also to be active in crystalline form [67].

scription was successfully achieved [70]. Initially it was not clear that at low-resolution DNA could be observed. For this reason, the downstream region of the DNA was linked through biotin to a streptavidin molecule whose bulkier density should clearly be visible. As it turned out, the streptavidin and some of the DNA were visible. The downstream DNA could be seen in a cleft and appeared to continue into the molecule, where its continued density was obscured by the protein. The remainder of the nucleic acids were buried within the polymerase and a higher resolution structure was needed.

9. High-resolution structure of RNAPII and a two metal ion active site As a point of interest, determining the high-resolution structure of large complex macromolecules is currently a challenging task, which can take over 10 years [71,72]. Firstly, large amounts of pure, homogeneous and intact material need to be generated. In the case of RNAP, the protein was found to be prone to protease degradation, especially the CTD of Rpb1. Indeed, the generation and use of a CTD-specific antibody was essential for production of intact homogeneous enzyme [73]. Large amounts of material could be produced in yeast, yet thousands of liters of culture were necessary for the production of sufficient quantities to achieve a backbone model of RNAP [62]. Once high-quality material was at hand, the second challenge of finding appropriate conditions for crystallization was surmounted [74]. In addition, phase information, which on some level may be described as determining the ``shape'' of the molecule, are not directly determined by X-ray diffraction of crystals. This is usually accomplished by soaking the macromolecule in a heavy metal solution as a first step. Comparison of the diffraction patterns of the metal-containing crystals and diffraction patterns of those that do not contain metals is the standard procedure for phase determination. In large macromolecules such as RNAP, classical heavy metal compounds were not useful either because they damaged yRNAP crystals or because they could not generate a sufficient signal [74]. As a result, large metal clusters were initially employed in phase determination of RNAP similar to those employed with ribosome crystals [71,72]. These major obstacles in achieving an Xray structure of yeast RNAP were surmounted and resulted ° in 5 A X-ray structure of the enzyme [74]. The comparison of this structure to the EM structure led to the finding of a domain, whose position differed between the structures. It was then postulated that this domain was a moveable domain that could be involved in clamping nucleic acids in their position. Higher-resolution structural determination required modifications in crystallization conditions to allow for consistent and improved high-resolution crystal diffraction [62]. It also required the analysis of crystals with over 100 different

8. Low-resolution EM structure of RNAP in the act of transcription Once relatively homogeneous and stable elongation complexes were at hand, a three-dimensional reconstructed low-resolution EM structure of RNAP in the act of tran-

180

A. Gnatt / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175­190

heavy metal binding sites, which were generated by soaking various heavy metals into RNAP crystals. A key component of improved crystal diffraction involved the shrinkage of the crystal unit cells by the addition of polyethylene glycol 400 [62]. This in turn allowed for consistent and high-quality diffraction. Finally, improved beamline physics was extremely important in the successful determination of the high-resolution structure of yRNAP. A backbone model containing mostly polyalanines of RNAPII was accomplished, followed by the recent high° resolution structure to 2.8 A and the active elongation complex [55,62,75]. The structure of the enzyme at rest, not in the act of transcription, was crucial for the successful determination of the elongation complex structure. As discussed above, structure determination with X-ray crystallography requires phase (or shape) information, which is arrived at by heavy metal soaking of crystals. A second method employed in determining phase uses a known model (shape) of the protein in a process called molecular replacement. Elongation complex crystals were very fragile and platelike [75]. Soaking them with heavy metals caused them to either crack or fall apart. For this reason, a high-quality model of RNAP at rest for molecular replacement with the elongation complex was essential for the successful structural determination of the elongation complex [75]. One of the important biochemical findings of the structure of the enzyme at rest involves its mechanism of catalysis. In the backbone model of RNAP as well as in the bacterial RNA polymerase structure, a single magnesium ion (Metal A) was found in the active site, implying a single ion catalytic mechanism. In contrast, single chain prokaryotic nucleic acid polymerases employ a two-ion mechanism in ligating the phosphates of the bound nucleotide substrate to the growing nucleic acid chain [76]. In the two-metal catalysis, metal A coordinates the 3V hydroxyl

group of the RNA chain and the alpha-phosphate of the substrate nucleoside ­triphosphate, and metal B coordinates all three phosphate groups of the substrate ­ triphosphate. Both metals stabilize the transition state during phosphodiester bond formation. The resolution to this discrepancy came with the recent high-resolution and high-quality struc° ture of RNAP to 2.8 A. In this structure, a second active site metal (metal B) was discovered, though with a lower occupancy than that of Metal A. Metal B may have a low occupancy because it may enter and exit with the nucleotide substrate [77]. Metal A in the active site is constrained by aspartate 481, 483 and 485 of Rpb1 whereas Metal B was found in the region of D481, and E836 and D837 of Rpb2. Eight zinc atoms were also found in all high-resolution RNAP structures. These appear to be involved in the structural stability of the polypeptide chains, and are essential to protein integrity. Further information on the high° resolution structure of RNAP disclosed in the 2.8 A structure [55] will be brought in the context of the elongation complex [75], below.

10. High-resolution structure of the elongation complex The structures of yRNAP lack subunits 4 and 7, as these subunits were prohibitive to crystallization. The general features of yRNAP are displayed in Fig. 3 below. Looking down at the top of the enzyme, three border regions of a large cleft exist, with a single open end as depicted in Fig. 3. The first border domain was termed the clamp and is discussed separately below. Most of the first and second borders of the cleft are composed of Rpb1 and Rpb2 linked through a ``bridging'' helix of Rpb1. In single polypeptide polymerases, there exists a homologous bridging helix as well [55]. Near the bridging helix a pore traverses the

Fig. 3. Key features of the RNAP structure. RNAP in yellow is shown from the ``top'' view. Different features of the structure of the RNAP are highlighted on both sides of the image. The red spot is the active site Magnesium (Metal A). The general features are described in the text.

A. Gnatt / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175­190

181

molecule with the active site magnesium found in the pore (Fig. 3). At the base of the opening of the cleft, a domain termed the ``Jaws'' extends the first and second borders. The Jaws consist of subunits Rpb1 and 9 in the upper jaw and of Rpb5 on the lower jaw. From the position of the jaws in the different RNAP crystal forms, it is apparent that they are somewhat mobile. This domain is probably an important element in binding and determining the position of the downstream DNA. The third border effectively closes the cleft on the third side. Its position in one of the RNAP crystal forms would prevent a DNA fragment from entering and exiting the enzyme as a linear, unbent molecule. This domain of Rpb2 was therefore termed the ``wall''. Its involvement in the direct binding of nucleic acids will be discussed below. In one of the RNAP crystal forms though, movement of the first border clamp domain generates an open region between the wall and the first border (not shown). This was proposed to accommodate a linear B-form DNA, which could enter near the Jaws and exit the molecule between the wall and the first border. This finding has relevance for the process of initiation of transcription [55]. In an attempt to describe the path of the DNA along RNAP, we will begin with the downstream double-stranded region of the tailed template that has yet to be transcribed. In Fig. 4 below, the red arrow symbolizes the downstream

DNA region and points to the orange/red RNA/DNA hybrid. The downstream DNA is also depicted as the double-stranded red lines in the template scheme above the polymerase. Partially ordered nucleic acid density of the downstream DNA in the elongation complex structure was indeed observed to be located in the cleft and contacts the Rpb5 lower jaw domain at a loop containing proline118. In the elongation complex X-ray structure, the downstream DNA does not pass through the mouth of the ``jaws''. This is because the DNA may have been too short to reach the Jaws and its position may have been altered by the end to end stacking of downstream DNA originating from neighboring molecules. DNA cross-linking studies indicate though, that the downstream DNA is in contact with the Jaws [76]. This is also observed in the lower resolution EM structure of the elongation complex which employed a slightly longer DNA template and where the downstream DNA passes between the upper and lower jaws [70]. Mobility of the Jaws as observed in the various crystals would allow them to open or close on the downstream DNA, permitting some freedom of movement of the DNA, an element that is essential for efficient enzyme translocation. The partial ordering of the downstream DNA prohibits its molecular modeling and further indicates a degree of DNA mobility in the cleft. Freedom of movement of the DNA would be an essential element in translocation on RNAP and

Fig. 4. Key features of the elongation complex. RNA polymerase II, yellow, is depicted in the same orientation as in Fig. 3. The tailed template in red is schematically presented above RNAP with yellow RNA bound to it. The 3V single-stranded tail of the template is indicated. The red arrow in RNAP depicts the approximate position of the downstream DNA going through the Jaws. In the elongation complex structure though, the template did not pass through the jaws (see text below). The RNA/DNA, yellow/red hybrid is depicted in an approximately correct position as a barrel, which is at a 90j angle compared to the downstream DNA. See text for further information.

182

A. Gnatt / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175­190

lends credence to the explanation of the movement of the jaws in this regard. The size of the cleft as measured from the Jaws domain, Rpb1 residue 1222 to the bridging helix, is approximately ° 60 A. This would allow space for 17 ­ 19 base pairs of downstream B-DNA to fit inside the cleft. Indeed protection assays mentioned above, where DNA was protected from cleavage on elongation complexes, are in agreement and extremely accurate in describing the length of the protected downstream DNA (see Section 3). The convergence of information from structural and biochemical studies therefore strongly validates the information at hand. In the elongation complex structure, in the vicinity of the bridging helix, density of the noncoding DNA strand is totally obscured due to motion or disorder. It is clear though that the downstream DNA strands separate to form the bubble before the bridging helix. Two elements termed ``forks'' were suggested to maintain this bubble, similar to a fork in a road. An Rpb2 loop (residues 500 ­510) termed ``fork loop 2'' in the cleft before the bridging helix region is likely to clash with the non-template strand. A homologous loop in the bacterial enzyme has been suggested to play this role as well [78]. Direct visualization of DNA strand separation in RNAP is not possible because of the disordering of the non-template strand as mentioned above as well as the disordering of

several residues of fork loop 2. Maintaining the open transcription bubble directly upstream of the DNA/RNA hybrid was suggested to involve another loop, ``fork loop 1'' in the vicinity of Rpb2 residue 470. This loop is found in yeast and human proteins but not in the bacterial enzyme. Although most of the downstream DNA was not well ordered, three bases of the downstream template strand and the DNA ­ RNA hybrid were ordered. The template strand is observed dipping down, over the bridging helix to the active site (see Figs. 5 and 7 below). The DNA then curves upwards, along the wall domain where it is found with RNA in the nine-base-pair RNA/DNA hybrid. The hybrid is schematically depicted in Fig. 4 above as an orange/red barrel, which lies approximately at a 90j angle to the downstream DNA. A funnel-shaped pore lies below the active site (Fig. 5 below). The pore is the only location for nucleic acid substrates to enter the molecule because the RNA/DNA hybrid in the elongation complex blocks entry of nucleotides from above.

11. The clamp domain RNAP structures revealed that the clamp domain of the first cleft border plays crucial roles in the process of tran-

Fig. 5. The funnel-shaped pore. RNAP is depicted from the ``bottom'' view compared to Figs. 3 and 4, by rotating the molecule 180j. In this view, the clamp depicted in yellow is on the opposite side of the molecule and the pore below the active site is observed. DNA in purple and RNA in blue are presented as a space-filling model. A yellow spot represents the active site magnesium. Nucleotide substrates can only enter through the pore. The RNA in the RNA/DNA hybrid is directly over the pore and is presumed to slide down the pore during arrest of transcription. It is also suggested that through this pore TFIIS can gain access to the RNA and possibly the active site. See text for further details.

A. Gnatt / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175­190

183

° scription. As mentioned above, the lower resolution 5 A X° structure and ray structure was compared to the EM 16 A only one domain, the clamp domain, was observed to have shifted. In the X-ray structure it appeared as if the clamp was open, whereas in the EM structure it appeared closed. This was indeed confirmed in the higher resolution X-ray structures of the enzyme at rest, which was in an open conformation and the elongation complex, in which the clamp domain was in a closed conformation. As a result of clamp closure, downstream DNA and the RNA/DNA hybrid in the transcribing complex are unable to escape from the molecule whereas in the open complex nucleic acids are free to escape. The dramatic closing of the clamp depicted in Fig. 6 below involves shifting of some residues as much as ° 30 A [75]. In the closed conformation, the cleft's dimensions still allow for sufficient room for nucleic acid movement. DNA mobility was also suggested previously regarding the mobile jaw domain and the disordered downstream DNA. High B-factors of the DNA/RNA hybrid compared with the protein also indicate that it, too, has a fair degree of mobility. The enzyme prevents nucleic acids from escape, increasing processivity, yet too tight a ``grip'' on the RNA/DNA would prevent efficient elongation of the RNA chain. One could picture RNAP transcribing very long megabase transcripts such as dystrophin [79], which would require securing the template from release despite hundreds of thousands of bases that are to be synthesized. Movement along the template though proceeds at a rate sufficient for useful transcript generation. The clamp therefore functions as a processivity element. In the case of DNA replication, DNA polymerase has an accessory processivity factor, PCNA, whereas RNAP has its clamp domain as a built-in unit for the same purpose [80 ­ 82]. It is interesting to note that an altered form of PCNA has been identified in cancer [83]. Modulation of the clamp

position from closed to open during transcription could certainly have an effect of decreased processivity and increased abortive transcription. Although it is too early to tell, it would be interesting to know if transcription factors or mutations in the clamp domain could modulate the position of the clamp and thereby affect transcription. This is a likely mechanism for modulation of RNAP function during initiation and elongation. Indeed, the structure dictates that the clamp must be opened for termination of transcription and recycling of RNAP for use in another round of initiation. Clamp closure appears to be triggered by the binding of nucleic acids, especially by the formation of the RNA/DNA hybrid. There exist five ``switch'' regions that are involved in the clamp open to closed conformation change that is found in the elongation complex. Three of the switch domains are either poorly ordered (switch 1 RPB1 1384­ 1406 and 2 Rpb1 328 ­346) or totally disordered (switch 3 Rpb2 1107 ­ 1129) in the open RNAP conformation, lacking nucleic acids. Conformational changes of the switch regions may be concerted since switch regions interact with each other. Switches 1 ­3 also contact the RNA/DNA hybrid and contribute much to the hybrid-binding pocket. It appears that formation of the hybrid may be an important factor in clamp closure. In this regard, Switch 3 is of particular interest. Switch 3 may become ordered by the growing hybrid, similar to a glove becoming ordered as a hand fits inside. In our case, the hand would be the RNA/DNA hybrid and the glove would be switch 3, RPB2 residues 1107­ 1129. Once switch 3 is ordered by the hybrid, switch 2, an alpha helix, must move since the newly ordered switch 3 would come in direct contact with switch 2. The flipping out of the helical turn of switch 2 Rpb1 residues 331 ­ 42, and movement of the entire switch 2 region may be the direct consequence. As a result, the clamp may be forced to close. This possible ``domino'' scenario of the collapsing of

Fig. 6. The clamp domain. RNAP is depicted looking into the cleft such that the downstream DNA would be running into the image. The clamp domain is in yellow, the DNA in purple and RNA in blue. The Clamp is shown in its open position on the non-elongating RNAP on left and in the closed position of the elongation complex on the right. An orange bar helps visualize the distance of clamp movement as it traps the nucleic acids and prevents their escape from the enzyme.

184

A. Gnatt / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175­190

the clamp may perhaps be tested by site-directed mutagenesis.

12. The hybrid The RNA/DNA hybrid of the elongation complex was observed as nine bases precisely matching earlier biochemical studies and is highly underwound compared to a free DNA ­ RNA duplex. Indeed, it appears that biochemical findings of a three-and nine-base hybrid were justified. The first three bases of the RNA are well buried and protected in the active site and are held in place by both DNA and protein interactions. Although the DNA interacts with protein residues all along its length, the five upstream RNA bases are held in place mostly through base pairing with the DNA template. The three-base-pair hybrid suggested to exist by biochemical studies [27] may represent the three bases of hybrid, well protected in the active site, not prone to even extreme RNAase digestion, whereas the nine-base hybrid less tightly held together represents the entire nine-base hybrid region [25,26]. Whatever the case, the size of the hybrid appears to be dictated by its position along the wall domain in the hybrid-binding pocket. This position is the result of direct interactions of the hybrid with residues of the active site binding pocket. Although direct binding of amino acid residues to the RNA/DNA hybrid is essential for positioning of nucleic acids in the active site and stability of the complex, there exists a secondary shell of over 20 ° positively charged side chains at a distance of 4­ 8 A. These also contribute to the stability of the hybrid. One end of hybrid lies in the catalytic site where the magnesium ion, metal A, is located. The other end of the hybrid lies near the protein loops of the clamp that separate the DNA from the RNA. The orientation of the template strand warrants attention. The ``active base'', the DNA template base that hydrogen bonds to the incoming ribonucleotide, is flipped by a lefthanded twist of approximately 90 degrees toward the opening of the pore relative to the next downstream base. This downward flipping is made possible by the binding of the ``active base'' to switches 1 and 2 as well as the interaction of the next downstream base to the bridging helix residues Ala832 and Thr831. To a large degree, the bridging helix actually acts as a wedge, separating the ``active base'' and the next downstream base.

Transcription appears to occur in discrete factories with RNAP fixed to the nuclear skeleton [84,85]. Results suggest DNA template translocation as a result of RNAP catalysis. One possible mechanism for such a movement was proposed on the basis of the comparison of the yeast and bacterial RNA polymerase structures [55,86]. The bridging helix of yeast enzyme is straight whereas in the bacterial enzyme it is bent towards the position of the hybrid. Modeling the bent bacterial bridging helix into the yeast elongation complex structure indicates the bridging helix as coming in contact with the hybrid. Bending of the bridging helix would result in a riveting motion that could push the hybrid forward thereby moving the entire template forward. Further studies are needed to confirm this model.

14. RNA/DNA exit from the molecule In the elongation complex structure, nucleotides upstream of the hybrid were not observed despite their presence. The RNA strand should be between 12 and 15 bases, though RNA and DNA beyond the hybrid are disordered and not visible. Density of the hybrid ended near polypeptide loops that were proposed to separate the RNA and DNA strands. Two of three of these loops, the rudder and the lid, were disordered in the elongation complex. The third loop, the rudder, remained ordered. In the bacterial RNAP structure, the lid and the rudder were also disordered [87]. The reason that these loops may be disordered at the point of RNA/DNA separation may lie in the existence of various conformations of the DNA, RNA and the loops. It was previously shown that tailed templates similar to those employed in generating the elongation complex result in a percentage of RNA which displaces the noncoding DNA strand, resulting in a mixture of DNA/DNA hybrids and an extended RNA/DNA hybrid [66]. In addition, tailed templates initiate at one of several bases in the single-stranded region, which results in heterogeneous RNAs, differing in the length of their 5V terminii by two or three bases [67]. Taken together, nucleic acid ­ protein interactions in the region of DNA/RNA separation could be somewhat heterogeneous, which could explain the disorder of the loops involved in hybrid strand separation as well as the disordering of nucleic acids. Since we know the position of the rudder and lid loops in the nontranscribing RNAP, we can overlay them on the clamp domain of the elongation complex whose loops are disordered as in Fig. 7. Interestingly, we observe that the RNA is pointed directly below the lid into a channel that could accommodate a single-stranded nucleic acid chain, which is most likely the RNA ``exit'' channel. The coding DNA strand is pointing directly between the lid and the rudder. Both RNA and DNA in the hybrid are found directly below these loops. It is therefore highly probable that the

13. Translocation on the template For transcription to succeed, RNAP must move across the template or vice-versa. The distinction may be relative to the position of observation. If we were ``standing'' on the DNA, we would see the RNAP moving and vice-versa. Interestingly, there exists evidence suggesting that from the vantage point of the nucleus, the DNA may be moving.

A. Gnatt / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175­190

185

Fig. 7. Exit of RNA and DNA from RNAP. The blue RNA/purple DNA hybrid is depicted as a space-filling model. On the left side of the image, the hybrid is shown relative to the positions of the lid, zipper, rudder and bridging helix (see text). The arrows depict the suggested directions and positions of extended nucleic acids. Those positions are shown in the right image in relation to the overall RNAP structure with the suggested location of the CTD as indicated. The yellow domain is the Clamp.

clamp domain, in addition to its role in ``processivity'', acts in strand separation and as the DNA exit domain. The RNA enters the RNA exit channel, which may lead directly to the CTD domain of the largest RNAP subunit, Rpb1.

15. Position of the CTD In the section on transcript elongation above, it was noted that the CTD of Rpb1 contains a heptapeptide repeat that may be heavily phosphorylated. The CTD is a key regulatory domain of RNAP, which binds mediator, elongation factors, capping enzyme, splicing factors as well as termination factors. Although its structure is disordered and not observed in these X-ray studies, the position of the CTD can be inferred from the lack of density in the tightly packed RNAP crystals [55]. One region alone can accommodate for the mass of the CTD. This site, as it turns out, is precisely where the RNA exit site is located as mentioned above (Fig. 7). Indeed, negative or positive elongation factors that bind the CTD, those that cause pausing on a template, or relieve pausing, would then be in proximity to the RNA. In addition, other factors that bind the CTD such as splicing factors and termination factors would also be in contact with the RNA. The RNAP structures are suggestive of mechanisms of function for RNAP-associated factors, though further structural studies of RNAP with the accessory factors as well as biochemical studies are essential. The mechanisms by which negative elongation factors could affect transcription may be one of several. Firstly, negative elongation factors could bind

the CTD and be in the path of the exiting RNA, preventing further transcription. This could be relieved by other elongation factors such as pTEFb that phosphorylate the CTD, causing the dissociation of negative elongation factors [88]. Another possibility is that negative elongation factors could affect CTD structure, which would then form an obstruction to movement of the RNA with phosphorylation returning the structure to an elongation competent mode. Still other possibilities exist, and further study is called for.

16. Elongation and transcript stability As discussed in Section 3, two stages of elongation are completed before elongation commitment and promoter clearance is achieved. In the first stage, a transition occurs from an RNA length of three to four bases accompanied by an increase in stability. Such a transition may involve movement of amino acid side chains that could interact, either short- or long-range, with the RNA. This would result in the fine positioning of the three bases of RNA/DNA hybrid nearest to the active site magnesium. Movement of such residues would not be seen in our ``snapshot'' of elongation. Some evidence indeed suggests that the structural transition between an RNA length of three to four and longer transcripts may be related to the limited protein contact of the RNA in the hybrid beyond the first three bases. A mutation in a conserved arginine residue (Arg497 in Rpb2, Arg529 in E. coli hsubunit) that makes a long-range interaction with the hybrid at the fifth base has been shown to result in the overproduction of abortive transcripts [89].

186

A. Gnatt / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175­190

In a second stage of transcript elongation, increased elongation complex stability is observed when the RNA reaches an approximate length of 15 bases. There is no correlation though between RNA stability and RNA lengths between 4 and 15 bases (Hsu, this volume). The path of the RNA in the protein may explain the increased stability when the RNA reaches a length of approximately 15 bases. As the DNA/RNA hybrid reaches 9 ­10 bases, the RNA and DNA contact the rudder and lid loops, which separate the DNA and RNA. Once successfully separated, the growing RNA chain can reach and bind the RNA binding channel at a length of 13 ­15 bases and exit the RNA binding channel at 18 ­20 bases. The increased contact of the single-stranded RNA to the RNA exit channel would result in the achievement of a highly stable elongation complex. This model is in accord with the structure at hand as well as the biochemical data indicating 18­ 20 protected RNA bases and increased stability achieved when the RNA reaches over 14 bases in length [19,27]. The question as to the stability of the elongation complex even to relatively high salts [24,27] is not a trivial one. It is a logical argument that interactions between the hybrid, the downstream and upstream DNA and the exiting RNA with the protein, would all contribute energetically to the stability. From the elongation complex structure we can assume though that the primary determinant of stability is in the closure of the clamp itself. Once the clamp is closed, nucleic acids are unable to escape and the complex is stabilized. The cause of clamp closure is in the interactions of the hybrid with hybrid binding regions, which would ultimately result in the increased stability. Another means of stability could be transcription factors that keep the clamp closed though no factors have been mechanistically linked with such an activity. The flexibility of RNAP and its multiple structural features including the pore, various clefts, multiple movable domains and the key clamp domain argue for multiple transcription elongation complexes. Although stability of these complexes would be determined by the particular conformation, it would especially be determined by the closure of the clamp as indicated above. In the case of the elongation complex structure, the enzyme has completed chemical linkage of substrate to the growing RNA chain but has not translocated to make room for the next incoming nucleotide. Indeed, the crystals were grown without the presence of nucleotides to prevent continued synthesis and addition of nucleotides to these elongation complexes allows for immediate continued transcription in the crystal itself [67]. Since the clamp was closed, these complexes were stable for weeks in the crystalline form. One can also imagine other possible elongation complex conformations. For example, an arrested complex might have the RNA extruding down the pore in a ``backtracked'' conformation (see below). Another elongation complex might have completed translocation. If we define ``paused'' as competent to transcribe without the need for transcription

factors, then indeed the X-ray structure is that of a paused complex. The native state of the elongation complex in the presence of nucleotides would probably include many different states. These include some molecules that could be slightly backtracked by two bases or so, some that have completed synthesis but have not translocated as in our case and those that have completed translocation. As long as the Clamp remains closed, the complexes would remain stable.

17. TFIIS, RNAP and arrested transcription Arrested transcription occurs when the 3V hydroxyl of the RNA strand loses contact with the active site after RNAP backtracks on the DNA template (Fig. 1). The structure of the elongation complex clearly shows the 3V hydroxyl of the RNA lying immediately above the funnel-shaped pore (Fig. 5). This is highly suggestive of a mechanism whereby the RNA slides down the pore causing the loss of contact of the 3Vhydroxyl by the active site. Indeed, some weak electron density (personal observation) is located in the pore of the elongation complex structure and may represent a minority of backtracked enzymes. TFIIS, which causes RNAP to act as an endoribonuclease and alleviate the situation, is likely to be positioned in or around the bottom of the pore. Indeed, TFIIS has been shown to be in close proximity to the 3Vterminal of the RNA by cross-linking [90]. In addition, a fragment of the largest bacterial polymerase subunit located in the funnel was cross-linked to the end of extruded RNA [50]. Rpb1 residues on the outer portion of the funnel have also been shown to interact with TFIIS [91,92]. TFIIS function could be explained by various mechanisms. One possibility is that TFIIS binds the RNA, repositioning it for cleavage by the catalytic site of RNAP. Indeed a cryptic TFIIS nucleic acid binding domain is said to exist [53]. Another possibility suggested is that the two acidic TFIIS residues Asp261 and Glu262 that coordinate a zinc atom may actually participate in ribonuclease activity by a two metal ion phosphoryl transfer reaction [93]. To achieve this, an entire domain of TFIIS would have to fit into the pore, and indeed it does (personal observation). It would not be able to reach the active site though, if RNA were protruding down the pore. Further biochemical and structural studies are necessary to determine the precise mechanism of this crucial elongation factor.

18. Other RNA polymerases Studies of RNA polymerases from bacteria not only have allowed for a wealth of biochemical information but also have been successfully employed for structural determination [87,94]. Of prime importance is the structure of the a2hhV subunit RNA polymerase from the Thermus aquaticus (tRNAP) [87]. The Rpb3 ­Rpb11 heterodimer of yeast

A. Gnatt / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175­190

187

RNAP is structurally homologous to the bacterial a2 subunit. Rpb1 and Rpb2 in yRNAP are also structurally homologous to the bacterial hV and h subunits, respectively. An additional subunit of the bacterial RNA polymerase, omega, is indicated as the yeast Rpb6 homologue [95]. From the primary sequence of human RNAP though, it is evident that the yeast enzyme is more homologous to the human than the bacterial counterpart [55]. In a broader evolutionary sense, it is fascinating to note that there exists a similar subunit architecture of archael and eukaryal RNA polymerases [96]. In comparing the structures of bacterial and yeast RNA polymerases, it is clear that there is a degree of homology on the amino acid sequence level but an even higher homology on the structural level regarding protein folds (Fig. 8). The striking overall conservation of structure furthers the claim of a universal transcription mechanism. Near the active site, the structural homology is highest. In general, protein elements distant from the active site, such as on the periphery or surface, are less homologous [55]. With regards to transcription elongation, the same general features are found in both yeast and bacterial enzymes. Because of the high degree of homology, direct comparison of the two enzyme structures is useful in deciphering mechanisms of function such as the suggested mechanism of translocation. One key difference between the two structures lies in the presence of the jaw domain in the yRNAP as opposed to its absence in tRNAP. This results in seven bases less protection for the downstream DNA in the bacterial enzyme as opposed to the yeast enzyme.

19. Rifampicin inhibition of RNA polymerase Tuberculosis (TB) caused by the Mycobacterium tuberculosis is known to reach epidemic proportions in some regions and lead to death. Rifampicin is one of the key antibiotics in TB treatment. Rifampicin inhibits bacterial DNA-dependent RNA polymerases by binding to the h subunit and preventing transcript elongation during the earliest stages of RNA synthesis [97]. The affinity of rifampicin to eukaryotic polymerases is much lower than that of the bacterial counterpart, making it a very potent wide-range antibiotic. Due to its importance in treating TB, resistance of bacteria to rifampicin is of prime concern. In a landmark structural study of the bacterial RNA polymerase in complex with rifampicin, the Darst laboratory (Rockefeller Institute) determined the precise location and mechanism of function of the antibiotic [94]. The crystallographic study of the bacterial RNA polymerase revealed the binding of the drug to the enzymes' h subunit pocket that lies directly in the path of the RNA. Mutations that confer resistance to rifampicin were observed to involve amino acids that bind rifampicin or could possibly alter the conformation of the binding pocket. Although some of the rifampicin-binding pocket of eukaryotes and bacteria is homologous, it appears that part of the pocket is not. Among the amino acid residues in the rifampicin-binding pocket are residues 413 and 414 of the bacterial h subunit. The same region in the eukaryotes happens to be that of fork loop 1, a loop mentioned above that is absent from the bacterial enzyme. This difference in

Fig. 8. RNA polymerase structures are conserved across species. RNA polymerase structures of the T. aquaticus RNA polymerase [87] in green and the yeast RNAP [55] in yellow are presented. An amazing degree of homology is clearly observed. The yeast enzyme though has the addition of the jaw domain, which is not present in the bacterial enzyme. See text for further details.

188

A. Gnatt / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175­190

structure is likely to account for some of the altered affinities of the bacterial and eukaryotic enzymes to rifampicin. In any case, rifampicin directly lies in the path of RNA in the DNA/RNA hybrid as predicted from the bacterial model or when aligned in the analogous rifampicin-binding pocket of yRNAP (personal observation). The structure of the bacterial enzyme with rifampicin can now serve as the basis for improved design of antibiotics to be used in the treatment of TB and other bacterial infections.

20. Future prospects Transcription elongation by RNA polymerase is a complex process that is regulated by many elongation factors. Structural studies of the bacterial RNA polymerase and yeast RNAP shed light on these mechanisms including hybrid strand separation, DNA template translocation on RNA polymerase, abortive initiation, transcript arrest, and processivity [98]. Structural studies relating to RNA polymerase elongation also have importance in the development of treatments for cancer, AIDS and bacterial infection. One key feature of the enzyme is its flexibility. RNAP can adopt multiple conformations to accommodate its complex task. It must be able to bind a DNA template and secure it in place especially for the generation of long RNAs, yet allow for template mobility. For this purpose, the clamp domain has been shown to be highly mobile yet capable of preventing the releasing of the transcript. Despite the divergence of archael and eukaryotic domains over 2 billion years ago, their RNAP enzymes and subunits share amazing homology [99]. This relatedness among prokarya suggests a close genetic relationship between all living species on earth. It also emphasizes the efficiency of transcription; the basic machinery suffices for archaea and man as well. Despite this similarity, increasing complexity of higher eukaryotes dictates a need for increasingly complex mechanisms of regulation of transcription. One case is the elongation factor TFIIS. TFIIS is found in all eukaryotes investigated and a functional bacterial counterpart exists as well. These are all ubiquitously expressed since TFIIS is a general elongation factor. In mammals, tissuespecific isoforms are expressed and could directly alter the kinetics of RNA elongation by being recruited to specific genes, allowing readthrough of arrest sites and a higher order level of regulation not present in yeast or bacteria [100]. What structural elements of RNAP could contribute to this complexity despite the interspecies homology? As noted, the overall homology of RNA polymerases from yeast and bacteria varies in the surface and peripheral regions. These regions are in contact with transcription elongation factors such as TFIIS and those that affect transcription initiation and termination as well. The increased repertoire of transcription factors in mammalians could interact with these select protein regions. The increased regulation is further indicated by the absence of a CTD in bacterial

polymerases that may not need the complex additional sets of regulatory factors possessed by eukaryotes. The structural studies that are the basis of this review reveal some of the complexity of RNAP and the process of transcription elongation. These types of studies also raise the need for further biochemical investigation to test hypotheses suggested by the structure. In addition, in the elongation complex structure not all the nucleic acid binding domains were filled with density because of nucleic acid disorder, packing constraints or template design. This result indicates a need to generate more complete elongation complex structures. The disclosures of RNAP and elongation complex structures are not an endpoint of structural experimentation in themselves. They should be viewed as a structural basis to be built upon for continued study of the remaining issues of transcript elongation and its regulation. Site-directed mutagenesis is one means of confirming ideas that arise from the structural studies. Crystallization of other elongation complexes and co-crystallization of RNAP with other transcription elongation factors can also accomplish this goal.

Acknowledgements I am most appreciative of Dr. Roger Kornberg, Stanford University in his granting me the wonderful opportunity to achieve the yeast RNAP elongation complex structure in his laboratory and for his guidance. I am further indebted to all co-workers whose names are not mentioned here, lest one is omitted. Work by the author towards the structure of RNAP elongation complex was sponsored by the USAMRC Breast Cancer Initiative DAMD17-97-7099 and does not necessarily reflect the policy of the government. Earlier yet crucial support for the elongation complex structural studies was provided as fellowships to the author by the Bank of America-Giannini Foundation and by the National Institutes of Health (NCS Grant 5T32CA09151).

References
[1] J.C. Venter, M.D. Adams, E.W. Myers, P.W. Li, R.J. Mural, G.G. Sutton, H.O. Smith, M. Yandell, C.A. Evans, R.A. Holt, J.D. Gocayne, P. Amanatides, R.M. Ballew, D.H. Huson, J.R. Wortman, et al., Science 291 (2001) 1304 ­ 1351. [2] E.S. Lander, L.M. Linton, B. Birren, C. Nusbaum, M.C. Zody, J. Baldwin, K. Devon, K. Dewar, M. Doyle, W. FitzHugh, R. Funke, D. Gage, K. Harris, A. Heaford, J. Howland, L. Kann, J. Lehoczky, R. LeVine, et al., Nature 409 (2001) 860 ­ 921. [3] B.P. Schlegel, V.J. Green, J.A. Ladias, J.D. Parvin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97 (2000) 3148 ­ 3153. [4] S.F. Anderson, B.P. Schlegel, T. Nakajima, E.S. Wolpin, J.D. Parvin, Nat. Genet. 19 (1998) 254 ­ 256. [5] A.S. Neish, S.F. Anderson, B.P. Schlegel, W. Wei, J.D. Parvin, Nucleic Acids Res. 26 (1998) 847 ­ 853. [6] I. Irminger-Finger, B.D. Siegel, W.C. Leung, Biol. Chem. 380 (1999) 117 ­ 128. [7] E. Schneider, M. Montenarh, P. Wagner, Oncogene 17 (1998) 2733 ­ 2741.

A. Gnatt / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175­190 [8] R. Truant, H. Xiao, C.J. Ingles, J. Greenblatt, J. Biol. Chem. 268 (1993) 2284 ­ 2287. [9] R. Petermann, B.M. Mossier, D.N. Aryee, V. Khazak, E.A. Golemis, H. Kovar, Oncogene 17 (1998) 603 ­ 610. [10] J.W. Conaway, R.C. Conaway, Ann. Rev. Biochem. 68 (1999) 301 ­ 319. [11] N.A. Woychik, K. McKune, W.S. Lane, R.A. Young, Gene Expr. 3 (1993) 77 ­ 82. [12] A. Sentenac, CRC Crit. Rev. Biochem. 18 (1985) 31 ­ 90. [13] Y.J. Kim, S. Bjorklund, Y. Li, M.H. Sayre, R.D. Kornberg, Cell 77 (1994) 599 ­ 608. [14] A.K. Taggart, T.S. Fisher, B.F. Pugh, Cell 71 (1992) 1015 ­ 1028. [15] B.D. Dynlacht, T. Hoey, R. Tjian, Cell 66 (1991) 563 ­ 576. [16] B.F. Pugh, R. Tjian, Genes Dev. 5 (1991) 1935 ­ 1945. [17] E. Guzman, J.T. Lis, Mol. Cell. Biol. 19 (1999) 5652 ­ 5658. [18] G. Pan, J. Greenblatt, J. Biol. Chem. 269 (1994) 30101 ­ 30104. [19] F.C. Holstege, U. Fiedler, H.T. Timmers, EMBO J. 16 (1997) 7468 ­ 7480. [20] J.F. Kugel, J.A. Goodrich, J. Biol. Chem. 275 (2000) 40483 ­ 40491. [21] J.F. Kugel, J.A. Goodrich, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95 (1998) 9232 ­ 9237. [22] A. Dvir, R.C. Conaway, J.W. Conaway, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94 (1997) 9006 ­ 9010. [23] Q. Yan, R.J. Moreland, J.W. Conaway, R.C. Conaway, J. Biol. Chem. 274 (1999) 35668 ­ 35675. [24] J.R. Levin, B. Krummel, M.J. Chamberlin, J. Mol. Biol. 196 (1987) 85 ­ 100. [25] D.N. Lee, R. Landick, J. Mol. Biol. 228 (1992) 759 ­ 777. [26] I. Sidorenkov, N. Komissarova, M. Kashlev, Mol. Cell 2 (1998) 55 ­ 64. [27] G.A. Rice, C.M. Kane, M.J. Chamberlin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 88 (1991) 4245 ­ 4249. [28] A. Shilatifard, FASEB J. 12 (1998) 1437 ­ 1446. [29] D. Reines, J.W. Conaway, R.C. Conaway, Trends Biochem. Sci. 21 (1996) 351 ­ 355. [30] S.M. Uptain, C.M. Kane, M.J. Chamberlin, Ann. Rev. Biochem. 66 (1997) 117 ­ 172. [31] M.G. Izban, D.S. Luse, J. Biol. Chem. 267 (1992) 13647 ­ 13655. [32] N.F. Marshall, D.H. Price, J. Biol. Chem. 270 (1995) 12335 ­ 12338. [33] J. Archambault, R.S. Chambers, M.S. Kobor, Y. Ho, M. Cartier, D. Bolotin, B. Andrews, C.M. Kane, J. Greenblatt, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94 (1997) 14300 ­ 14305. [34] Y. Yamaguchi, T. Takagi, T. Wada, K. Yano, A. Furuya, S. Sugimoto, J. Hasegawa, H. Handa, Cell 97 (1999) 41 ­ 51. [35] J.W. Conaway, J.N. Bradsher, S. Tan, R.C. Conaway, Cell. Mol. Biol. Res. 39 (1993) 323 ­ 329. [36] A. Shilatifard, W.S. Lane, K.W. Jackson, R.C. Conaway, J.W. Conaway, Science 271 (1996) 1873 ­ 1876. [37] G. Otero, J. Fellows, Y. Li, T. de Bizemont, A.M. Dirac, C.M. Gustafsson, H. Erdjument-Bromage, P. Tempst, J.Q. Svejstrup, Mol. Cell 3 (1999) 109 ­ 118. [38] G. Orphanides, G. LeRoy, C.H. Chang, D.S. Luse, D. Reinberg, Cell 92 (1998) 105 ­ 116. [39] M.F. Laspia, A.P. Rice, M.B. Mathews, Cell 59 (1989) 283 ­ 292. [40] D.K. Kim, Y. Yamaguchi, T. Wada, H. Handa, Mol. Cells 11 (2001) 267 ­ 274. [41] J.W. Conaway, A. Shilatifard, A. Dvir, R.C. Conaway, Trends Biochem. Sci. 25 (2000) 375 ­ 380. [42] J.L. Corden, Trends Biochem. Sci. 15 (1990) 383 ­ 387. [43] H.S. Lu, C.L. Clogston, J. Wypych, P.R. Fausset, S. Lauren, E.A. Mendiaz, K.M. Zsebo, K.E. Langley, J. Biol. Chem. 266 (1991) 8102 ­ 8107. [44] P. Komarnitsky, E.J. Cho, S. Buratowski, Genes Dev. 14 (2000) 2452 ­ 2460. [45] C.J. Hengartner, V.E. Myer, S.M. Liao, C.J. Wilson, S.S. Koh, R.A. Young, Mol. Cell 2 (1998) 43 ­ 53. [46] Y. Zhu, T. Pe'ery, J. Peng, Y. Ramanathan, N. Marshall, T. Marshall,

189

[47] [48]

[49] [50]

[51] [52] [53] [54] [55] [56] [57] [58] [59] [60] [61] [62]

[63] [64] [65] [66] [67] [68] [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] [78] [79] [80] [81]

B. Amendt, M.B. Mathews, D.H. Price, Genes Dev. 11 (1997) 2622 ­ 2632. D. Barilla, B.A. Lee, N.J. Proudfoot, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 98 (2001) 445 ­ 450. S. McCracken, N. Fong, K. Yankulov, S. Ballantyne, G. Pan, J. Greenblatt, S.D. Patterson, M. Wickens, D.L. Bentley, Nature 385 (1997) 357 ­ 361. M. Wind, D. Reines, BioEssays 22 (2000) 327 ­ 336. V.K. Olmsted, D.E. Awrey, C. Koth, X. Shan, P.E. Morin, S. Kazanis, A.M. Edwards, C.H. Arrowsmith, J. Biol. Chem. 273 (1998) 22589 ­ 22594. P.E. Morin, D.E. Awrey, A.M. Edwards, C.H. Arrowsmith, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93 (1996) 10604 ­ 10608. X. Qian, S.N. Gozani, H. Yoon, C.J. Jeon, K. Agarwal, M.A. Weiss, Biochemistry 32 (1993) 9944 ­ 9959. X. Qian, C. Jeon, H. Yoon, K. Agarwal, M.A. Weiss, Nature 365 (1993) 277 ­ 279. N.A. Woychik, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 63 (1998) 311 ­ 317. P. Cramer, D.A. Bushnell, R.D. Kornberg, Science 292 (2001) 1863 ­ 1876. N.A. Woychik, R.A. Young, Mol. Cell. Biol. 9 (1989) 2854 ­ 2859. N.A. Woychik, W.S. Lane, R.A. Young, J. Biol. Chem. 266 (1991) 19053 ­ 19055. V. Khazak, P.P. Sadhale, N.A. Woychik, R. Brent, E.A. Golemis, Mol. Biol. Cell 6 (1995) 759 ­ 775. M. Choder, R.A. Young, Mol. Cell. Biol. 13 (1993) 6984 ­ 6991. S.M. Orlicky, P.T. Tran, M.H. Sayre, A.M. Edwards, J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 10097 ­ 10102. A.M. Edwards, C.M. Kane, R.A. Young, R.D. Kornberg, J. Biol. Chem. 266 (1991) 71 ­ 75. P. Cramer, D.A. Bushnell, J. Fu, A.L. Gnatt, B. Maier-Davis, N.E. Thompson, R.R. Burgess, A.M. Edwards, P.R. David, R.D. Kornberg, Science 288 (2000) 640 ­ 649. S.A. Darst, A.M. Edwards, E.W. Kubalek, R.D. Kornberg, Cell 66 (1991) 121 ­ 128. A.M. Edwards, S.A. Darst, S.A. Hemming, Y. Li, R.D. Kornberg, Nat. Struct. Biol. 1 (1994) 195 ­ 197. T.R. Kadesch, M.J. Chamberlin, J. Biol. Chem. 257 (1982) 5286 ­ 5295. R.L. Dedrick, M.J. Chamberlin, Biochemistry 24 (1985) 2245 ­ 2253. A. Gnatt, J. Fu, R.D. Kornberg, J. Biol. Chem. 272 (1997) 30799 ­ 30805. A.E. Sluder, D.H. Price, A.L. Greenleaf, J. Biol. Chem. 263 (1988) 9917 ­ 9925. W.S. Dynan, R.R. Burgess, Biochemistry 18 (1979) 4581 ­ 4588. C.L. Poglitsch, G.D. Meredith, A.L. Gnatt, G.J. Jensen, W.H. Chang, J. Fu, R.D. Kornberg, Cell 98 (1999) 791 ­ 798. A. Yonath, H.G. Wittmann, Biophys. Chem. 29 (1988) 17 ­ 29. N. Ban, P. Nissen, J. Hansen, P.B. Moore, T.A. Steitz, Science 289 (2000) 905 ­ 920. N.E. Thompson, D.B. Aronson, R.R. Burgess, J. Biol. Chem. 265 (1990) 7069 ­ 7077. J. Fu, A.L. Gnatt, D.A. Bushnell, G.J. Jensen, N.E. Thompson, R.R. Burgess, P.R. David, R.D. Kornberg, Cell 98 (1999) 799 ­ 810. A.L. Gnatt, P. Cramer, J. Fu, D.A. Bushnell, R.D. Kornberg, Science 292 (2001) 1876 ­ 1882. S. Doublie, S. Tabor, A.M. Long, C.C. Richardson, T. Ellenberger, Nature 391 (1998) 251 ­ 258. C.I. Wooddell, R.R. Burgess, Biochemistry 39 (2000) 13405 ­ 13421. N. Korzheva, A. Mustaev, M. Kozlov, A. Malhotra, V. Nikiforov, A. Goldfarb, S.A. Darst, Science 289 (2000) 619 ­ 625. C.N. Tennyson, H.J. Klamut, R.G. Worton, Nat. Genet. 9 (1995) 184 ­ 190. T.S. Krishna, X.P. Kong, S. Gary, P.M. Burgers, J. Kuriyan, Cell 79 (1994) 1233 ­ 1243. J. Kuriyan, M. O'Donnell, J. Mol. Biol. 234 (1993) 915 ­ 925.

190

A. Gnatt / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1577 (2002) 175­190 [92] J. Archambault, F. Lacroute, A. Ruet, J.D. Friesen, Mol. Cell. Biol. 12 (1992) 4142 ­ 4152. [93] C. Jeon, H. Yoon, K. Agarwal, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 91 (1994) 9106 ­ 9110. [94] E.A. Campbell, N. Korzheva, A. Mustaev, K. Murakami, S. Nair, A. Goldfarb, S.A. Darst, Cell 104 (2001) 901 ­ 912. [95] L. Minakhin, S. Bhagat, A. Brunning, E.A. Campbell, S.A. Darst, R.H. Ebright, K. Severinov, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 98 (2001) 892 ­ 897. [96] A.A. Best, G.J. Olsen, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 195 (2001) 85 ­ 90. [97] Y. Nakamura, T. Yura, MGG, Mol. Gen. Genet. 145 (1976) 227 ­ 237. [98] R. Landick, Cell 105 (2001) 567 ­ 570. [99] F. Werner, J.J. Eloranta, R.O. Weinzierl, Nucleic Acids Res. 28 (2000) 4299 ­ 4305. [100] T. Umehara, S. Kida, T. Yamamoto, M. Horikoshi, Gene 167 (1995) 297 ­ 302.

[82] P.M. Burgers, Nucleic Acids Res. 16 (1988) 6297 ­ 6307. [83] P.E. Bechtel, R.J. Hickey, L. Schnaper, J.W. Sekowski, B.J. Long, R. Freund, N. Liu, C. Rodriguez-Valenzuela, L.H. Malkas, Cancer Res. 58 (1998) 3264 ­ 3269. [84] P.R. Cook, Science 284 (1999) 1790 ­ 1795. [85] F.J. Iborra, A. Pombo, D.A. Jackson, P.R. Cook, J. Cell Sci. 109 (Pt 6) (1996) 1427 ­ 1436. [86] A. Gnatt, D. Ginzberg, J. Lieman-Hurwitz, R. Zamir, H. Zakut, H. Soreq, Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 11 (1991) 91 ­ 104. [87] G. Zhang, E.A. Campbell, L. Minakhin, C. Richter, K. Severinov, S.A. Darst, Cell 98 (1999) 811 ­ 824. [88] T. Wada, G. Orphanides, J. Hasegawa, D.K. Kim, D. Shima, Y. Yamaguchi, A. Fukuda, K. Hisatake, S. Oh, D. Reinberg, H. Handa, Mol. Cell 5 (2000) 1067 ­ 1072. [89] D.J. Jin , C.L. Turnbough Jr., J. Mol. Biol. 236 (1994) 72 ­ 80. [90] W. Powell, B. Bartholomew, D. Reines, J. Biol. Chem. 271 (1996) 22301 ­ 22304. [91] J. Wu, D.E. Awrey, A.M. Edwards, J. Archambault, J.D. Friesen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93 (1996) 11552 ­ 11557.

