Abstracts

241

carrying this hemoglobin variant, the red cell parameterswere normal. By isoelectrofocusing Hb Uxbridge appearedto have an isoelectric point slightly higher than Hb A but was silent on cellulose acetate and acid gel electrophoresis. Structural modifications affecting position P20(B2) have been demonstratedto be responsible for a high oxygen affinity and polycythemia in Hb Olympia (Val +Met) and Hb Trolhattan (Val + Glu). In the caseof Hb Uxbridge, despite an alteration of the same site, the oxygen binding parametersof the patient's hemolysate showed only a mild (ca. 20%) increase in oxygen affinity.
The molecular characterization of Gaucher disease in South Africa. B. Morar, A.B. Lane, Department of Human Genetics, SAIMR, PO Box 1038, Johannesburg, South Africa.

DNA from 29 southern African Gaucher disease patients was analyzed for five common Gaucher disease mutations: 12266, 1448C, 84GG, IVS2 + 1 and 1504T. The origins of the patients were as follows: 14 Ashkenazi Jews; 6 Gentile Caucasoids;8 Negroids; and one of mixed ancestry. The 12260 allele accountedfor 80% of diseasealleles in the Jewish patients, 50% of alleles in the Gentile Caucasoid patients and was absent from the Negroid patients. The 1448C allele was present in both the Jewish (1 of 24 alleles) and Negroid patients (3 of 16 alleles). Single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis was successfully used to detect mutation 12266. This system also revealed the presenceof mutation 1297T in a Jewish patient and a novel point mutation, 1277T, in an Afrikaans-speaking Caucasoid patient. Screening of 360 unrelated, healthy Ashkenazi Jewish volunteers to estimate the frequency of diseasealleles in the local population led to the detection of 17 carriers: 16 possessedthe 1226G allele (frequency = 0.0222), and one the 1297T allele (frequency = 0.0014). Using these results, together with the fact that only 92% of `Gaucher alleles' would be detected in this study, we estimate the disease carrier frequency in the Ashkenazim of South Africa to be 0.05, or approximately 1:20. A reliable carrier screening programme can now be offered to the local Jewish community. The majority of the disease alleles in the two Gentile groups remain uncharacterized.
Neonatal screening for hereditary fructose intolerance: Frequency of the most common mutant aldolase E allele (A149P) in the British population. C.L. James, P. Rellos, M. Ali, A.F. Heeley, T.M. Cox, Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke `s Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK.

Hereditary fructose intolerance (HPI) causessevereand sometimesfatal metabolic disturbances in infants and children but responds to dietary treatment. To determine the practicability of screening newborn infants for HPI, we have investigated the frequency of the most common and widespreadmutant allele of aldolaseB, A149P, in the neonatal population. The polymerase chain reaction was used to amplify aldolase B exon 5 genomic sequencesin DNA present in tied blood specimenspreservedon Guthrie cards. The A149P mutation was identified by discriminatory hybridisation to

242

Abstracts

allele-specific oligonucleotides and confirmed independently by digestion with the restriction endonucleaseBsaHI. Twenty-seven A149P heterozygoteswere identified by the molecular analysis of aldolase B genes in blood samples obtained from a random cohort of 2050 subjects born in 1994 and 1995, 1.32+0.49% (95% confidence level). Although no A149P homozygotes were identified, the data allow the frequency of 1 in 23 000 homozygotesfor this allele to be predicted. Our findings have implications for establishing an interventional mass screening programme to identify newborn infants with HFI in the UK. Early identi&ation of ehiklreu with cummtmi Qfa --ev seree&g prograntme in a Swedish county. M. Magnusson, F. Rasmussen,C. Sundelin, Child Health Unit, Department of Paediatrics, Uppsala University, S-751
85 Uppsala, Sweden. Objective: The aim was to evaluate the effectiveness of an early screening programme for communicative disturbances in relation to the health status of the child at the age of 4 years. Materials and methods: A case-control study including 705 cases and 2451 controls was performed. Results: Cases with commnnication disorders as well as other types of disabilities at 4 years of age showed a bigber frequency of deviant screeningresults on each screening occasion.The sensitivity for the screening programme amounted to 24.8%, the specificity was 95.5% and the positive predictive value was 61.2%.

Immunoradiometric and lumiuescence imm thyrutropin from dried blood spots for Jirkalova, J. Cap, H. St&ova, J. Pribysova, J. Plicka, R. Lomsky, &-for Protein and
Peptide Hormones, Charles University School Medicine, University Hospital, CZ-SO0 05 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic.

Two monoclonal antibodies to thyrotropin prepared in our laboratory were employed for the development of two-site immunometric assaysin two modifiWions for the estimation of human thyrotropin in dried blood spots designed for the screening of neonatal hypothyroidism. The immunoradiometric assay using the secondantibody labelled with 1251 simple and fast (one incubation step lasting 2 h). is The detection limit of 1 mU/I and the absence of the hook effect up to a concentration of more than 1000 mU/l are optimal for neonatal screening; the presence of other glycoprotein hormones does not interfere with the assay. In the luminescence immunoenzymometric assay the second antibody is labelled with peroxidase. In spite of the two-step configuration the method is fast (4.5 h) and enables specific determination of thyrotropin levels in the range of 2.4-1100 mu/I. The conditions and properties of both immunometric assaysdescribed are comparable with the time-resolved immunofluorometric assay widely used in Europe. The luminescence immunoenzymometric assay was applied successfully in the screening of 3000 neonatesfor congenital hypothyroidism. Fluorescence-assisted mismatch analysis (FAMA) for exhaustive screening of the

