J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL VOLUME 115, NUMBER 2

Abstracts S135

538

Polarized Expression of GATA3 Is Not Sufficient for CRTH2 and IL-4 Gene Activation in Differentiated Human Th2 Clones U. De Fanis1, M. Bova2, W. Lee1, R. J. Kurnat1, V. Casolaro1; 1Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 2Federico II University, Napoli, ITALY. RATIONALE: Because transcription factor GATA3 is required for Th2 differentiation of naive T cells, and the 7-transmembrane PGD2 receptor CRTH2 is the most selective Th2 surface marker identified to date, we hypothesized a direct correlation between the expression levels of these two proteins in polarized Th2 cultures. METHODS: Human naive CD4+ T cells were primed with antiCD3/CD28 and cultured under conventional Th1- or Th2-polarizing conditions. After 7 days of culture, CRTH2+ cells were enriched to >70% by positive selection using immunomagnetic beads (Dynal). Surface antigen expression and single-cell cytokine gene expression in permeabilized, monensin-treated cells were analyzed by flow cytometry. GATA3 expression was analyzed by RT-PCR. RESULTS: On day 7, CRTH2 surface expression was preferentially induced in Th2-polarized cultures (mean±SE: 16.8±1.8% vs 0.5±0.1% in Th1 cells in 8 independent experiments; p<0.05). Conversely, CCR5, a Th1 surface marker, was expressed on a higher proportion of Th1 than Th2 cells (23.0±1.9% vs 0.8±0.6%; p<0.05). After stimulation with PMA and ionomycin the totality of CRTH2+ cells expressed IL-4 but not interferon- . As reported, GATA3 mRNA was detected at higher levels in Th2 than in Th1 cells. However, within Th2 cells, there were no differences in GATA3 mRNA expression between CRTH2-enriched and CRTH2-depleted fractions. CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that, while increased expression of GATA3 is consistently observed in differentiating Th2 cultures, fully polarized cells, identified by CRTH2 and IL-4 detection, do not express higher levels of the factor. This suggests that GATA3 is necessary but not sufficient for stable, inheritable activation of these Th2 genes. Funding: NIH/NIAID Recurrent Respiratory Papillomatosis (RRP): TH2-Like, T-cell Polarization Induced by Human Papillomavirus (HPV)-11, Early Protein-6 (E6) B. Hadjiev1, J. A. DeVoti1,2, D. W. Rosenthal1,2, A. Vambutas3,2, B. M. Steinberg3,2, V. R. Bonagura1,2; 1Allergy and Immunology, Long Island Jewish Medical Center and Schneider Children's Hospital, New Hyde Park, NY, 2Institute for Medical Research of North Shore-LIJ Health System, Manhasset, NY, 3Otolaryngology and Communicative Disorders, Long Island Jewish Medical Center, New Hyde Park, NY. RATIONALE: RRP is caused by HPV types 6 and 11. It is unclear why few HPV-exposed individuals develop RRP with a severe and unrelenting course of disease. We reported that HPV-11 E6 induced the relatively unopposed expression of IL-10, with decreased IFN , IL-12 and IL-18, in RRP. To determine which cells produce these immunoregulatory cytokines, we exposed peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) to E6, and then identified cytokine-specific mRNA expression purified in T- and non-T-cells. METHODS: PBMC were exposed to E6, and then fractionated into Tand non-T-cells. Negative selection of cell fractions was performed using anti-CD14, 16, 19, 56 antibodies conjugated with PE, and purified by anti-PE microbead separation (Miltenyi Biotec). cDNA from these cell fractions was amplified using specific primers for IFN- , IL-10, IL-12, or IL-18 by RT-PCR. RESULTS: IL-10 mRNA was expressed by both T-, and non-T-cells, but only T-cells from patients expressed IFN- . Control, E6-exposed non-Tcells also expressed IFN- . In some instances E6 concomitantly reduced IL-12 and IL-18 further supporting TH2-like T-cell polarization. CONCLUSIONS: Only T-cells from patients express IFN- after E6 exposure, while T-cells and non-T-cells from patients and controls express IL-10. An inverse relationship between TH1-, and TH2-like cytokine expression was present in patients, but not controls, in response to E6 supporting the possibility that RRP is a TH2-like disease. Select dendritic

cells may express IL-10 and be responsible for TH2-like polarization of Tcells in RRP.

540

Prophylaxis of Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infection With Intranasal siRNA-Nanoparticles of the NS1 Gene In Vivo W. Zhang, H. Yang, S. Behera, X. Kong, R. F. Lockey, S. S. Mohapatra; Dept. of Internal Med., USF, Tampa, FL. RATIONALE: Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection is one of the major causes of respiratory tract infection in all age groups. No vaccine or antiviral is available against RSV infection. Elevated expression of hostIFN response protects against RSV infection. Since RSV NS1 protein appears to antagonize antiviral host-IFN response, a plasmid-borne small interference RNA-targeting the NS1 gene (siNS1) was used to examine the role of NS1 in modulating RSV infection. METHODS: Virus titers were analyzed by plaque assay. Protein expression was detected by western blotting and fluorescence microscopy. Cytokine expression was analyzed by intracellular cytokine staining. Lung pathology was examined immuno-histochemical procedures. Role of CD8+ memory T cells was examined by adoptive transfer. RESULTS: Mice treated intranasally with siNS1-nanoparticles prior to or after infection with RSV show significantly decreased virus titers in the lung and decreased inflammation and airway reactivity compared to control. Our study also demonstrated that knockdown of NS1 gene with a single dose of siNS1 treatment significantly attenuates re-infection of mice with a higher dose of RSV 16d after primary infection. The intercellular cytokine analysis showed that increased level of IFN- production in both CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell from spleen compared to RSV-infected group. Furthermore, siNS treatment induced increases in memory CD8+ T-cells in the lungs, but not in spleens in the RSV-infected mice 30d post-infection. CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that siNS1-nanoparticles may provide an effective prophylaxis or treatment against RSV infection of humans. Funding: NIH

539

541

High Resolution Crystal Structure of Bla g 2: A Zinc Binding Cockroach Allergen A. Pomés1, M. Li2, S. Wünschmann1, M. D. Chapman1, A. Wlodawer2, A. Gustchina2; 1R&d, INDOOR Biotechnologies, Inc., Charlottesville, VA, 2Macromolecular Crystallography Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD. RATIONALE: Bla g 2 is a potent allergen, structurally related to a family of inactive aspartic proteinases. The aim was to determine the crystallographic structure of Bla g 2 and study the structural basis for its function and allergenicity. METHODS: Partially de-glycosylated rBla g 2 mutant (N93Q) was expressed in Pichia pastoris and affinity purified to homogeneity. Crystals grew in mother liquid containing 18% PEG8000, 0.2M MgAcetate and 10mM DTT, pH 5.8. The structure was solved by the multiple isomorphous replacement method. RESULTS: A high resolution structure of Bla g 2 was determined at 1.3Å resolution. Blag2 binds an atom of zinc through H155, H161, D303 and D307. The structure is very similar to the active enzymes, with the C coordinates deviating only ~1.5Å. However, major structural differences have been identified in the active site region: distortions primarily due to the replacement of glycines in the D(S/T)G motif by a serine or threonine, a larger distance (4.41Å instead of ~3Å) between catalytic aspartates, and an extra-phenylalanine (F75a) from the flap, occupying the S1 pocket for substrate binding. Blag2 has five instead of the usual 2 or 3 disulfide bonds, confering stability to the molecule. CONCLUSIONS: Bla g 2 is a zinc binding protein. Distortions in the active site explain why the allergen is an "inactive" aspartic proteinase. Enzyme activity is not correlated with the ability of Bla g 2 to cause IgE responses. The crystal structure of Bla g 2 will help to elucidate the role of Bla g 2 in allergic respiratory disease. Funding: INDOOR Biotechnologies, Inc. and Philip Morris USA Inc.

SUNDAY

