Microbial nickel metalloregulation: NikRs for nickel ions
Nuvjeevan S Dosanjh and Sarah LJ Michel
Nickel is a required co-factor for several microbial enzymes; however, because of its potential toxicity, nickel import and homeostasis must be tightly controlled. Recent biophysical and biochemical studies have revealed that NikR proteins are a new type of metalloregulatory protein that utilize allostery and coordination geometry to sense nickel ions and regulate transcription of genes involved in nickel import and processing. Nickel import into bacteria occurs through either ABC-type transporters (NikABCDE) or HoxN type permeases (NixA). Recent structural evidence suggests that nickel is transported through NikABCDE as a metallophore (akin to a siderophore). Nickel storage is accomplished via the HPN protein, a histidinerich protein similar to metallothionein.
Addresses Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, 20 Penn Street, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland, 21201, USA Corresponding author: Michel, Sarah LJ (smichel@rx.umaryland.edu)

Nickel uptake in E. coli (NikABCDE)
E. coli requires high levels of nickel during anaerobic growth to sustain the needs of its Ni/Fe hydrogenases, which reversibly catalyze H2 oxidation [1,2]. The concentration of nickel ions in the environment is low -- estimated at 30 nM in seawater and 5 nM in freshwater, requiring highly specific importers of nickel [3]. In E. coli, the NikABCDE transporter, an ATP-binding cassette identified nearly two decades ago, serves at the main importer of nickel [1­6]. NikABCDE comprises five proteins: NikA is a periplasmic nickel-binding protein; NikB and NikC are integral inner membrane proteins; and NikD and NikE are membrane-associated proteins with intrinsic ATPase activity [2,7]. NikA is the initial nickel sensor and is also responsible for a negative chemotaxic response to high levels of nickel [4]. The affinity of NikA for nickel has been studied by several groups using fluorescence assays [4,8] and isothermal titration calorimetry [9] with Kd values that range from 10 nM to 10 mM reported. NikA with Ni2+ bound has proven to be difficult to structurally characterize, and the exact nature of the nickel-binding site is controversial. Recently, two crystal structures of metal-bound NikA have been reported -- one identifies a nickel pentahydrate (H2O)52+ in a hydrophobic pocket of the protein [9], whereas the second identifies an adventitious Fe(III)EDTA(H2O)À molecule in this same pocket [10]. Neither structure shows any direct metal to ligand coordination between the metal ion and the protein. These results suggest that NikA does not bind to metal ions directly, rather it binds to a metallophore, akin to the siderophores found in iron uptake proteins [11].

Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2006, 10:123­130 This review comes from a themed issue on Bioinorganic chemistry Edited by David M Dooley and Amy Rosenzweig Available online 28th February 2006 1367-5931/$ ­ see front matter # 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. DOI 10.1016/j.cbpa.2006.02.011

Introduction
Nickel is utilized by a variety of bacteria for function and survival. To date, nine microbial enzymes that require nickel have been identified, and there are several excellent review articles on these enzymes [1,2]. Although bacteria require nickel for enzymatic processes, high concentrations of nickel ions are toxic. As a result, bacteria have developed sophisticated mechanisms to regulate levels of intracellular nickel (reviewed in [2,3]). In recent years, a novel class of nickel regulatory proteins has been identified. These proteins, named NikRs, are transcription factors that repress and/or activate specific genes in response to nickel availability [2,3]. This review focuses on recent advances in our understanding of nickel homeostasis, and covers nickel uptake, nickel regulation and nickel storage proteins. In particular, we focus on nickel metalloregulation in two Gram-negative bacteria: Escherichia coli (Ec) and Helicobacter pylori (Hp) which represent paradigms for two distinct modes of nickel regulation.
www.sciencedirect.com

Regulation of the nikABCDE operon
The transcriptional regulation of the nikABCDE operon is a tightly coordinated process that is responsive to several biological cues including intracellular nickel concentration, oxygen tension and nitrate availability (summarized in Figure 1). The expression of nikABCDE is positively regulated by the fumarate nitrate regulatory protein (FNR) transcription factor when oxygen is absent [12] and negatively regulated by the NikR repressor when intracellular nickel levels are high [13,14]. Recently, an additional level of transcriptional control has been determined for the nikABCDE operon involving the nitrate responsive NarLX two-component system [15]. In the presence of nitrate (NO3À), NarL is phosphorylated by NarX and appears to repress the nikABCDE operon by binding a distinct operator site from that of NikR, and thus with a mechanism that is independent of NikRmediated repression [15].
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2006, 10:123­130

124 Bioinorganic chemistry

Figure 1

Schematic representation of nickel homeostasis in E. coli. Nickel enters the cell primarily through the ATP dependent nikABCDE transporter, and is required for the activity of enzymes such as hydrogenases and for the functioning of the NikR transcriptional regulator. The expression of nikABCDE is highly regulated and is switched on during anaerobic conditions through the oxygen-sensitive FNR transcription factor [12]. When intracellular nickel levels reach a threshold, nickel-bound NikR represses transcription of nikABCDE by binding to a clearly defined palindromic operator sequence [14,18,19]. A further independent means of transcriptional repression is mediated by NarL, part of the NarLX two-component system, which is responsive to nitrate levels [15]. An additional, as yet uncharacterized, nickel import pathway (depicted with a question mark) is thought to be responsible for specifically maintaining NikR activity [15].

Nickel uptake (EcNikR)
The E. coli NikR repressor, which has many bacterial and archaeal orthologues, is a 15 kDa protein with two distinct functional domains: an N-terminal DNA-binding domain, and a C-terminal nickel-binding domain [14]. The N-terminal DNA-binding domain is homologous to the ribbon-helix-helix family of transcription factors that includes Arc, CopG, Mnt and MetJ [16]. The NikR DNAbinding domain is homodimeric and is predicted to recognize operator DNA through a two-stranded antiparallel b-sheet [16]. The full-length NikR protein as well as the C-terminal domain are tetrameric in the presence or absence of nickel [17,18]. The nickel-binding and DNA-binding properties of NikR have been studied extensively in recent years. The current model emerging for NikR function involves a mechanism of differential DNA binding activity responsive to both intracellular nickel concentrations and nickel coordination geometry [14,17,18,19,20,21]. Metal binding studies have shown that nickel binds to NikR,
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2006, 10:123­130

at the C-terminus, with picomolar affinity (7­10 pM) [14,18,20]. Interestingly, EcNikR has similar affinities for other divalent metal ions including zinc, copper and cobalt, although nickel confers greater conformational stability to the complex [20,22]. High affinity nickel binding is a prerequisite for NikR's interaction with a palindromic operator sequence (GTATGA-16N-TCATAC) in the nikABCDE promoter, resulting in transcriptional repression of the operon [14,18]. Stoichiometric binding of nickel to the high affinity sites in NikR results in nanomolar binding to the nikABCDE promoter. Interestingly, when additional nickel is added to NikR, the affinity of NikR for its DNA binding partner increases to picomolar, suggesting that there is a second, low affinity site for nickel ions [14,18,19]. The affinity of this putative low-affinity NikR site for nickel was reported to have a micromolar Kd by Chivers and Sauer [18] and nanomolar Kd by Zamble and co-workers [19]. In addition, using DNase footprinting studies, Chivers and Sauer determined that the region of DNA that is protected when this second NikR site is occupied is larger than the
www.sciencedirect.com

Microbial nickel metalloregulation Dosanjh and Michel 125

region protected when only the high affinity NikR site is occupied [18]. Although the location of the low affinity nickel site in E. coli NikR is unknown, structural studies on a close NikR homolog in Pyrococcus horikoshii (Ph) have revealed a second nickel site located between two monomers of the protein [23]. The presence of two distinct nickel-binding sites with differing affinities for nickel leads to a question of biological relevance (i.e. under typical physiology which, if any, of the nickel sites are occupied?). Chivers and Sauer have estimated that the NikR intracellular concentration is at least 200 nM suggesting that, at the very least, the high affinity sites of NikR are saturated, and under physiological conditions the nikABCDE operon is predominantly occupied [18]. The presence of two distinct metal-binding sites in NikR allows for an attractive mechanism of nickel regulation where NikR is able to sense a wide range of nickel concentrations and effect transcription of nikABCDE appropriately. A recent study by Chivers and co-workers has shed further light on NikR's regulatory function within E. coli. Unexpectedly, NikR function does not appear to be dependent on nickel imported from the nikABCDE transporter, implying that a second, yet to be identified, nickel import pathway is involved in providing nickel for NikR [15]. Furthermore, NikR function is inhibited by one or more components of the hydrogenase assembly pathway, suggesting a nickel-independent mechanism of regulating NikR [15]. As well as metal affinity, the geometry of NikR is thought to dictate DNA affinity. The first structural studies of the nickel-binding site of NikR came from X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) experiments. Maroney and co-workers observed that the high affinity nickel site was square planar, which is a coordination geometry favored by Ni(II) but not by most other divalent metal ions [21]. On the basis of this observation, it was proposed that the proclivity of nickel for square planar geometry explains the protein's use of nickel in vivo. Extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) studies revealed that NikR utilizes three N(O) donors and one S-donor as ligands to bind to nickel. A subsequent crystal structure of just the C-terminus of E. coli NikR with nickel bound identified the metal-binding ligands as two histidines (His87, His89) and one cysteine (Cys95) from one monomer of the NikR tetramer and one histidine (His76) from another monomer of the NikR tetramer [17]. Surprisingly, X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) studies of NikR revealed that, upon binding of operator DNA, the coordination geometry at the nickel site changes to six-coordinate, high-spin Ni(II), with EXAFS analysis defining the ligands as six nitrogen and/or oxygen ligands [21]. The loss of coordination by a cysteine residue upon DNA binding is particularly interesting as this implies that a covalent bond is broken to afford DNA binding. These
www.sciencedirect.com

intriguing results imply that the two respective domains of NikR are allosterically linked, although the precise physiological role for this cross-talk has yet to be ascribed. Crystal structures of both EcNikR and PhNikR provide tantalizing clues regarding the mechanism of DNA recognition. Drennan and co-workers reported the X-ray structure of full length apo-EcNikR in 2003 [17]. In this structure, shown in Figure 2a, the protein folds with the metal-binding domains forming a central tetrameric core and the DNA-binding domains forming two dimeric
Figure 2

Structural conformations of NikR. Ribbon representations of the crystal structures for (a) apo-EcNikR [17], (b) the nickel-bound `open' form of PhNikR and (c) the nickel-bound `trans' form of PhNikR [23]. All structures show individual monomeric units colored in red, green, blue and yellow with the high and low affinity nickel ions shown as grey shaded spheres. The RCSB Protein Data Bank (PDB) accession codes for apo-EcNikR, nickel-bound `open' PhNikR, and nickel-bound `trans' PhNikR are 1Q5V, 2bj1 and 2bj8 respectively. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2006, 10:123­130

126 Bioinorganic chemistry

ribbon-helix-helix domains positioned outside the core. Typically, ribbon-helix-helix protein domains bind to operator DNA via the ribbon or anti-parallel b-sheet region. In the apo-EcNikR structure, the anti-parallel b-sheets are not positioned in the correct orientation to allow binding of the E. coli operator DNA sequence (GTATGA-16N-TCATAC), implying that NikR and its cognate DNA must undergo a conformational change to facilitate binding. In 2005, a series of structures of PhNikR were reported by Tahirov and co-workers [23]. These structures support Drennan and co-workers' suggestion of a DNA-induced conformational change within NikR. Two different nickel-bound structures -- one with a similar conformation to the apo-EcNikR structure and one in which the DNA-binding domains are shifted relative to each other in a `trans' conformation were reported (Figure 2b,c). The authors suggest that this trans-conformation may represent an intermediate NikR form, and propose that a cis-geometry is the optimal conformation for DNA binding (Figure 3) [23].

found to be comparatively small with respect to the genomes of other bacteria, including E. coli. The small size of the genome coupled with the bacteria's requirement to regulate multiple genes in response to environmental stressors was initially puzzling to researchers, but recent studies have revealed that some of the transcription factors found in H. pylori are pleiotropic, or capable of regulating multiple genes [27,28].

Nickel uptake in H. pylori (NixA)
Nickel import into H. pylori primarily occurs via a nickelcobalt transporter named NixA, which is a HoxN type permease [1]. NixA is required for effective H. pylori colonization; mice infected with a strain of H. pylori in which NixA has been knocked out show diminished H. pylori colonization [29]. This transporter has also been identified in other bacteria including, Ralstonia eutropha, Bradyrhizobium japoncum and Rhodobacter capsulatus (reviewed in [2]). NixA binds nickel and is predicted to fold into eight transmembrane helices [30,31]. The exact amino acids involved in nickel binding are not known, but twelve amino acids have been shown to be required for effective transport, including several aspartate and histidine residues, which are likely candidates for nickel-binding ligands [30,31]. An ABC-type transporter from H. pylori has been proposed as a second nickel transporter, but direct evidence of nickel import via this transporter has not been reported [32].

Nickel uptake and regulation in H. pylori
H. pylori is a human pathogen that resides in the acidic environment of the gastric epithelium. Colonization by H. pylori causes gastric ulcers in the short term and gastric adenocarcinoma and MALT (mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue) lymphoma in the long term [24]. The environment of the gastric epithelium is highly dynamic, subjecting H. pylori to both fluctuating pH levels and fluctuating metal ion levels (i.e. metals are liberated from ingested foods at low pH) [25]. To survive in this harsh environment, H. pylori has developed stress responses that are manifest in the regulation of specific genes. The genome of H. pylori was sequenced in 1997 [26] and was
Figure 3

Nickel regulation in H. pylori (NikR: a `master regulator')
An ortholog of EcNikR with 30% sequence identity (including the metal-binding ligands) and 68% sequence similarity is present in H. pylori [28,33]. From the

Schematic summary of the known or predicted conformations adopted by NikR. NikR is thought to exist in an equilibrium between three conformational states, a trans-, open or cis- DNA-binding domain (DBD) conformation. The `open' conformation has been observed in crystal structures of both apo-EcNikR and apo/holo-forms of PhNikR [17,23]. The trans- conformation has been observed for the holo-PhNikR. The potential for a cis-NikR form has been inferred by the observed conformational flexibility of the PhNikR DBD, and most likely represents the optimal conformation for DNA binding. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2006, 10:123­130 www.sciencedirect.com

Microbial nickel metalloregulation Dosanjh and Michel 127

sequence homology, HpNikR is predicted to have similar nickel-binding and DNA-binding domains to EcNikR; however, detailed biochemical and biophysical studies characterizing metal and DNA binding have not yet been reported. In the past three years, there have been numerous studies describing the microbiology of HpNikR. These studies, described below, reveal that HpNikR regulates several genes in response to nickel and possibly pH (Figure 4). One of the most abundant proteins found in H. pylori is the enzyme urease, which hydrolyzes urea to yield ammonia and carbamate [1,2]. The high concentration of urease protein in H. pylori is essential for the bacteria's ability to survive in the acidic environment of the gastric epithelium, with the ammonia produced by the urease serving to neutralize the effect of the gastric epithelium's low pH
Figure 4

[34]. Both urease expression and activity are stimulated by increased nickel levels -- when H. pylori is grown in media supplemented with nickel ions, expression of urease subunit proteins (UreA and UreB) increases 3.5fold, with a 12-fold increase in urease enzyme activity [35]. This increase in urease expression as a function of added nickel is dependent on NikR -- the inactivation of NikR by the insertion of a kanamycin-resistant gene results in a growth-restricted mutant strain of H. pylori that no longer exhibits nickel-responsive induction of urease expression [27,33]. A potential NikR operator binding site made up of a 19 base pair palindromic sequence, TTAAxTAATxATTAxTTAA, has been identified approximately 50 base pairs upstream of the UreA transcriptional start site [33]. Recent Northern hybridization and EMSA/DNase footprinting studies [36] provide further evidence for a role of H. pylori NikR as a

Schematic depiction of the central role for NikR in regulating nickel responsive gene expression in H. pylori. The urease operon, composed of the urease-encoding ureA/ and ureB genes, and the urease accessory genes I­H, is positively regulated by NikR in response to nickel, and the ArsRS two-component system in response to acidity. The light blue oval depicts the NikR operator binding site [33,36] with the dark blue ovals indicating the operator sites of the ArsR response regulator mapped by Pflock et al.. [40]. Nickel, imported mainly through the NixA transporter, is required as a co-factor by urease to catalyse the formation of ammonia and bicarbonate from urea. NikR autorepresses nikR­nadD expression and represses genes involved in ferric uptake (exb, exbD and tonB) by binding to an intergenic operator site [27]. Further genes are also subject to regulation by NikR including fur, nixA and hpn [27]. www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2006, 10:123­130

128 Bioinorganic chemistry

transcriptional activator of urease that is regulated by intracellular nickel levels. Studies using transcriptome and slot-blot analysis have shown that, in addition to urease, NikR regulates the transcription of many other genes as a function of nickel availability, leading to the proposition that HpNikR is a `global regulator' of gene expression [27]. The genes that are upregulated by HpNikR are primarily involved in nickel metabolism (e.g. nixA, hpn and hpn-like), whereas the genes that are downregulated range from those involved in iron uptake and storage (e.g. pfr, fur, exbB/ exbD), those involved in motility (e.g. cheV, flaA, flab), those involved in stress responses (e.g. hrcA-grpE-dnaK) to genes involved in encoding outer membrane proteins (e.g. omp11, omp31, opm 32) [27]. For the most part, it is not known whether the transcriptional regulation of these genes by NikR is mediated directly or through an accessory pathway or transcription factor. Gel shift and b-galactosidase assays have been reported for a transcriptionally repressive association of HpNikR with an intergenic DNA sequence found between the nikR-nadD and exbB/exbD divergent operon, implying that H. pylori NikR autorepresses nikR-nadD expression and genes involved in iron uptake. Specifically, NikR recognizes a GCATGA-16X-TCATGC palindrome, which is nearly identical to EcNikR's operator sequence [27]. Recent studies by van Vliet and co-workers have confirmed that NixA is subject to direct transcriptional regulation by HpNikR, through an identified binding site in the NixA promoter [36]. NikR was shown to repress NixA transcription in a nickel-dependent manner by binding to sequences overlapping the À10 to +1 region of the NixA promoter. The repressive role for NikR in NixA regulation is in stark contrast to that reported by the Labigne and coworkers transcriptome study, where NixA was originally identified as one of several genes upregulated by NikR [27]. NikR also directly regulates urease expression, and it is of interest to note that the NikR-binding site in the UreA promoter, where NikR functions as an activator of transcription, is found upstream of the canonical s80 binding motifs [33,37,38]. Thus, it appears that HpNikR's ability to function as an activator or repressor of transcription is largely influenced by the location of its target operator binding site (see also update). The role of H. pylori NikR in response to acidity is one of some contention. Under moderately low acidity (pH 5­ 5.5) three ammonia-producing enzymes -- urease, amidase and formamidase -- are up-regulated [25,39]. In isogenic nikR mutants, the pH-dependent up-regulation of amidase and formamidase does not occur, suggesting that NikR regulates these genes as a function of pH [25,39]. Indirect evidence has also led to the suggestion that NikR regulates urease at low pH by sensing the increased bioavailability of nickel under acidic conditions
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2006, 10:123­130

[28,39]. Recent studies by Beier and co-workers, however, dispute the hypothesis that NikR is the primary regulator of H. pylori acid adaptation. Instead, they identify a two-component system named ArsRS (acid responsive signaling) that, when phosphorylated, regulates urease expression in response to low pH. The target sequence for ArsR is upstream of the UreA promoter (À21 to À74) and has some overlap with the proposed target sequence for NikR. Thus, Beier and co-workers propose that urease expression is mediated by two distinct mechanisms -- one in response to increasing nickel concentrations (NikR) and one in response to decreasing pH (ArsR) [40].

Nickel storage protein (HPN)
H. pylori contains a histidine-rich cytoplasmic protein called HPN that functions to store nickel ions and bears some similarities to the metal storage protein metallothionein [41]. NikR up-regulates HPN in response to nickel, suggesting that HPN expression is part of a coordinated response to nickel by H. pylori. HPN, a 60-residue histidine-rich protein, is present in solution as a multimer and exhibits changes in a-helical and b-sheet secondary structural content upon binding nickel. ICP-MS and UVvisible titrations revealed that each HPN monomer binds five nickel ions with a Kd of 7.1 mM. A pH titration revealed that when the pH is dropped below 6.8, the affinity of HPN for nickel ions decreases. Similarly, nickel can be removed from HPN by addition of EDTA, demonstrating that nickel binding is reversible [41]. The geometry and specific residues involved in nickel binding have yet to be determined. Together, these results suggest HPN may be a storage site for nickel, releasing nickel when the organism requires increased bioavailability. The retention and storage of nickel through HPN is a feature that distinguishes nickel metabolism in H. pylori from that of E. coli and indeed most other bacteria that only transport the required nickel quota from the extracellular environment when needed.

Conclusions
An emerging theme in metallobiochemistry is that metal uptake and homeostasis is a highly regulated process [42]. A key recent finding in the nickel metallobiochemistry of bacteria has been the identification and characterization of NikR proteins as nickel-dependent transcription factors. These proteins regulate the transcription of specific genes in response to nickel ion concentrations, utilizing a combination of allostery and coordination geometry. As such, nickel regulation bears striking similarity to the regulation of other metal ions in prokaryotes (see [43­ 45]). In addition, although NikR proteins of E. coli and H. pylori have highly conserved sequence homology, the specific genes that they regulate differ. This divergence in regulation between species suggests that specific bacteria have evolved to tailor their nickel regulatory pathways to meet their specific needs.
www.sciencedirect.com

Microbial nickel metalloregulation Dosanjh and Michel 129

A better understanding of how specific bacteria regulate nickel has relevance for the design of therapeutics. Humans do not utilize nickel for major metabolic processes, and nickel is generally viewed as a toxic/carcinogenic metal [46,47]. The disparate requirement for nickel between eukaryotes and prokaryotes coupled with the distinct uses of nickel by specific prokaryotes makes nickel-containing proteins and/or enzymes an attractive target for the development of antimicrobial drugs.

The first X-ray structure of NikA is described. Surprisingly, nickel is not directly coordinated to the protein and is instead described as nickelpentahydrate in a hydrophobic pocket formed by the protein. 10. Cherrier MV, Martin L, Cavazza C, Jacquamet L, Lemaire D,  Gaillard J, Fontecilla Camps JC: Crystallographic and spectroscopic evidence for high affinity binding of FeEDTA(H2O)S to the periplasmic nickel transporter NikA. J Am Chem Soc 2005, 127:10075-10082. An X-ray structure of FeEDTA(H2O)À bound to NikA is reported. Contrary to the findings of Heddle et al. [9], an adventitious FeEDTA(H2O)À complex associated with NikA is reported. The authors propose that nickel will bind to NikA in a similar type of metallophore complex. 11. Wandersman C, Delepelaire P: Bacterial iron sources: from siderophores to hemophores. Annu Rev Microbiol 2004, 58:611-647. 12. Wu LF, Mandrand-Berthelot MA, Waugh R, Edmonds CJ, Holt SE, Boxer DH: Nickel deficiency gives rise to the defective hydrogenase phenotype of hydC and fnr mutants in Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 1989, 3:1709-1718. 13. de Pina K, Desjardin V, Mandrand-Berthelot MA, Giordano G, Wu LF: Isolation and characterization of the nikR gene encoding a nickel-responsive regulator in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 1999, 181:670-674. 14. Chivers PT, Sauer RT: Regulation of high affinity nickel uptake in bacteria. Ni2+ Dependent interaction of NikR with wild-type and mutant operator sites. J Biol Chem 2000, 275:19735-19741. 15. Rowe JL, Starnes GL, Chivers PT: Complex transcriptional  control links NikABCDE-dependent nickel transport with hydrogenase expression in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 2005, 187:6317-6323. NikABCDE expression is shown to be affected by the concentration of hydrogenase assembly proteins and by the level of nitrate. Intriguingly, the authors also report that NikR activity is not dependent on nickel ions imported by NikABCDE, and propose the existence of a second transporter in E. coli. 16. Chivers PT, Sauer RT: NikR is a ribbon-helix-helix DNA-binding protein. Protein Sci 1999, 8:2494-2500. 17. Schreiter ER, Sintchak MD, Guo Y, Chivers PT, Sauer RT,  Drennan CL: Crystal structure of the nickel-responsive transcription factor NikR. Nat Struct Biol 2003, 10:794-799. The first X-ray structures of NikR are reported. The putative DNA-binding domains fold as ribbon-helix-helix domains, as predicted, but are not positioned appropriately to bind to NikR's cognate DNA. The authors suggest that, upon DNA binding, a large conformational change of the NikR protein and DNA occurs. 18. Chivers PT, Sauer RT: NikR repressor: high-affinity nickel binding to the C terminal domain regulates binding to operator DNA. Chem Biol 2002, 9:1141-1148. 19. Bloom SL, Zamble DB: Metal-selective DNA-binding  response of Escherichia coli NikR. Biochemistry 2004, 43:10029-10038. The metal selectivity of NikR­DNA binding is assessed and shown to be independent of metal ion when only the high-affinity metal site is occupied. When the low-affinity metal binding site is occupied, however, a preference for Ni(II) over Cu(II), Mn(II), Cd(II) and Co(II) is observed. 20. Wang SC, Dias AV, Bloom SL, Zamble DB: Selectivity of metal  binding and metal-induced stability of Escherichia coli NikR. Biochemistry 2004, 43:10018-10028. The affinities of a series of divalent metal ions for NikR are reported. Nickel binds to NikR with picomolar affinity (matching values reported in [18]). 21. Carrington PE, Chivers PT, Al-Mjeni F, Sauer RT, Maroney MJ:  Nickel coordination is regulated by the DNA-bound state of NikR. Nat Struct Biol 2003, 10:126-130. X-ray absorption studies (XAS) determine that Ni binds to NikR via three N(O) and one S donor ligands in a square planar geometry. Surprisingly, upon addition of cognate DNA, the nickel site changes to a six-coordinate site with six N(O) ligands. The authors propose that there is cross-talk between the N-terminal DNA site and the C-terminal Ni-binding site. 22. Dias AV, Zamble DB: Protease digestion analysis of Escherichia coli NikR: evidence for conformational stabilization with Ni(II). J Biol Inorg Chem 2005, 10:605-612. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2006, 10:123­130

Update
Recent studies have shown that HpNikR is a tetrameric protein that binds stoichiometric nickel with similar affinities to that deduced for EcNikR [48,49]. The nickel-responsive binding of HPNikR to target promoters pUreA, pNikR, pexbB and pFur have been characterized by in vitro gel shift and DNase I footprinting studies. It is of interest to note that NikR and Fur (ferric uptake regulator) appear to co-regulate some of these genes through independent and overlapping operator binding sites, suggesting a link between iron and nickel metabolism in H. pylori [49].

Acknowledgements
We thank Dr Robert diTargiani for help with figures and for useful discussions, and the University of Maryland Baltimore for financial support.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:  of special interest  of outstanding interest 1. 2. 3. 4. Maroney MJ: Structure/function relationships in nickel metallobiochemistry. Curr Opin Chem Biol 1999, 3:188-199. Mulrooney SB, Hausinger RP: Nickel uptake and utilization by microorganisms. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2003, 27:239-261. Eitinger T, Mandrand-Berthelot MA: Nickel transport systems in microorganisms. Arch Microbiol 2000, 173:1-9. de Pina K, Navarro C, McWalter L, Boxer DH, Price NC, Kelly SM, Mandrand Berthelot MA, Wu LF: Purification and characterization of the periplasmic nickel binding protein NikA of Escherichia coli K12. Eur J Biochem 1995, 227:857-865. Eitinger T, Friedrich B: Microbial nickel transport and incorporation into hydrogenases. In Transition Metals in Microbial Metabolism. Edited by Winkelman G, Carrano C. Harwood Academic Publishers; 1997:235-256. Wu LF, Mandrand-Berthelot MA: Genetic and physiological characterization of new Escherichia coli mutants impaired in hydrogenase activity. Biochimie 1986, 68:167-179. Navarro C, Wu LF, Mandrand-Berthelot MA: The nik operon of Escherichia coli encodes a periplasmic binding-proteindependent transport system for nickel. Mol Microbiol 1993, 9:1181-1191. Salins LL, Goldsmith ES, Ensor CM, Daunert S: A fluorescencebased sensing system for the environmental monitoring of nickel using the nickel binding protein from Escherichia coli. Anal Bioanal Chem 2002, 372:174-180. Heddle J, Scott DJ, Unzai S, Park SY, Tame JR: Crystal structures of the liganded and unliganded nickel-binding protein NikA from Escherichia coli. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:50322-50329.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9. 

www.sciencedirect.com

130 Bioinorganic chemistry

23. Chivers PT, Tahirov TH: Structure of Pyrococcus horikoshii  NikR: nickel sensing and implications for the regulation of DNA recognition. J Mol Biol 2005, 348:597-607. Several X-ray structures of PhNikR are presented and a shift in the Nterminal, ribbon-helix-helix DNA binding domains is observed for one of the nickel bound structures. The authors propose a mechanism for DNA binding based upon this domain shift. In addition, a second nickel binding site is identified. 24. Blaser MJ, Atherton JC: Helicobacter pylori persistence: biology and disease. J Clin Invest 2004, 113:321-333. 25. Bury-Mone S, Thiberge JM, Contreras M, Maitournam A,  Labigne A, De Reuse H: Responsiveness to acidity via metal ion regulators mediates virulence in the gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori. Mol Microbiol 2004, 53:623-638. A transcriptional profiling study of H. pylori genes implicates NikR in the acid-response of H. pylori. A mouse model in which the mouse is infected with a nikR mutant of H. pylori exhibits decreased colonization of H. pylori. 26. Tomb JF, White O, Kerlavage AR, Clayton RA, Sutton GG, Fleischmann RD, Ketchum KA, Klenk HP, Gill S, Dougherty BA et al.: The complete genome sequence of the gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori. Nature 1997, 388:539-547. 27. Contreras M, Thiberge JM, Mandrand-Berthelot MA, Labigne A:  Characterization of the roles of NikR, a nickel-responsive pleiotropic autoregulator of Helicobacter pylori. Mol Microbiol 2003, 49:947-963. The authors categorize several genes that are up or down regulated by NikR in response to nickel using DNA macroarrays. 28. van Vliet AH, Ernst FD, Kusters JG: NikR-mediated regulation of  Helicobacter pylori acid adaptation. Trends Microbiol 2004, 12:489-494. A review of HpNikR in which HpNikR is proposed to be a `master regulator' of gene expression. 29. Nolan KJ, McGee DJ, Mitchell HM, Kolesnikow T, Harro JM, O'Rourke J, Wilson JE, Danon SJ, Moss ND, Mobley HL et al.: In vivo behavior of a Helicobacter pylori SS1 nixA mutant with reduced urease activity. Infect Immun 2002, 70:685-691. 30. Fulkerson JF Jr, Garner RM, Mobley HLT: Conserved residues and motifs in the NixA protein of Helicobacter pylori are critical for the high affinity transport of nickel ions. J Biol Chem 1998, 273:235-241. 31. Wolfram L, Bauerfeind P: Conserved low-affinity nickel-binding amino acids are essential for the function of the nickel permease NixA of Helicobacter pylori. J Bacteriol 2002, 184:1438-1443. 32. Hendricks JK, Mobley HLT: Helicobacter pylori ABC transporter: effect of allelic exchange mutagenesis on urease activity. J Bacteriol 1997, 179:5892-5902. 33. van Vliet AH, Poppelaars SW, Davies BJ, Stoof J, Bereswill S, Kist M, Penn CW, Kuipers EJ, Kusters JG: NikR mediates nickel-responsive transcriptional induction of urease expression in Helicobacter pylori. Infect Immun 2002, 70:2846-2852. 34. Sachs G, Scott DR, Weeks DL, Rektorscheck M, Melchers K: Regulation of urease for acid habitation. In Helicobacter pylori: Physiology and Genetics. Edited by Mobley HLT, Mendz GL, Hazell SL. ASM Press; 2001:277-283. 35. van Vliet AH, Kuipers EJ, Waidner B, Davies BJ, de Vries N, Penn CW, Vandenbroucke-Grauls CM, Kist M, Bereswill S, Kusters JG: Nickel-responsive induction of urease expression

in Helicobacter pylori is mediated at the transcriptional level. Infect Immun 2001, 69:4891-4897. 36. Ernst FD, Kuipers EJ, Heijens A, Sarwari R, Stoof J, Penn CW,  Kusters JG, van Vliet AH: The nickel-responsive regulator NikR controls activation and repression of gene transcription in Helicobacter pylori. Infect Immun 2005, 73:7252-7258. HpNikR is shown to directly activate ureA and repress nixA by binding to the promoter sequences as a function of nickel concentration. 37. Shirai M, Fujinaga R, Akada JK, Nakazawa T: Activation of Helicobacter pylori ureA promoter by a hybrid Escherichia coli-H. pylori rpoD gene in E. coli. Gene 1999, 239:351-359. 38. Davies BJ, de Vries N, Rijpkema SG, van Vliet AH, Penn CW: Transcriptional and mutational analysis of the Helicobacter pylori urease promoter. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2002, 213:27-32. 39. van Vliet AH, Kuipers EJ, Stoof J, Poppelaars SW, Kusters JG: Acid-responsive gene induction of ammonia-producing enzymes in Helicobacter pylori is mediated via a metalresponsive repressor cascade. Infect Immun 2004, 72:766-773. 40. Pflock M, Kennard S, Delany I, Scarlato V, Beier D: Acid-induced activation of the urease promoters is mediated directly by the ArsRS two-component system of Helicobacter pylori. Infect Immun 2005, 73:6437-6445. 41. Ge R, Watt RM, Sun X, Tanner JA, He QY, Huang JD, Sun H:  Expression and characterization of the histidine-rich protein, Hpn: potential for nickel storage in Helicobacter pylori. Biochem J 2006, 393(Pt 1):285-293. The nickel binding and oligomeric properties of HPN are presented. 42. Finney LA, O'Halloran TV: Transition metal speciation in the cell: insights from the chemistry of metal ion receptors. Science 2003, 300:931-936. 43. Busenlehner LS, Pennella MA, Giedroc DP: The SmtB/ArsR family of metalloregulatory transcriptional repressors: structural insights into prokaryotic metal resistance. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2003, 27:131-143. 44. Pennella MA, Giedroc DP: Structural determinants of metal selectivity in prokaryotic metal-responsive transcriptional regulators. Biometals 2005, 18:413-428. 45. Pennella MA, Shokes JE, Cosper NJ, Scott RA, Giedroc DP: Structural elements of metal selectivity in metal sensor proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:3713-3718. 46. Cavani A: Breaking tolerance to nickel. Toxicology 2005, 209:119-121. 47. Valko M, Morris H, Cronin MT: Metals, toxicity and oxidative stress. Curr Med Chem 2005, 12:1161-1208. 48. Abraham LO, Li Y, Zamble DB: The metal- and DNA-binding  activities of Helicobacter pylori NikR. J Inorg Biochem 200510.1016/j.jinorgbio.2005.10.014. The affinity of nickel for HPNikR is reported to be picomolar, matching values reported for nickel binding to ECNikR [18,20]. Ni-bound HPNikR is shown to directly bind to sequences from the promoter regions of UreA and NikR. 49. Delany I, Ieva R, Soragni A, Hilleringmann M, Rappuoli R,  Scarlato V: In vitro analysis of protein-operator interactions of the NikR and Fur metal-responsive regulators of coregulated genes in Helicobacter pylori. J Bacteriol 2005, 187:7703-7715. HPNikR is shown to be tetrameric and to bind to sequences from the promoter regions of exbB, nikR, UreA and Fur. In addition, a connection between HPNikR and HPFur gene regulation is observed.

Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2006, 10:123­130

www.sciencedirect.com

