Chemico-Biological Interactions 175 (2008) 150­155

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Chemico-Biological Interactions
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/chembioint

Characterization of the solution structure of a neuroligin/ -neurexin complex
Davide Comoletti a, , Alexander Grishaev b , Andrew E. Whitten c , Palmer Taylor a , Jill Trewhella d,e
a

Department of Pharmacology, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0650, United States b National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States c Bragg Institute, Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation, NSW 2234, Australia d School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia e Department of Chemistry, University of Utah, UT 84112, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t
Neuroligins are post-synaptic cell adhesion molecules that promote synaptic maturation and stabilization upon binding with pre-synaptic partners, the - and -neurexins. Using a combination of analytical ultracentrifugation, small angle X-ray, and neutron scattering, we have characterized the low-resolution three-dimensional structure of the extracellular domain of the neuroligins, free in solution, and in complex with -neurexin. The globular extracellular domain of the neuroligins forms stable homodimers through a four-helix bundle typical of the cholinesterases and other members of the / -hydrolase fold family. The presence of the stalk region adds to the extracellular domain of neuroligin-1 an elongated structure, suggesting a rod-like nature of the stalk domain. Sedimentation equilibrium coupled with solution scattering data of the -neurexin/neuroligin-1 complex indicated a 2:2 stoichiometry where two -neurexin molecules bind to a neuroligin-1 dimer. Deuteration of neurexin allowed us to collect neutron scattering data that, in combination with other biochemical techniques, provide a basis for optimizing the positioning of each component in a detailed computational model of the neuroligin/neurexin complex. As several mutations of both neurexin and neuroligin genes have been linked to autism spectrum disorders and mental retardation, these new structures provide an important framework for the study of altered structure and function of these synaptic proteins. © 2008 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

Article history: Available online 4 May 2008 Keywords: Synaptic adhesion molecules Neuroligin Neurexin SAXS

1. Introduction Autism is a heterogeneous spectrum of disorders, and research into its biological and genetic basis is still in its infancy. The genetics underlying autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are complex, involving multiple genetic variants,

Abbreviations: ASD, autism spectral disorders; NL, neuroligin; NX , -neurexin.  Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 858 534 6842; fax: +1 858 534 8248. E-mail address: dcomolet@ucsd.edu (D. Comoletti). 0009-2797/$ ­ see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.cbi.2008.04.040

and multigenic interactions. Two major limitations prevail in understanding the pathogenesis of the ASD. First, the absence of a defined quantitative marker or gene product ascribed to the disorder makes the diagnosis of the disorder subjective, relying on rating scales and diagnostic checklists. Second, owing to the complicated nature of the human social behavior, animal models may not always be suitable surrogates for studying the disease. Therefore, much of what we know about the neurobiology of autism has been derived from clinical research on affected children or by postmortem analysis of brains of autistic individuals. Given these constraints, basic neuroscience research

D. Comoletti et al. / Chemico-Biological Interactions 175 (2008) 150­155

151

may ultimately provide crucial information to understand etiologic and pathophysiologic mechanisms. Since the first study showing a linkage in a twin sets between the incidence of the ASD and mutations in the NLGN3 and 4 genes, several structural variants (including point mutations, truncations, and exon deletions) of the coding regions of neurexin (NX) and neuroligin (NL) were found to be associated with ASD and mental retardation [1­7]. Emerging evidence also indicates that rare variations in copy number and common variations within the genes encoding NX-1 and NX-3 contribute to ASD susceptibility [8,9]. Although the frequency of these individual mutations in the overall autistic population is probably low, these findings point to adhesion proteins or their associating partners as being important contributory gene products to autism and mental retardation. Predictably, associations are now emerging between autism and proteins known to associate intracellularly with NL, such as Shank3 [10]. In humans, the neuroligins compose a family of transmembrane proteins composed of an N-linked glycosylated extracellular domain with strong sequence homology to acetylcholinesterase containing two sites of alternative splicing and a Ser-Thr rich stalk domain that carries Nand O-linked oligosaccharides. This domain connects the above globular domain to a single transmembrane spanning domain and a small intracellular C-terminal domain probably lacking a defined structure, but containing a PDZ recognition domain. The neuroligins bind in vitro to both NX and NX in a Ca2+ dependent fashion. Neurexins compose a family of neuronal proteins with three genes (neurexins 1 through 3) driven by two promoters ( and ), resulting in the expression of at least six principal NX forms. Extensive alternative mRNA splicing confers additional complexity to the possible gene products [11]. The atomic structures of the second and sixth LNS domain of the NX have recently been solved [12,13]; however, no structural information on the arrangement of the entire extracellular domain is available. The inhibitory role of the glycosylation carried by splice insert B in NL1 was extensively studied in both NX and NX [14,15]. More recently it was established that splice insert B has an even larger effect on the association than glycosylation alone [16­18]. Viewed together, these data show a three-component hierarchical mechanism that could be specifically modulated by cell type and developmental stage: (1) NX and NL gene selection, (2) the splicing options afforded by both NXs and NLs, and (3) posttranslational N-linked glycosylation of splice insert B in NL1 that negatively regulates both NX and NX affinities. We report here the results of small-angle solution scattering experiments on the extracellular domains of the neuroligins and the complex formed between NL1 and NX . X-ray scattering data provide overall shape information on the extracellular domains of the NLs and the initial structural definition of the O-linked glycosylated domain linking the extracellular domain to the transmembrane span. We also use the X-ray scattering data to refine our homology model for the NL1 dimer. A combination of X-ray scattering and neutron contrast variation data with ab initio and rigid body modeling has yielded a structural model of

the extracellular domain of NL1 in complex with NX [19]. Our model is presented in relation to the synaptic disposition of the complex, and while of inherently low resolution, it provides an important structural framework for linking genetic information on mutated neurexins and neuroligins with neuro-developmental disorders. 2. Results 2.1. The extracellular domain of the neuroligins belongs to the /-hydrolase fold family of proteins It was previously shown that the NLs behave as dimmers [14,16,20]. The extracellular domain of NL1, lacking both splice inserts A and B, was truncated following the / -hydrolase fold domain at residue 638 (NL1638- (A&B)). Using small-angle X-ray scattering data in combination with homology modeling, we first determined a three-dimensional structural model of the dimeric acetylcholinesterase-like domain for NL1 in solution. The scattering data can provide accurate and precise structural parameters that relate to the overall shape of the scattering object, as well as information on the domain or subunit dispositions within that shape. Under dilute solution conditions in which the scattering molecules are mono-disperse and identical, one can determine the molecular volume (which for proteins is generally proportional to molecular weight), radius of gyration, Rg , vector length distribution function, P(r), and the maximum linear dimension Dmax . Once these basic structural parameters are obtained, threedimensional shape reconstruction of the protein of interest can be performed. If there are reliable homology models, crystal structure or NMR data available on domains or components of the molecule or complex, rigid body modeling can be used to develop a structural model that best fits the scattering data and incorporates the know structural components [28]. The distribution of the distances between scattering centers (i.e. atoms) in the protein molecule (P(r)) that is obtained as a Fourier transform of the scattering data reflects the molecular shape and allows calculation of the global descriptors such as the radius of gyration, Rg , and the maximum dimension of the protein, Dmax . The P(r) profile for NL1-638- (A&B) gives values for Rg and Dmax of ° ° 42.5 ± 0.4 A and 130 A respectively, confirming that the NLs exist as dimers in solution, free of larger aggregates under our experimental conditions [19]. The zero angle scattering and volume estimates form the scattering data are consistent with the values estimated from the partial specific volume and the molecular weights determined from sequences and by mass spectrometry, respectively [16]. The solution scattering data further indicate that the stalk region connecting the globular domain of the NLs with their transmembrane domain is elongated and projects away from the globular domain [19]. The presence of oligosaccharides, combined with an abundance of Pro residues, presumably maintains the peptide chain in a semi-rigid, bottlebrush-like structure, as demonstrated in the P-selectin molecule and the T-cell co-receptor CD8 protein [21,22]. Shape restoration and rigid body modeling show that the dimerization surface of the NLs is located

152

D. Comoletti et al. / Chemico-Biological Interactions 175 (2008) 150­155

Fig. 1. Equilibrium ultracentrifugation analysis of NL1 and NL1/NX complex. Left panel, the extracellular domain of NX appears monomeric in solution (sequence based MW = 24,770 Da). Center panel, the glycosylated extracellular domain of NL1 is a dimer in solution (sequence based MW = 135,000 Da). Right panel, a 2:2 molar mixture of NX and NL1 was ran at equilibrium (sequence based MW of the complex = 184,000 Da). The extracted molecular mass indicates that the stoichiometry of the complex is compatible with a 2:2 assembly. Raw data are shown as circles; solid line is the best fit. The distribution of the residuals of the best fit is shown above.

at a characteristic 4-helix bundle, similarly to what was found in the crystal structure of Torpedo Californica AChE [23] and in the crystal structures of mouse AChE lacking a Cterminal cysteine [24]. As expected from the high sequence identities among the NLs, our scattering data show that the extracellular domains of NL2, 3 and 4 are similar in overall shape and dimensions, supporting the notion that they share a common fold and dimerize at similar surfaces [19]. 2.2. Sedimentation equilibrium allows the determination of the oligomeric state of the neuroligins and the NX/NL complex stoichiometry Analytical ultracentrifugation involves the combination of sedimentation velocity (SV) and sedimentation equilibrium (SE) analyses. As SV can give information on the mass and shape of the macromolecular species, and SE is sensitive only to the mass of the particle, these measurements provide complementary information. SE analysis was used to determine that whereas the extracellular domain of NX is monomeric in solution at concentrations <0.5 mg/ml, NL1 is an extremely stable dimer virtually devoid of free monomer even at low concentrations (Fig. 1) [16]. To further characterize the association of NX with neuroligins, we conducted sedimentation equilibrium experiments of NL1 mixed with NX in the presence of 2 mM Ca2+ . These experiments enabled us to calculate a molecular mass consistent with the formation of a tight complex in a 2:2 stoichiometry (Fig. 1) [16]. 2.3. Two NX monomers associate with NL1 at opposite sides of the long axis of the NL1 dimer Surface plasmon resonance refractivity measurements were used to quantify the association between NL1 and NX [16]. Removal of splice insert B in NL1 led to a 9-fold increase in affinity with respect to the wild-type NL1 protein. These data indicate that splice insert B exerts a strong

inhibitory influence on the NX binding suggesting that the focal point of the NL surface binding for NX is in the vicinity of this alternative splice sequence B [16]. Small angle X-ray scattering was employed to characterize complex formation between NL1-638- (A&B) and NX . The P(r) analysis of these data yielded Rg and Dmax ° ° values of 48.7 ± 0.9 A and 150 A, respectively, an increase ° of 20 A in maximum dimension compared to the free NL1638- (A&B). This increase, in combination with a marked change in the shape of the P(r) profile also indicates that the added mass of NX sits at the periphery of each NL1 monomer, distant from both the center of mass and the dimer axis of symmetry [19]. To determine the positions of the NX subunits relative to the NL1 dimer, deuterated NX was prepared and stoichiometric amounts of deuterated NX were combined with protonated NL1-638- (A&B) in the presence of 2 mM Ca2+ . By acquiring neutron scattering data from the complex in 42% D2 O solution, the protonated NL1 subunits were effectively "solvent-matched". In these conditions, the scattering from the deuterated NX dominates the signal, allowing for direct measurement of the relative position of the NX units [19]. The combined Xray and neutron scattering data provide the approximate binding locations for the NX subunits and the separation between their centers of mass; a powerful set of restraints for refining a low resolution structure of the complex. Ab initio shape restoration from the X-ray scattering data from the complex gives a shape that shows two clearly recognizable protrusions from the basic NL1 dimer shape with their approximate separation corresponding to the values determined for the bound NX molecules in the neutron solvent matching experiment [19]. In laminin-neurexin-sex hormone binding globulin (LNS) domains, the metal binding pocket is located at the rim of the -sheet sandwich opposite the N- and C-termini [12] and alanine mutations of D137 and N238, residing on this rim, lack synaptogenic activity [17], possibly participating in the binding of Ca2+ . On the NL1 surface, mapping NX binding determinants

D. Comoletti et al. / Chemico-Biological Interactions 175 (2008) 150­155

153

ments versus the crystallographic result may be due to some dynamic variability in the relative orientations of neurexin in the complex. The formation of a highly dynamic complex could be crucial for the signaling mechanism at the synapse. 3. Conclusions Using small angle solution scattering we described the first low resolution, three-dimensional structure of the AChE-like domain of the NLs, showing that all four NLs have similar overall shapes and dimensions. The stalk region connecting the globular domain of the NLs with their transmembrane domain is elongated and projects away from the globular domain. Using the newly determined NL1 structure, and complementing our X-ray data with neutron contrast variation data from a complex of protonated NL1 and a deuterated NX , we determined the first three dimensional structural model of NL1 in complex with NX . The combination of X-ray scattering with neutron contrast variation, sequence analysis, modeling, biochemical and mutagenesis data has allowed us to put forward a model of the NX and NL complex in the synaptic space (Fig. 2) [19]. Our study provides an important framework for analyzing disposition of these molecules within the synaptic space and for linking genetic information on mutated NXs and NLs with neuro-developmental disorders such as autism. 4. Experimental procedures 4.1. Expression vectors and mutagenesis Soluble FLAG-NL1 to NL4 plasmids devoid of both transmembrane and intracellular domains were engineered as described previously [16]. NL1-638 was also engineered with (NL1-638) and without splice inserts A and B (NL1-638- (A&B)). All mutations were obtained using the Quickchange Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene, San Diego, CA) and verified by both restriction digests and DNA sequencing. Preparation of the GST-cleavable NX construct was described elsewhere [16]. 4.2. Neuroligin and neurexin expression and purification To purify each soluble NL, M2 anti-FLAG-affinity column (Sigma) was used [14]. Samples were concentrated by micro filtration and separated in analytical gel filtration and SDSPAGE gels and stained with Coomassie to check for purity and absence of degradation products. For neutron scattering experiments, deuterated NX was expressed in BL21 E. coli (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) using Spectra 9 deuterated media (Spectragases, Branchburg, NJ) and purified as described previously [16,19]. 4.3. Initial topology modeling of the neuroligins Structural models of the extracellular domain of the NLs were generated with the programs Homology and InsightII

Fig. 2. Model of the NL1/NX assembly in the synapse. The NX/NL complex is tethered at the synaptic membranes through their respective O-linked glycosylated regions. NL1 is displayed as green ribbon and is tethered to the post-synaptic membrane, whereas NX is displayed as red ribbon and is tethered to the pre-synapse.

revealed that the region flanking splice insert B (including E297 and K306) (14­16) is the focal point for NX binding. Therefore, initial placement of the NX subunits relative to the NL1-638- (A&B) dimer was done to best-fit the low-resolution density reconstruction of the complex and according to known biochemical constraints [14­17]. The final calculation produced a structure in which the NX monomers are positioned in agreement with the available mutagenesis data [16,17] and the C-termini of the NL1 and NX subunits facing opposite directions, consistent with the complex bridging pre- and post-synaptic surfaces [19]. High resolution crystal structures of NL4, free in solution and in complex with NX , have recently been solved [25]. Comparative analysis of the low resolution structures obtained by SAXS with the high resolution structure of NL4 confirms that the / -hydrolase fold and the reciprocal orientation of the two NL monomers were accurately predicted. Moreover, the crystal structure of the NL/NX complex reveals that the binding surface of NX and the relative positioning of the NX monomer (with its -strands sandwich oriented perpendicularly to the NL dimer) on the NL dimer are virtually identical in the high and low resolution structures. In the crystal structure only the orientation of NX differs slightly from the assignment obtained with solution scattering techniques. The solution scattering data reflect the ensemble average solution of a structure, while crystallization would select the most stable interaction consistent with maintaining crystal contacts. The relatively small interaction area between the neuroligin and neurexin components raises the question as to whether the different orientation deduced from the solution scattering experi-

154

D. Comoletti et al. / Chemico-Biological Interactions 175 (2008) 150­155 [2] F. Laumonnier, F. Bonnet-Brilhault, M. Gomot, R. Blanc, A. David, M.P. Moizard, M. Raynaud, N. Ronce, E. Lemonnier, P. Calvas, B. Laudier, J. Chelly, J.P. Fryns, H.H. Ropers, B.C. Hamel, C. Andres, C. Barthelemy, C. Moraine, S. Briault, X-linked mental retardation and autism are associated with a mutation in the NLGN4 gene, a member of the neuroligin family, Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74 (2004) 552­557. [3] J. Yan, G. Oliveira, A. Coutinho, C. Yang, J. Feng, C. Katz, J. Sram, A. Bockholt, I.R. Jones, N. Craddock, E.H. Cook, A. Vicente, S.S. Sommer, Analysis of the neuroligin 3 and 4 genes in autism and other neuropsychiatric patients, Mol. Psychiatry 10 (2005) 329­332. [4] F. Blasi, E. Bacchelli, G. Pesaresi, S. Carone, A.J. Bailey, E. Maestrini, International Molecular Genetic Study of Autism Consortium (IMGSAC), Absence of coding mutations in the X-linked genes neuroligin 3 and neuroligin 4 in individuals with autism from the IMGSAC collection, Am. J. Med. Genet. B Neuropsychiatr. Genet. 141 (2006) 220­221. [5] Z. Talebizadeh, D.Y. Lam, M.F. Theodoro, D.C. Bittel, G.H. Lushington, M.G. Butler, Novel splice isoforms for NLGN3 and NLGN4 with possible implications in autism, J. Med. Genet. 43 (2006) e21. [6] J. Feng, R. Schroer, J. Yan, W. Song, C. Yang, A. Bockholt, E.H. Cook Jr., C. Skinner, C.E. Schwartz, S.S. Sommer, High frequency of neurexin 1beta signal peptide structural variants in patients with autism, Neurosci. Lett. 409 (2006) 10­13. [7] S. Chocholska, E. Rossier, G. Barbi, H. Kehrer-Sawatzki, Molecular cytogenetic analysis of a familial interstitial deletion Xp22.2-22.3 with a highly variable phenotype in female carriers, Am. J. Med. Genet. A 140 (2006) 604­610. [8] J.A. Duvall, J.L. Stone, R.M. Cantor, S.F. Nelson, D.H. Geschwind, Independent replication of autism association in several neuronal connectivity genes [abstract 1652], Presented at the annual meeting of The American Society of Human Genetics, New Orleans, Louisiana, October 2006 (http://www.ashg.org/genetics/ashg06s/). [9] The Autism Genome Project Consortium, Mapping autism risk loci using genetic linkage and chromosomal rearrangements, Nat. Genet. 39 (2007) 319­328. [10] C.M. Durand, C. Betancur, T.M. Boeckers, J. Bockmann, P. Chaste, F. Fauchereau, G. Nygren, M. Rastam, I.C. Gillberg, H. Anckarsater, E. Sponheim, H. Goubran-Botros, R. Delorme, N. Chabane, M.C. MourenSimeoni, P. de Mas, E. Bieth, B. Roge, D. Heron, L. Burglen, C. Gillberg, M. Leboyer, T. Bourgeron, Mutations in the gene encoding the synaptic scaffolding protein SHANK3 are associated with autism spectrum disorders, Nat. Genet. 39 (2007) 25­27. [11] M. Missler, R. Fernandez-Chacon, T.C. Sudhof, The making of neurexins, J. Neurochem. 71 (1998) 1339­1347. [12] G. Rudenko, T. Nguyen, Y. Chelliah, T.C. Sudhof, J. Deisenhofer, The structure of the ligand-binding domain of neurexin-Ibeta: regulation of LNS domain function by alternative splicing, Cell 99 (1999) 93­101. [13] L.R. Sheckler, L. Henry, S. Sugita, T.C. Sudhof, G. Rudenko, Crystal structure of the second LNS/LG domain from neurexin 1alpha: Ca2+ binding and the effects of alternative splicing, J. Biol. Chem. 281 (2006) 22896­22905. [14] D. Comoletti, R.E. Flynn, L.L. Jennings, A. Chubykin, T. Matsumura, H. ¨ Hasegawa, T.C. Sudhof, P. Taylor, Characterization of the interaction of a recombinant soluble neuroligin1 with neurexin-1 , J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 50497­50505. ¨ [15] A.A. Boucard, A.A. Chubykin, D. Comoletti, P. Taylor, T.C. Sudhof, A splice-code for trans-synaptic cell adhesion mediated by binding of neuroligins to - and -neurexins, Neuron 48 (2005) 229­236. [16] D. Comoletti, R.E. Flynn, A.A. Boucard, B. Demeler, V. Schirf, J. Shi, L.L. Jennings, H.R. Newlin, T.C. Sudhof, P. Taylor, Gene selection, alternative splicing, and post-translational processing regulate neuroligin selectivity for -neurexins, Biochemistry 45 (2006) 12816­12827. [17] E.R. Graf, Y. Kang, A.M. Hauner, A.M. Craig, Structure, function and splice site analysis of the synaptogenic activity of the neurexin-1 beta LNS domain, J. Neurosci. 26 (2006) 4256­4265. [18] B. Chih, L. Gollan, P. Scheiffele, Alternative splicing controls selective trans-synaptic interactions of the neuroligin-neurexin complex, Neuron 51 (2006) 171­178. [19] D. Comoletti, A. Grishaev, A. Whitten, I. Tsigelny, P. Taylor, J. Trewhella, Synaptic arrangement of the neuroligin/ -neurexin complex revealed by X-ray and neutron scattering, Structure 15 (2007) 693­705. [20] R.C. Hoffman, L.L. Jennings, I. Tsigelny, D. Comoletti, R. Flynn, T.C. ¨ Sudhof, P. Taylor, Structural characterization of recombinant soluble rat neuroligin. 1: Mapping of secondary structure and glycosylation by mass spectrometry, Biochemistry 43 (2004) 1496­1506.

(Accelrys, Inc., 2002) using the crystal structure of mouse AChE (1MAH in the PDB database) as a template. 4.4. Sedimentation equilibrium analysis Analytical ultracentrifugation was conducted in a Beckman/Coulter XL-I centrifuge using an An 60 Ti rotor. Protein solutions of 30, 100 and 300 g/mL of NL1 were used in a six-channel charcoal-filled epon centerpiece loaded with 120 L of sample and 125 L of reference buffer, pH 7.4. Samples were spun at 20  C for 16 h at 8000, 10,000 and 12,000 rpm. Equilibrium was attained as judged by the overlay of the last three scans. The partial specific volume of each protein was calculated using Sednterp software (version 1.06) accounting for total sugars. Molar masses of the proteins were calculated using XL-A/XL-I Data Analysis Software version 4.0 based on OriginTM program. 4.5. Small-angle scattering X-ray scattering data were acquired using Beam Line 4.2 at SSRL [19] and the instrument at the University of Utah that is described in Heidorn and Trewhella [26]. Neutron scattering data were acquired using the 30-m SANS instrument NG3 at the National Institutes of Standards and Technology [19]. Standard data reduction protocols were used to obtain scattering due to the proteins in solution and scattering data analysis used the ATSAS suite of programs [27]. Refinement of the NL dimer and NL/NX complex used the protocols described in Grishaev et al. [28]. Acknowledgements We acknowledge the support of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce, in providing the neutron research facilities used in this work. This work utilized facilities supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Agreement No. DMR0454672. Portions of this research were carried out at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory, a national user facility operated by Stanford University on behalf of the U.S. Department of Energy, and by the National Institutes of Healt. This work was supported by United States Public Health Service grants R37 GM-18360 and P42 ES10337 to P.T. This research was also supported in part by the Office of Science (Biological and environmental Research), U.S. Department of Energy, grant no. DE-FG02- 05ER64026 and an Australian Research Council Federation Fellowship to J.T.; a Cure Autism Now Pilot Research Award to D.C.; and by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health (NIH), and the Intramural Antiviral Target Program of the Office of the Director, NIH to A.G. References
[1] S. Jamain, H. Quach, C. Betancur, M. Rastam, C. Colineaux, I.C. Gillberg, H. Soderstrom, B. Giros, M. Leboyer, C. Gillberg, T. Bourgeron, Paris Autism Research International Sibpair Study, Mutations of the X-linked genes encoding neuroligins NLGN3 and NLGN4 are associated with autism, Nat. Genet. 34 (2003) 27­29.

D. Comoletti et al. / Chemico-Biological Interactions 175 (2008) 150­155 [21] F. Li, H.P. Erickson, J.A. James, K.L. Moore, R.D. Cummings, R.P. McEver, Visualization of P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 as a highly extended molecule and mapping of protein epitopes for monoclonal antibodies, J. Biol. Chem. 271 (1996) 6342­6348. [22] A.H. Merry, R.J. Gilbert, D.A. Shore, L. Royle, O. Miroshnychenko, M. Vuong, M.R. Wormald, D.J. Harvey, R.A. Dwek, B.J. Classon, et al., Oglycan sialylation and the structure of the stalk-like region of the T cell co-receptor CD8, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 27119­27128. [23] J.L. Sussman, M. Harel, F. Frolow, C. Oefner, A. Goldman, L. Toker, I. Silman, Atomic structure of acetylcholinesterase from Torpedo Californica: a prototypic acetylcholine-binding protein, Science 253 (1991) 872­879. [24] Y. Bourne, P. Taylor, P. Marchot, Acetylcholinesterase inhibition by fasciculin: crystal structure of the complex, Cell 83 (1995) 503­512.

155

[25] I.P. Fabrichny, P. Leone, G. Sulzenbacher, D. Comoletti, M.T. Miller, P. Taylor, Y. Bourne, P. Marchot, Structural analysis of the synaptic protein neuroligin and its -neurexin complex: determinants for folding and cell adhesion, Neuron 56 (2007) 1­13. [26] D.B. Heidorn, J. Trewhella, Comparison of the crystal and solution structures of calmodulin and troponin C, Biochemistry 27 (1988) 909­915. [27] P.V. Konarev, M.V. Petoukhov, V.V. Volkov, D. Svergun, ATSAS 2.1, a program package for small-angle scattering data analysis, J. Appl. Crystallogr. Part 2 39 (2006) 277­286. [28] A. Grishaev, J. Wu, J. Trewhella, A. Bax, Refinement of multidomain protein structures by combination of solution small angle X-ray scattering and NMR data, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127 (2005) 16621­16628.

