doi:10.1006/jmbi.2001.5049 available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

J. Mol. Biol. (2001) 314, 205±216

Characterization of AloI, a Restriction-modification System of a New Type
 Ï    " Ï Egle Cesnaviciene1, Maryte Petrusyte1, Ruta Kazlauskiene2 Ï  1 1 1  Zita Maneliene , Albertas Timinskas , Arvydas Lubys and Arvydas Janulaitis1*
Institute of Biotechnology Ïu Graici"no 8, 2028 Vilnius Lithuania Ïu Fermentas AB, Graici"no 8 2028 Vilnius, Lithuania
2 1

We report the properties of the new AloI restriction and modi®cation enzyme from Acinetobacter lwof® Ks 4-8 that recognizes the DNA target 5H GGA(N)6GTTC3H (complementary strand 5H GAAC(N)6TCC3H ), and the nucleotide sequence of the gene encoding this enzyme. AloI is a bifunctional large polypeptide (deduced Mr 143 kDa) revealing both DNA endonuclease and methyltransferase activities. Depending on reaction cofactors, AloI cleaves double-stranded DNA on both strands, seven bases on the 5H side, and 12-13 bases on the 3H side of its recognition sequence, and modi®es adenine residues in both DNA strands in the target sequence yielding N6-methyladenine. For cleavage activity AloI maintains an absolute requirement for Mg2 and does not depend on or is stimulated by either ATP or S-adenosyl-L-methionine. Modi®cation function requires the presence of S-adenosyl-L-methionine and is stimulated by metal ions (Ca2). The C-terminal and central parts of the protein were found to be homologous to certain speci®city (HsdS) and modi®cation (HsdM) subunits of type I R-M systems, respectively. The N-terminal part of the protein possesses the putative endonucleolytic motif DXnEXK of restriction endonucleases. The deduced amino acid sequence of AloI shares signi®cant homology with polypeptides encoding HaeIV and CjeI restriction-modi®cation proteins at the N-terminal and central, but not at the C-terminal domains. The organization of AloI implies that its evolution involved fusion of an endonuclease and the two subunits, HsdM and HsdS, of type I restriction enzymes. According to the structure and function properties AloI may be regarded as one more representative of a newly emerging group of HaeIV-like restriction endonucleases. Discovery of these enzymes opens new opportunities for constructing restriction endonucleases with a new speci®city.
# 2001 Academic Press

*Corresponding author

Keywords: cloning; bifunctional; restriction endonuclease; DNA modi®cation; protein puri®cation

Introduction
Bacterial restriction-modi®cation (R-M) systems are usually composed of two enzymatic activities intracellularly competing for the same target: an
Ï Ï Ç Present address: E. Cesnaviciene, Fermentas AB, Ï iuno 8, 2028 Vilnius, Lithuania. Graic " Abbreviations used: R-M, restriction-modi®cation; ENase, endonuclease; MTase, methyltransferase; AdoMet, S-adenosyl-L-methionine; ORF, open reading frame. E-mail address of the corresponding author: janulait@ibt.lt
0022-2836/01/020205±12 $35.00/0

endonuclease (ENase), which recognizes and cleaves DNA at the target site, and DNA methyltransferase (MTase), which prevents the cleavage of host DNA by cognate endonuclease by introducing methyl groups at the recognition sites. About 3000 R-M systems with more than 200 speci®cities have been identi®ed in a variety of microorganisms.1 On the basis of enzyme subunit composition, co-factor requirements, DNA speci®city characteristics, and reaction products, R-M systems are traditionally grouped into three classes2 designated types I, II and III. Together with the fast accumulation of data on the newly identi®ed and sequenced R-M systems, an increasing number of
# 2001 Academic Press

206 systems that do not ®t into the conventional classi®cation are being reported. Some of them are represented by bifunctional enzymes with ENase and MTase activities that, like type II monofunctional ENases but unlike type I and type III bifunctional enzymes, cleave DNA speci®cally. Examples include the Eco57I-like R-M systems3,4 that, in addition to bifunctional restriction ENase, comprise separate cognate MTase. Similarly, several BcgI-like R-M systems recognize asymmetric interrupted sequences, cleave DNA bilaterally and are composed of two heterosubunits that are both required for ENase and MTase activity.5 ± 9 These discoveries expand the limits of type II enzymes and show the structural and functional heterogeneity within this class. The recent addition to the list of unusual restriction endonucleases is represented by HaeIV,10 a R-M system that, similarly to BcgIlike enzymes cleaves DNA bilaterally, but unlike them is represented by simple bifunctional polypeptide and is not stimulated by AdoMet. The study of these unusual restriction enzymes provides insights into their evolution. Here we describe the isolation and properties of one more R-M system encoded by a single bifunctional polypeptide, the AloI system from Acinetobacter lwof® KS4-8, and discuss opportunities afforded by discovery of bifunctional ENases for constructing restriction endonucleases with a new speci®city.

Restriction-modi®cation System AloI

Results
Purification of AloI AloI was puri®ed (see Materials and Methods) to apparent homogeneity as illustrated in Figure 1 (lane 3). The apparent molecular mass under denaturing conditions was found to be 140 kDa (see Figure 1, lane 1). Gel ®ltration in buffers with different NaCl concentrations (0.2 and 1.0 M) containing 10 % glycerol showed that the native endonuclease has a molecular mass of approximately 550 kDa (data not shown), suggesting that under physiological conditions the protein might exist as a tetramer. The elution pro®les of ENase and MTase activities during gel ®ltration were coincident (data not shown), indicating that AloI polypeptide is bifunctional. Enzymatic properties Puri®ed preparation of recombinant AloI protein was used for the detailed study of reaction conditions and various cofactors in¯uencing either DNA cleavage or methylation activity of the enzyme. AloI maintains an absolute requirement for Mg2 for cleavage activity (Figure 2(a), lane 1 versus 2). ENase activity of AloI is not dependent on or stimulated by ATP or AdoMet: ATP does not affect the activity of AloI at concentrations up to 2 mM (data not shown), while the addition of AdoMet to the reaction mixture results in incom-

Figure 1. SDS-PAGE analysis of the puri®ed AloI endonuclease (lane 1: 0.3 mg, lane 3: 2.5 mg) with size standards (lane 2) as follows: (a) myosin (200 kDa), (b) b-galactosidase (116.4 kDa), (c) phosphorylase b (97.4 kDa), (d) conalbumin (76.6 kDa), (e) pyruvate kinase (57.2 kDa), (f) alkaline phosphatase (49.5 kDa). Protein concentration in lane 1 allowed the estimation of AloI molecular weight, while that in lane 3 was used for the evaluation of AloI preparation homogeneity.

plete cleavage of the substrate (Figure 2(a), lane 3). Substitution of AdoMet in the cleavage reaction by its analogue synefungine resulted in DNA fragmentation identical to that obtained in the absence of the analogue (Figure 2(a), lane 4). Collectively, these observations indicate that AdoMet, unlike in the case of other bifunctional ENases,3 ± 9 does not stimulate the endonucleolytic activity of AloI, while DNA methylation occurring in parallel with DNA cleavage protects some of the target sites. Methylation by AloI is stimulated by metal ions (Ca2) as determined by the DNA protection assay (Figure 2(b), lane 6 versus 7). DNA resistance to AloI could not be due to cleavage inhibition by Ca2, since DNA was cleaved in its presence (lane 8), although less ef®ciently than in its absence (lane 5). The cleavage activity of AloI was found to have strong dependence on pH and ionic strength (data not shown). Maximum activity was achieved in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 100 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 100 mg/ml BSA. Optimal temperature for cleavage was found to be 30  C. Incubation at 37  C resulted in 30 % activity.

Restriction-modi®cation System AloI

207 target site on l DNA (position 36718) products were digested by AloI and compared with sequencing ladders. Three DNA fragments were observed following digestion with AloI (Figure 3, lane 1). The fastest moving fragment (band 1a, lane 1) generated by AloI digestion, co-migrated with the C band of the sequence ladder indicating that AloI cleaves DNA seven nucleotides away from the 5H end of the recognition sequence 5H -GAAC(N)6TCC3H . The other two fragments (1b and 1c, lane 1) corresponding to the partial digestion product comigrate with the A and C bands of the sequence ladder, indicating that the second AloI cut occurred either 12 or 13 bases away from the 3H -end of the recognition sequence. Lane 2 shows the result when fragments produced by AloI digestion were treated with T4 DNA polymerase. The two fastest moving bands (2a and 2b, lane 2) resulting from the exonuclease activity of the T4 DNA polymerase co-migrate with C and A bands and indicate that AloI cleaves DNA 12 or 13 bases away from the 3H end of the recognition sequence on the complementary DNA strand. The third band (2c, lane 2)

Figure 2. Cofactor requirements for endonucleolytic and methylation activities of AloI. (a) Assay of the cofactors required in DNA cleavage reaction. All incubations were carried out for one hour at 30  C. Lane 1, l DNA incubated with two ENase units of AloI in reaction mixture without Mg2; lane 2, l DNA digested with two units of AloI in the presence of 10 mM Mg2; lane 3, the same components as in lane 2 plus 20 mM AdoMet; lane 4, the same components as in lane 2 plus 20 mM synefungine (SF). (b) Methylation activity of AloI. Initially l DNA was incubated with the amount of AloI equivalent to seven endonuclease units for two hours at 30  C in reaction mixture supplemented with: no cofactors (lane 5), 200 mM AdoMet (lane 6), 200 mM AdoMet and 1.5 mM Ca2 (lane 7). Reaction in lane 8 contained the same components as in lane 7 but without AloI. Afterwards the reaction mixtures were supplemented with R buffer that contains Mg2 (®nal concentration, 10 mM) and four units of AloI ENase and incubated for one hour.

The recognition sequence and cleavage position of AloI To determine the recognition sequence, AloI sites were mapped on l and M13mp18 DNA. All other tested substrates (fX174, pBR322 and pUC18 DNAs) had no recognition sites for the enzyme. Seven of eight cleavage sites on l DNA were mapped (approximate positions 270, 7300, 12,000, 21,600, 24,700, 36,700 and 42,900) by double digestion with Psp5II, Bsp120I, Eco105I, P¯23II, SacI, XhoI and EheI (data not shown). The single AloI cleavage site in M13mp18 DNA was mapped to position 5770 using MlsI, EheI and NsbI. A computer-aided search of identical nucleotide sequences at the mapped AloI sites and areas surrounding them revealed only one common sequence 5H GGA(N)6GTTC 3H (or its complementary strand 5H GAAC(N)6TCC 3H ). The predicted AloI target site was consistent with (a) the absence of AloI sites in fX174, pBR322 and pUC18, (b) the presence of a single AloI cleavage site in M13mp18 DNA and (c) the number and sizes of fragments generated by AloI digestion of l or Ad2 DNA. To determine the cleavage position of AloI, the T7 DNA polymerase extension through the AloI

Figure 3. Determination of AloI cleavage point. Lanes G, A, T, C are the sequence ladders through AloI recognition site. Lane 1: 1a, 1b, and 1c, the products of the primed synthesis reaction cleaved with AloI. Lane 2: 2a, 2b and 2c, the same fragments as in lane 1 but treated with the T4 DNA polymerase.

208 obtained after treatment of AloI digestion product with T4 DNA polymerase co-migrates with the T band, indicating that the second AloI cleavage point on the complementary DNA strand occurs seven bases away from the 5H -end of the recognition site. An identical experiment performed through the AloI site located at position 7286 on l DNA produced the same pattern of cleavage with respect to AloI recognition sequence (data not shown). In addition, a small fragment excised from the DNA as a result of the bilateral cleavage (and carrying the intact AloI target) was found to be composed of a mix of oligonucleotides 32 and 33 bases in length (data not shown). Summarizing, we conclude that AloI cleaves double-stranded DNA on both strands at bases 7/12 or 13 upstream and 12 or 13/7 bases downstream of its recognition sequence as shown below, thereby exhibiting degenerate 3H cleavage point: 5H - 7 NGAACNNNNNNTCCN12/13 -3H 3H -13/12NCTTGNNNNNNAGGN7 -5H Methylation specificity The central part of the AloI amino acid sequence contains conserved motifs typical for m6A DNA methyltransferases (see below). AloI targets include three adenine residues, each being a potential substrate for AloI DNA methyltransferase activity. The modi®cation speci®city of AloI was determined using a set of oligonucleotides designed to form DNA duplexes that contain the AloI recognition sequence. Two non-methylated oligonucleotides (standing for each DNA strand) and three modi®ed oligonucleotides, each having the N6-methyladenine instead of A at different loci of the AloI recognition sequence, were synthesized and annealed in all possible combinations to form nonmethylated, hemimethylated and completely methylated duplexes (Table 1). Following incubation with AloI in the presence of [3H]AdoMet the reac-

Restriction-modi®cation System AloI

tion products were subjected to scintillation counting. The amounts of incorporated label are presented in Table 1. The results support the presumption that AloI modi®cation activity is adenine-speci®c (row 6 versus 7) and imply that AloI modi®es the second adenine on the top strand (row 5 versus 6) and a unique A on the complementary strand (row 2 versus 6): 5H -GAm6AC NNNNNN TCC-3H 3H -CT TG NNNNNN m6AGG-5H On the other hand, AloI DNA modi®cation activity demonstrates the preference for hemimethylated substrates (rows 2 and 3 versus 4), similar to some type I restriction-modi®cation enzymes and BcgI,11 ± 13 thus acting as a maintenance DNA methyltransferase. Non-cognate methylation of the ®rst adenine on the top strand interferes partially with the maintenance (row 3 versus 5) and de novo (row 1 versus 4) MTase activities of AloI, though does not abolish them completely. Cloning and sequencing of the gene encoding AloI restriction-modification system Selection for clones expressing AloI DNA methyltransferase activity was based on the resistance of self-modifying recombinant plasmids to digestion by AloI.14 A total of 30 randomly picked transformants obtained after two successive rounds of biochemical selection for protectively modi®ed AloI-resistant recombinant plasmids were further screened for the presence of AloI-speci®c modi®cation and were found to be partially protected from AloI cleavage. AloI ENase activity was undetectable in crude extracts of all analysed clones. Restriction mapping revealed that all analysed plasmids, according to the cloned insert size, could be subdivided into seven groups that all shared a common 4.4 kb DNA fragment. One of the analysed plasmids harbouring the smallest DNA insert, 4.9 kb, was chosen for further analysis. The PaeI fragment encompassing both the

Table 1. Methylation speci®city of AloI
3

No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

Enzyme AloI AloI AloI AloI AloI AloI Without AloI (control)

Oligonucleotide duplexes 3H -CTTGNNNNNNAGG 5H -GXACNNNNNNTCC 3H -CTTGNNNNNNAGG 5H -GAXNNNNNNTCC 3H -CTTGNNNNNNXGG 5H -GAACNNNNNNTCC 3H -CTTGNNNNNNAGG 5H -GAACNNNNNNTCC 3H -CTTGNNNNNNXGG 5H -GXACNNNNNNTCC 3H -CTTGNNNNNNXGG 5H -GAXCNNNNNNTCC 3H -CTTGNNNNNNAGG 5H -GAACNNNNNNTCC

H radioactivity (cpm) 13426 56165 52350 17680 22756 834 802

Methylation assays were performed as described in Materials ands Methods. X stands for N6-methyladenine.

Restriction-modi®cation System AloI

209 vation allowed for speculation that aloIRMSencoded recombinant protein should be restrictionpro®cient like the wild-type variant. In order to test this possibility aloIRMS was subcloned into the expression vector pUHE25-2 under the control of strong synthetic promoter A1/04/03 yielding the plasmid pSup-AloI (Figure 4). Induction of the E. coli strain harbouring pSup-AloI with IPTG resulted in appearance of a protein band of $140 kDa in size as judged by SDS-PAGE, the presence of AloI ENase activity in crude cell extracts and resistance of plasmid DNA to AloI cleavage (data not shown). Taken together, the data indicated that the single ORF encodes the bifunctional restriction-modi®cation enzyme. Comparative amino acid sequence analysis indicated (see below) that the N-terminal part of AloI most likely represents the cleavage domain of the enzyme. This notion is supported by the observation that the AloI deletion mutant de®cient of 50 N-terminal amino acid residues (plasmid pSupÁN-AloI, Figure 4) retained the protective modi®cation of plasmid DNA but was de®cient in AloI ENase activity. Comparative sequence analysis The deduced amino acid sequence of AloI protein was compared with the contents of the EMBL and SWISS-PROT databases. It was found that the AloI region, encompassing the N-terminal (RH ) and central (MH ) parts of the enzyme corresponding to putative endonuclease and methylase domains, respectively (see below), shares signi®cant homology with the corresponding segments of polypeptides encoding the HaeIV (47 % identity, 10) and CjeI (35 % identity, EMBL Acc. No. AAF77188) R-M systems, and with putative restriction-modi®cation protein from Campylobacter jejeuni genomic sequence (39 % identity, EMBL Acc. No. CAB73307). At the same time the C-terminal parts (SH ) of these proteins that are most likely responsible for the target recognition were found to be dissimilar except for two internally repeated conserved sequence motifs CM1 and CM2 (Figure 5). CM1 separates two variable regions, VR1 and VR2, of AloI and CjeI, while CM2 is located at the Cterminal end of both proteins. We have found 158 similar conserved motifs in amino acid sequences of known or putative speci®city subunits that belong to different families (except for family ID) of type I enzymes (data not shown). While no statistically signi®cant homologues of such conserved motifs exist in HaeIV, the C-terminal end of the enzyme contains the Q residue that is invariant in the conserved motifs (Figure 5). In addition, by analogy to the other conserved motifs it is separated by four amino acid residues from the highly conserved proline. Therefore it cannot be excluded that the C-terminal region of HaeIV descended from the conserved repeats and represents the highly divergent variant.

Figure 4. Cloning of AloI restriction-modi®cation system and construction of overproducing plasmids. The upper line shows the 4.9 kb DNA fragment of A. lwof® KS4-8 cloned and sequenced in this work. Shaded arrow represents the aloIRMS gene. Thick black lines indicate a portion of DNA that originates from A. lwof® and is carried by plasmids constructed in this work. Corresponding plasmid names and relevant phenotypes are indicated in the table on the right. The determination of R and M phenotypes is described in Materials and Methods. M, partial MTase protection from AloI cleavage; M, complete MTase protection from AloI cleavage; MÀ, no MTase protection from AloI cleavage; R, ENase activity; RÀ, ENase activity not detectable. Thin black arrows indicate the direction of transcription from the inducible promoter PA1/O4/O3. The introduced PaeI targets that overlap translation initiation codons in constructed plasmids and HindIII target utilized in the subcloning procedure are shown.

entire cloned DNA region and short ¯anking sequences of the vector DNA was subcloned into the PaeI site of pUC19-AloI to form pUCAloIM (Figure 4). The increase in plasmid copy number had no effect on the ef®ciency of pUCAloIM protection from AloI digestion compared to that of the original plasmid. Crude cell extracts prepared from cells with pUCAloIM showed no detectable AloI ENase activity (data not shown). In order to get more information on the structural organization of the AloI restriction-modi®cation system, the nucleotide sequence of the entire cloned 4929 nt fragment was determined on both strands. Sequence analysis revealed that the cloned fragment encompasses only one very large open reading frame (ORF) aloIRMS (nt 511-4296) with the capacity to code for a protein of 1262 amino acid residues with the calculated molecular mass of 142.9 kDa. This is consistent with the data obtained from SDS-PAGE analysis of puri®ed protein (Figure 1). The ORF starts with the ATG codon (nt 511-513) and is preceded by an unusually distantly spaced putative ribosome binding site 5H GAAGAAGG (nt 480-487). The annotation of the start codon was con®rmed by the N-terminal amino acid sequence analysis. The ®rst nine residues of the wt AloI enzyme were found to be XINQENLVA (X stands for amino acid of unidenti®ed nature). This result was in agreement with the predicted N-terminal sequence MINQENLVA of cloned aloIRMS. On the other hand, this obser-

210

Restriction-modi®cation System AloI

Figure 5. Schematic map of the structure-function organization of AloI, HaeIV and CjeI. RH , DNA cleavage domain; CM-endo, region of statistically signi®cant similarity between the proteins, encompassing catalytic/Mg2  binding motif of restriction endonucleases (D X14 EXK); MH , methylase domain, Roman numbers indicate the conserved motifs of DNA methyltransferases; SH , target recognition domain, VR1 and VR2 indicate two variable regions of SH whereas open boxes mark the position of two putative target recognition regions that are compared in Figure 6; CM1 and CM2, conserved internal repeats. CM-endo, CM1 and CM2 alignments are presented below the scheme. The consensus sequence for both CM1 and CM2 is derived from the alignment of 158 conserved motifs found within known or putative HsdS subunits. Q is invariant in all 158 motifs, while P separated by four amino acid residues from Q is present in 155 of 158 motifs. The meanings of other symbols used for description of the consensus sequence are given in ref. 18.

The structure of bipartite, asymmetric target [GGA]-N6-[GTTC] recognized by AloI resembles DNA targets typical for type I restriction-modi®cation enzymes. The AloI target is unique in both the trinucleotide and tetranucleotide components. However, a block of 45 amino acid residues located within the VR1 (see Figure 5) of AloI was found to share a similarity (Figure 6) with the short amino acid sequence predicted to recognize the target DNA and located within the ®rst target recognition domain (TRD1) of StySBLI speci®city subunit HsdS.15 The relatedness of trinucleotide parts of bipartite AloI and StySBLI targets (GGA and CGA, respectively) suggests that the oligopeptides being discussed might be involved in recognition of trinucleotide components of DNA targets. On the other hand, the region of AloI located within the VR2 (see Figure 5) displayed similarity with a.a. sequences of predicted target recognition regions located within the TRD2 of StySPI and EcoKI15,16 (Figure 6). Bipartite DNA targets of compared enzymes possess similar tetranucleotides (GTTC, GTRC and GTGC, respectively) suggesting that homologous a.a. stretches located within both VR2 (AloI) and TRD2 (StySPI, EcoKI) might participate in recognition of tetranucleotide parts of their DNA targets. In addition to the similarities discussed above, the a.a. regions extracted from VR1 and VR2 of AloI were found to have homologues located within the variable regions of a few putative HsdS subunits found in genomic sequences (see Figure 6 for further annotations). The middle part of the protein was found to possess eight out of nine conserved motifs of amino

DNA methyltransferases.17 The linear order of conserved motifs in the amino acid sequence of AloI (N- X, I, II, IV-VIII -C; N and C denote amino- and carboxy-terminal ends) is similar to that found in the g group of amino methyltransferases.17,18 When the a.a. sequence of the methylase domain was compared to those of other sequences in the database using HR-SEARCH procedure,18 ten hits with E-value below 0.01 resulted. Two of them with the highest similarity (lowest E-value) corresponded to the methylase domains of CjeI and HaeIV. The next most similar MTase was XmnI, which although belonging to type II R-M systems, was most likely derived from type I HsdM subunits.17 The remaining seven polypeptides are represented by modi®cation subunits both of known or putative type I RM systems. The N-terminal part of AloI revealed a weak similarity (19 % identical amino acid residues) to the catalytic DNA cleavage domain of Eco57I (data not shown), another atypical (type IV) site-speci®c restriction endonuclease that possesses methylase motifs.20 The amino acid sequence motif 78D X13 EXK of Eco57I has been recently shown to be responsible for the catalytic function.21 A similar stretch of amino acid residues (102D X14 EXK) present within the N-terminal part of AloI (Figure 5) has a potential to be the catalytic/Mg2 binding centre of AloI DNA cleavage activity. Based on results of amino acid sequence and mutational analysis we suggest that the AloI sequence may be subdivided into three putative structural-functional parts (Figure 5). The N-terminal region (amino acid residues 1-405) corresponds

Restriction-modi®cation System AloI

211

Figure 6. Amino acid sequence alignment of AloI putative target recognition regions present in VR1 and VR2 (see Figure 5) with predicted target recognition regions from either TRD1 or TRD2 of type I speci®city polypeptides. Approximate locations of StySPI, StySBLI and EcoKI target recognition regions are as referred to in ref. 15.

to endonucleolytic domain (RH ); the middle part (406-910 a.a.) for AdoMet binding and methylation catalysis (MH ); and the C-terminal part (900-1255 a.a.) for target recognition (SH ). The approximate boundary between RH and MH domains was predicted on the basis of observations that the N-terminal motif X of g group methyltransferases is preceded by 15 amino acid residues on average. Furthermore, the predicted start of the methylase domain coincides with the appearance of similarity between MH and certain HsdM subunits. The approximate boundary between MH and SH domains was predicted by, ®rstly identifying the beginning of statistically reliable alignment of the AloI variable region VR1 with the ®rst half of HsdS subunits (see Figure 6), and secondly by assigning to the SH domain the number of amino acid residues preceding the aligned AloI region equal to the number of N-terminal non-aligned amino acid residues of the relevant HsdS subunit.

Discussion
We have shown here that AloI is a novel restriction endonuclease which recognizes interrupted asymmetric sequence 5H GGA(N6)GTTC 3H /5H GAAC(N)6TCC 3H and cleaves double-stranded DNA on both strands upstream and downstream releasing a DNA fragment that is composed of oligonucleotides 32 or 33 nt in length. AloI is a bifunctional enzyme that possesses both DNA cleavage and methylation activities. Viability of E.coli clones expressing AloI restriction endonuclease indicates that the methylation activity of the bifunctional enzyme modifying adenine residues in both DNA strands is able to protect host DNA against AloI. Thus no separate cognate MTase, the necessary component of the classical RM systems, is required and the two activities of AloI restriction-modi®cation system are contained within a single poly-

peptide, which, in solution, presumably exists as a tetramer. The amino acid sequence analysis suggests that the AloI polypeptide can be subdivided into three domains. The structure of N-terminal and central parts of the protein indicates that they correspond to DNA cleavage and methylation domains, respectively. This conclusion, with respect to the central part, is strongly supported by the presence of a set of conserved motifs characteristic for m6A generating DNA methyltransferases.17 A conclusion on the possible endonucleolytic function for the N-terminal part of AloI is based on the following observations: (i) the N-terminal part is similar to the endonucleolytic domain of Eco57I;21 (ii) it contains the putative catalytic/Mg2 binding motif of restriction ENases;22 (iii) deletion of the 50 Nterminal amino acid residues completely abolishes DNA cleavage activity of AloI, while maintaining the speci®c DNA methylation of the target sequence. The structure of the AloI C-terminal part (denoted SH in Figure 5) reveals similarities to speci®city (HsdS) subunits of type I restriction-modi®cation enzymes. Two internally repeated sequence motifs CM1 and CM2 are located in the middle and at the end of SH domain as found in HsdS subunits of family IA R-M systems.23 These motifs correspond to the A part24 of a lengthy conserved repeat sequence of type I enzymes. We have found that CM1 and CM2 homologues are present in the majority of known and putative speci®city subunits of type I enzymes, which belong to IA, IB and IC, but not ID families. Thus they represent the most conserved part of the conserved internal repeats that are believed to play an important role in the subunit assembly of type I R-M systems.23 The two variable regions of HsdS subunits separated by the central conserved sequence correspond to target recognition domains TRD1 and TRD2, each interacting with one half of the bipar-

212 tite asymmetric recognition sequences.23,25 ± 27,29 They share similarity only when the target nucleotide sequences are identical or at least closely related.23,30 The ®nding that variable regions of AloI share quite extensive similarity with TRDs of some HsdS subunits of related speci®city strongly supports the conclusion that the C-terminal part of AloI is responsible for recognition of target DNA. It is noteworthy that regions of similarity between AloI and TRD1 or TRD2 of the HsdS subunits shown in Figure 6 correspond to HsdS regions predicted to be involved in target sequence recognition.15 Dissimilarity in the C-terminal parts of otherwise highly similar AloI, CjeI and HaeIV enzymes having different recognition sequences, indirectly supports the conclusion on the C-terminal localization of target recognition domains for these enzymes. In the case of HaeIV, one target recognition domain was most likely deleted yielding an enzyme that recognizes symmetric interrupted sequence as it was observed after analogous rearrangements of some HsdS subunits.25 ± 27 The properties of AloI, HaeIV and CjeI indicate that they are related. Their possible evolutionary scenario might have employed the same mechanism: fusion of HsdS, HsdM and an endonuclease. This notion is supported by the observation that the methylase domain of AloI, besides its counterparts in HaeIV and CjeI, is most closely related to the XmnI methylase that most likely evolved from a type I MTase17 and to seven other HsdM subunits of type I R-M systems. In addition, AloI reveals properties of maintenance methyltransferase, like type I enzymes. The N-terminal part of AloI, HaeIV and CjeI does not contain any conserved regions typical for HsdR subunits, such as sequences found in so-called ``DEAD box'' proteins belonging to the superfamily of putative helicases or motifs characteristic to GTP/ATP binding proteins.31,32 Consistent with this observation, AloI activity is not affected, in contrast to type I enzymes, by ATP. Finally, the size of the endonucleolytic domain (ca 400 a.a.) is much smaller than that of HsdR subunits.23 Collectively, these data imply that there are no indications that the AloI cleavage domain (as well as those of HaeIV and CjeI) originated from HsdR. Another possibility, although unlikely, is that a HsdR, a predecessor of the cleavage domain overcame multiple rearrangements including massive deletions either after or prior to becoming a part of AloI-like enzyme. According to existing classi®cation of restrictionmodi®cation systems AloI cannot be attributed to any of the traditional types of R-M systems. With respect to DNA cleavage mode (on both sides of the recognition sequence), protein structure, absence of a separate cognate MTase and bifunctionality, this enzyme closely resembles the HaeIV and CjeI restriction-modi®cation systems. However, the enzymes differ in cofactor requirement in the cleavage reaction in such a way that, in addition to requirement for Mg2 (the only necessary cofactor for AloI and HaeIV), CjeI activity absol-

Restriction-modi®cation System AloI

utely requires AdoMet.28 AdoMet binding motifs exist in CjeI as well as in AloI and HaeIV methylase domains. Activation by AdoMet is documented in many bifunctional restriction endonucleases.3,9,13 Its effect on CjeI activity may represent an evolutionary relic that is lost by HaeIV and AloI. In addition, there is controversial data on the effect of ATP on CjeI activity-stimulation (REBASE) or no effect.28 The latter observation is consistent with the absence of ATP binding motifs in the a.a. sequence of CjeI. BcgI and BcgI-like enzymes, in a manner similar to AloI, also recognize interrupted nucleotide sequences and cleave DNA on both sides of them5,7 However, unlike AloI, these enzymes are composed of two heterosubunits (S and RM), both of which are required to bind and cleave or methylate target DNA.6 The S subunit and methylase domain of RM subunit most likely descended, similarly to AloI, from HsdS and HsdM subunits. On the other hand, AloI and BcgI differ in enzymatic properties; BcgI needs AdoMet not only for methylation but also for cleavage, while in the presence of AdoMet, AloI yields incomplete DNA fragmentation presumably due to competing methylation reaction. Synefungine, which effectively substitutes for AdoMet as a necessary cofactor or activator of DNA cleavage reaction in other bifunctional restriction endonucleases like BcgI,13 BplI,9 BseMII,4 Eco57I,3 has no effect on ENase activity of AloI. The structure of speci®city subunit HsdS of type I restriction-modi®cation enzymes is favourable for the quick appearance of new speci®cities as was demonstrated in several reports.25 ± 27,29 New speci®cities were generated either after the deletion of the HsdS region corresponding to one target recognition domain and resulting in mutants that recognize interrupted symmetric sequences25 ± 27,29 or by recombination of genes for speci®city subunits yielding mutants with hybrid DNA targets.33,34 However, type I enzymes cleave DNA randomly, making them unsuitable for DNA manipulations where type II ENases are preferred. On the other hand, all attempts to alter speci®city of type II restriction enzymes have been unsuccessful so far. The discovery of AloI- and BcgI-like enzymes opens the opportunity to alter their speci®city by manipulating their putative target recognition domains as was the case with type I enzymes. The structure of HaeIV supports this idea since this enzyme recognizes an interrupted symmetric DNA sequence and probably possesses, like HsdS mutants recognizing symmetric targets, only one TRD. On the other hand, the unique structuralfunctional organization of AloI and related enzymes possessing a speci®city domain which de®nes the recognition sequence presumably for both MTase and ENase activities, opens the possibility of altering their speci®city simultaneously by mutating the SH domain. Selection for MTases of a new speci®city could be performed by using an effective biochemical selection procedure.14 The

Restriction-modi®cation System AloI

213
aliquots of a sample and incubated for two hours at 30  C, followed by enzyme inactivation at 70  C for 15 minutes. 10Â concentrated R buffer was then added to the reaction mixture to make a ®nal 1Â concentration. The substrate was challenged with an excess of AloI for one hour and the reaction products were resolved by agarose gel electrophoresis. Purification of AloI restriction-modification enzyme The same scheme has been applied to purify both recombinant and native AloI enzymes to homogeneity. In spite of a variety of chromatographic procedures tested AloI yields from the natural host were extremely low, therefore native enzyme was used in a few experiments only, including the determination of AloI recognition sequence, plasmid library enrichment for clones carrying the AloI methyltransferase gene and for the Nterminal amino acid sequence analysis. AloI cleavage position, methylation speci®city, molecular weight and enzymatic properties were determined using recombinant enzyme. Collected biomass of either A. lwof® KS4-8 cells or E. coli clones expressing the recombinant AloI was used as a source for enzyme isolation. Induction of AloI recombinant protein synthesis was carried out by addition of IPTG (1 mM) to the growth media followed by culture incubation at 30  C. Cultures of both strains were grown into late logarithmic phase with aeration, harvested by centrifugation and stored at À20  C. All further steps were carried out at 4  C. Frozen cells (150 g wet weight both for native and for recombinant enzymes) were thawed in 300 ml buffer A (10 mM K-phosphate, 1 mM EDTA, 7 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, pH 7.4) containing 0.1 M NaCl. Following sonication, insoluble material was removed from the crude extract by centrifugation at 30,000 g for one hour. The supernatant was applied to a Heparin-Sepharose column (2.6 cm Â 30 cm) pre-equilibrated with buffer A plus 0.1 M NaCl. The column was washed with the same buffer and eluted with a 1200 ml linear gradient from 0.1 to 0.8 M NaCl. Fractions of 20 ml were collected and tested for the ENase activity. The AloI enzyme eluted at between 0.44 and 0.51 M NaCl. The ENase-pro®cient fractions were found to be active in the in vitro modi®cation assay also. The peak fractions were pooled, dialysed against buffer A and applied to a DEAE cellulose column (2.6 cm Â 18 cm) pre-equilibrated with buffer A. The column was washed with the same buffer and eluted with a 1000 ml linear gradient from 0 to 0.3 M NaCl in buffer A. Fractions of 20 ml were collected. Both AloI activities, ENase and MTase, eluted from the column in one peak at between 0.09 and 0.12 M NaCl. The peak fractions were pooled and applied to a phosphocellulose P11 column (1.6 cm Â 26 cm) equilibrated with buffer A plus 0.1 M NaCl. The column was washed with the same buffer and subsequently developed with a 600ml linear gradient from 0.1 to 0.8 M NaCl in buffer A. Fractions of 10 ml were collected. The peak of the ENase activity coincided with that of the MTase (0.42-0.49 M NaCl) again. The most active fractions were pooled and dialysed against buffer A plus 0.1 M NaCl. In the next step, the AloI pool from phosphocellulose was fractionated on a Blue Sepharose column (1.6 cm Â 23 cm) preequilibrated with buffer A plus 0.1 M NaCl. The column was washed with the same buffer and the enzyme was eluted with a 550 ml linear gradient from 0.1 to 1.0 M NaCl in buffer A. ENase and MTase activities eluted in a same peak centred on 0.60 M NaCl. Active fractions

feasibility of this approach has been recently demonstrated with the bifunctional ENase Eco57I, and resulted in simultaneous generation of restriction endonuclease and methylase of a new speci®city (R.Rimseliene & A.J., unpublished). Ï Ç

Materials and Methods
Bacterial strains, plasmids and reagents Acinetobacter lwof® strain KS4-8, the natural host for the AloI R-M system, was provided by Fermentas AB. E. coli strain ER2267 (FH proA B  lacIq Á(lacZ)M15zzf::mini-Tn10(KmR)/e14 À (mcrA À) endA1 supE44 thi-1 Á(mcrC-mrr)114::IS10 Á(argF-lac)U169 recA1) used as a host in all cloning experiments was obtained from New England Biolabs. The positive selection cloning vector pBR-R designed for the direct selection of recombinants35 was used as a basis for the construction of a vector pJRD-R (ApR, CmR, KmR), which has two AloI targets. pUC19-AloI was constructed by subcloning of 400 bp Bsu15I DNA fragment possessing the AloI target from pJRD-R into EcoO109I site of pUC19. Cohesive ends of both DNA molecules were blunted before the ligation step. pUHE25-2 expression vector used for overproduction of AloI protein was kindly provided by H. Bujard (Heidelberg University). Details on the construction of pJRD-R are available on request. E. coli ER2267 was cultivated and transformed as previously described.36 A. lwof® KS4-8 was cultivated in Lab Lemco liquid medium (OXOID) at 30  C. Ampicillin, kanamycin and chloramphenicol were added to Luria broth or LB-agar at concentrations 60, 50 and 30 mg/ml, respectively, where needed. All enzymes, kits, DNAs of l, pBR322, fX174, pUC18, pUC19 and M13mp18, oligonucleotides and dNTPs were from Fermentas AB. S-adenosyl-L-[3Hmethyl]methionine and [g-33P]dATP were purchased from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, non-radioactive AdoMet was from Serva. Protein molecular weight markers for SDS electrophoresis were from Boehringer Mannheim, and for gel ®ltration from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech. DE52 cellulose and phosphocellulose P11 were purchased from Whatman. Heparin-Sepharose, Blue Sepharose and Superdex 200 HR 10/30 column were from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech. Endonuclease and methyltransferase assays Restriction endonuclease activity was assayed in 50 ml of Fermentas AB buffer R (10 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 100 mM KCl, 0.1 mg/ml BSA, pH 8.5), containing 1 mg of substrate DNA. Either 1-2 ml of chromatographic fractions or varying amounts (1, 3, 5 ml) of cellfree extracts prepared as described37 were added to the reaction mixture and incubated for 10-60 minutes at 30  C. The reaction products were resolved by electrophoresis on 0.7 % (w/v) agarose gel. One unit of the endonuclease activity is de®ned as the activity required to completely hydrolyse 1 mg of l DNA in one hour at 30  C. To determine the AloI-speci®c in vivo modi®cation, plasmid DNA was isolated from the strain under investigation and incubated with an excess of AloI followed by agarose gel electrophoresis. The in vitro modi®cation activity was tested by the DNA protection assay where 1 mg of l DNA was used as a substrate in 50 ml of the reaction mixture (25 mM Tris-HCl, 20 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 1.5 mM CaCl2, 0.1 mg/ml BSA, 0.1 mM AdoMet, pH 8.0). The reaction was initiated by addition of 3 ml

214
were pooled and dialysed against 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 100 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 50 % (v/v) glycerol. The ®nal preparation was stored at À20  C. Molecular mass studies Gel electrophoresis Protein electrophoresis was carried out on 8 % (w/v) polyacrylamide gels in the presence of 1 % (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) according to the method of Laemmli.38 Protein bands were visualized by staining with 0.1 % (w/v) Coomassie brilliant blue R-250. Gel filtration Size-exclusion chromatography on a Superdex 200 HR 10/30 column in 10 mM K-PO4 buffer (pH 7.4), 1 mM EDTA, 7 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 10 % glycerol was used to determine the molecular mass of the puri®ed AloI enzyme. Two concentrations of NaCl (0.2 and 1.0 M) in the above buffer were used in separate experiments. Equine myoglobin (17 kDa), chicken ovalbumin (44 kDa), bovine gamma globulin (158 kDa), catalase (232 kDa), ferritin 440 kDa) and thyroglobulin (670 kDa) were used as standard molecular weight markers. Western blotting and N-terminal amino acid sequence analysis AloI protein isolated from the natural host and puri®ed to apparent homogeneity was electroblotted after the SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis onto Porablot PVDF membrane (Macherey-Nagel) according to Applied Biosystems recommendations. The membrane was stained with Coomasie blue R-250 and then the visualized protein of 142 kDa was sequenced using microsequencing technique at Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Physiology, Dortmund. Determination of the recognition sequence and cleavage site The recognition sequence of AloI was inferred by restriction analysis and mapping of recognition sites on DNAs of phages l, fX174 and M13mp18 and plasmids pBR322 and pUC18. The fragments predicted by cleavage of the inferred recognition sites were compared with the observed restriction fragments from AloI cleavage of the DNAs. AloI cleavage position was determined as described.39 Determination of the methylation specificity The modi®cation speci®city of AloI was determined using synthetic oligonucleotides (55-mer and 60-mer) that form a duplex DNA fragment containing the AloI target. Five oligonucleotides (two non-methylated oligonucleotides standing for each DNA strand and three modi®ed oligonucleotides each having the N6-methyladenine instead of A at different locations of AloI target) were synthesized and annealed in all possible combinations to form non-methylated, hemimethylated and completely methylated duplexes. Modi®cation reactions were carried out in 100 ml of R buffer containing 100 pM of oligoduplex DNA, 3 mCi of [3H]AdoMet (250 Ci/ mmol spec. act.) and the amount of AloI enzyme which

Restriction-modi®cation System AloI corresponds to ten ENase units. Reaction mixtures were incubated for 16 hours at 30  C. An aliquot of each reaction mixture was spotted on DEAE-paper, unincorporated radioactive label was rinsed away with the wash solution (0.2 M Na2HPO4), the ®lter was dried and the amount of the incorporated 3H determined by scintillation counting.

Isolation of DNA and recombinant DNA techniques A. lwof® KS4-8 genomic DNA was extracted and puri®ed essentially as described.40 Plasmids were prepared by the alkaline lysis procedure41 and puri®ed additionally according to the technique of Marko et al.42 Recombinant plasmid construction, restriction and deletion mapping, agarose gel electrophoresis and isolation of individual DNA restriction fragments from agarose gels were carried out using standard techniques.36 A library of nested deletions used for the sequencing of cloned restriction-modi®cation system was obtained using the ExoIII/S1 Deletion Kit (Fermentas AB). The nucleotide sequence was determined using the Cycle Reader2 DNA Sequencing Kit (Fermentas AB) and standard endlabelled M13/pUC sequencing primers. DNA sequence information is available through accession number AJ312389.

Cloning and expression of the AloI gene A. lwof® KS4-8 genomic DNA was partially digested with Bsp143I restriction endonuclease, fractionated on an agarose gel and DNA fragments 4-10 kb in size were isolated using DNA Extraction Kit (Fermentas AB). Recovered DNA fragments were ligated to the BglII-cleaved and dephosphorylated vector pJRD-R. The ligation mixture was used to electrotransform E. coli ER2267. Pooled plasmid population from 20,000 transformants was puri®ed, digested with AloI and transformed back into E. coli ER2267. The enrichment procedure was repeated twice, and plasmid DNAs of surviving transformants were analysed by restriction endonuclease mapping and tested for AloI-speci®c in vivo modi®cation.

Construction of AloI overproducing strains Oligodeoxynucleotides 5H -GCA CAA AAC GAG CAA AGC ATG CTT AAT CAG G-3H and 5H -GAA GTT GAC GGA TTT AGC ATG CAT GAA CGA CAG ATC-3H were used as mutagenic PCR primers in an experiment designed to introduce PaeI recognition sites (in bold) to overlap aloIRMS codons for Met1 or Val51. Both mutations were transferred in parallel into the plasmid pUCAloIM. The plasmid derivatives were cleaved with PaeI-HindIII and resulting fragments of 3892 bp and 3742 bp were inserted into the PaeI-HindIII-digested pUHE25-2 to form pSup-AloI and pSupÁN-AloI, respectively. In plasmid pUHE25-2 the PaeI site overlaps the translation initiation codon ATG that allows the optimized protein expression from synthetic vector translation initiation sequence. It is necessary to note that the introduction of PaeI targets resulted in additional changes of some amino acid residues at the N termini of recombinant AloI proteins: Ile2 was replaced by Leu in the case of pSup-AloI and Val51 to initiator Met, Asn52 to His in the case of pSupÁN-AloI.

Restriction-modi®cation System AloI Comparison of deduced amino acid sequences The deduced AloI amino acid sequence was compared to sequences deposited with the EMBL and the SWISSPROT sequence databases using the FASTA43 program. Similarity searches within the amino acid sequence of AloI protein and other homologous region searches were performed using the HR-SEARCH program.18

215
12. Suri, B., Nagaraja, V. & Bickle, T. A. (1984). Bacterial DNA modi®cation. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 108, 1-9. 13. Kong, H. & Smith, C. L. (1997). Substrate DNA and cofactor regulate the activities of a multi-functional restriction-modi®cation enzyme, BcgI. Nucl. Acids Res. 25, 3687-3692. 14. Szomolanyi, I., Kiss, A. & Venetianer, P. (1980). Cloning the modi®cation methylase gene of Bacillus sphaericus R in Escherichia coli. Gene, 10, 219-225. 15. Sturrock, S. S. & Dryden, D. T. F. (1997). A prediction of the amino acids and structures involved in DNA recognition by type I DNA restriction and modi®cation enzymes. Nucl. Acids Res. 25, 34083414. 16. Fuller-Pace, F. V. & Murray, N. E. (1986). Two DNA recognition domains of the speci®city polypeptides of a family of type I restriction enzymes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 83, 9368-9372. 17. Malone, T., Blumenthal, R. M. & Cheng, X. J. (1995). Structure-guided analysis reveals nine sequence motifs conserved among DNA amino-methyltransferases, and suggests a catalytic mechanism for these enzymes. J. Mol. Biol. 253, 618-632. 18. Timinskas, A., Butkus, V. & Janulaitis, A. (1995). Sequence motifs characteristic for DNA [cytosineN4] and DNA [adenine-N6] methyltransferases. Classi®cation of all DNA methyltransferases. Gene, 157, 3-11. 19. Nwankwo, D. O., Lynch, J. J., Moran, L. S., Fomenkov, A. & Slatko, B. E. (1996). The XmnI restriction-modi®cation system: cloning, expression, sequence organization and similarity between the R and M genes. Gene, 173, 121-127. 20. Janulaitis, A., Vaisvila, R., Timinskas, A., Klimasauskas, S. & Butkus, V. (1992). Cloning and sequence analysis of the genes coding for Eco57I type IV restriction-modi®cation enzymes. Nucl. Acids Res. 20, 6051-6056. 21. Rimseliene, R. & Janulaitis, A. (2001). Mutational analysis of two putative catalytic motifs of the type IV restriction endonuclease Eco57I. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 10492-10497. 22. Pingoud, A. & Jeltsch, A. (1997). Recognition and cleavage of DNA by type-II restriction endonucleases. Eur. J. Biochem. 246, 1-22. 23. Murray, N. E. (2000). Type I restriction systems: sophisticated molecular machines (a legacy of Bertani and Weigle). Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 64, 412-34. 24. Kneale, G. G. (1994). A symmetrical model for the domain structure of type I DNA methyltransferases. J. Mol. Biol. 243, 1-5. 25. Meister, J., MacWilliams, M., Hubner, P., Jutte, H., Skrzypek, E., Piekarowicz, A. & Bickle, T. A. (1993). Macroevolution by transposition: drastic modi®cation of DNA recognition by a type I restriction enzyme following Tn5 transposition. EMBO J. 12, 4585-4591. 26. Abadjieva, A., Patel, J., Webb, M., Zinkevich, V. & Firman, K. (1993). A deletion mutant of the type IC restriction endonuclease EcoR1241 expressing a novel DNA speci®city. Nucl. Acids Res. 21, 44354443. 27. MacWilliams, M. P. & Bickle, T. A. (1996). Generation of new DNA binding speci®city by truncation of the type IC EcoDXXI hsdS gene. EMBO J. 15, 4775-4783.

Acknowledgements
We thank Fermentas AB for donating enzymes and kits. The work was supported by grants from the Lithuanian national research program ``Molecular basis of Biotechnology'' and from Fermentas AB. The authors thank Mr William Kehayias for linguistic help.

References
1. Roberts, R. J. & Macelis, D. (2000). REBASE-restriction enzymes and methylases. Nucl. Acids Res. 28, 306-307. 2. Yuan, R. (1981). Structure and mechanism of multifunctional restriction endonucleases. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 50, 285-315. 3. Janulaitis, A., Petrusyte, M., Maneliene, Z., Klimasauskas, S. & Butkus, V. (1992). Puri®cation and properties of the Eco57I restriction endonuclease and methylase-prototypes of a new class (type IV). Nucl. Acids Res. 20, 6043-6049. 4. Jurenaite, S., Kazlauskiene, R., Urbelyte, V., Maneliene, Z., Petrusyte, M., Lubys, A. & Janulaitis, A. (2001). Characterization of BseMII, a new type IV restriction-modi®cation system, which recognizes the pentanucleotide sequence 5H CTCAG (N)10/8. Nucl. Acids Res. 29, 895-903. 5. Kong, H., Morgan, R. D., Maunus, R. E. & Schildkraut, I. (1993). A unique restriction endonuclease, BcgI, from Bacillus coagulans. Nucl. Acids Res. 21, 987-991. 6. Kong, H., Roemer, S. E., Waite-Rees, P. A., Benner, J. S., Wilson, G. G. & Nwankwo, D. O. (1994). Characterization of BcgI, a new kind of restrictionmodi®cation system. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 683-690. 7. Degtyarev, S. K., Rechkunova, N. I., Zernov, Y. P., Dedkov, V. S., Chizikov, V. E., Van Calligan, M. et al. (1993). Bsp24I, a new unusual restriction endonuclease. Gene, 131, 93-95. 8. Sears, L. E., Zhou, B., Aliotta, J. M., Morgan, R. D. & Kong, H. (1996). BaeI, another unusual BcgI-like restriction endonuclease. Nucl. Acids Res. 24, 35903592. 9. Vitkute, J., Maneliene, Z., Petrusyte, M. & Janulaitis, A. (1997). BplI, a new BcgI-like restriction endonuclease, which recognizes a symmetric sequence. Nucl. Acids Res. 25, 4444-4446. 10. Piekarowich, A., Golaszevska, M., Sunday, A. O., Siwinska, M. & Stein, D. C. (1999). The HaeIV restriction modi®cation system of Haemophilus aegyptius is encoded by a single polypeptide. J. Mol. Biol. 293, 1055-1065. 11. Burckhardt, J., Weisemann, J., Hamilton, D. L. & Yuan, R. (1981). Complexes formed between the restriction endonuclease EcoK and heteroduplex DNA. J. Mol. Biol. 153, 425-440.

216
28. Vitor, J. M. B. & Morgan, R. D. (1995). Two novel restriction endonucleases from Campylobacter jejuni. Gene, 157, 109-110. 29. Fuller-Pace, F. V., Bullas, L. R., Delius, H. & Murray, N. E. (1984). Genetic recombination can generate altered restriction speci®city. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 81, 6095-6099. 30. Cowan, G. M., Gann, A. A. & Murray, N. E. (1989). Conservation of complex DNA recognition domains between families of restriction enzymes. Cell, 56, 103-109. 31. Gorbalenya, A. E. & Koonin, E. V. (1991). Endonuclease (R) subunits of type-I and type-III restrictionmodi®cation enzymes contain a helicase-like domain. FEBS Letters, 291, 277-281. 32. Davies, G. P., Powell, L. M., Webb, J. L., Cooper, L. P. & Murray, N. E. (1998). EcoKI with an amino acid substitution in any one of seven DEAD-box motifs has impaired ATPase and endonuclease activities. Nucl. Acids Res. 26, 4828-4836. 33. Bullas, L. R., Colson, C. & Van Pel, A. (1976). DNA restriction and modi®cation systems in Salmonella. SQ, a new system derived by recombination between the SB system of Salmonella typhimurium and the SP system of Salmonella potsdam. J. Gen. Microbiol. 95, 166-172. 34. Nagaraja, V., Shepherd, J. C. & Bickle, T. A. (1985). A hybrid recognition sequence in a recombinant restriction enzyme and the evolution of DNA sequence speci®city. Nature, 316, 371-372. Ï 35. Lubys, A., Lubien , J., Kulakauskas, S., Stankevicius, e K., Timinskas, A. & Janulaitis, A. (1996). Cloning

Restriction-modi®cation System AloI and analysis of the genes encoding the type IIS restriction-modi®cation system HphI from Haemophilus parahaemolyticus. Nucl. Acids Res. 24, 2760-2766. Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F. & Maniatis, T. (1989). Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual, 2nd edit., Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY. Whitehead, P. R. & Brown, N. L. (1985). A simple and rapid method for screening bacteria for type II restriction endonucleases: enzymes in Aphanothece halophytica. Arch. Microbiol. 141, 70-74. Laemmli, U. K. (1970). Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4. Nature, 227, 680-685. Padegimiene, E., Maneliene, Z., Petrusyte, M. & Janulaitis, A. (2001). OliI, a unique restriction endonuclease that recognizes the discontinuous sequence 5H -CACNNNGTG-3H . Nucl. Acids Res. 29, E30. Marmur, J. (1961). A procedure for the isolation of deoxyribo nucleic acid from microorganisms. J. Mol. Biol. 3, 208-218. Birnboim, H. C. & Doly, J. (1979). A rapid alkaline extraction procedure for screening recombinant plasmid DNA. Nucl. Acids Res. 7, 1513-1523. Marko, M. A., Chipper®eld, R. & Birnboim, H. C. (1982). A procedure for the large-scale isolation of highly puri®ed plasmid DNA using alkaline extraction and binding to glass powder. Anal. Biochem. 121, 382-387. Pearson, W. R. & Lipman, D. J. (1988). Improved tools for biological sequence comparison. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 85, 2444-2448.

36.

37.

38. 39.

40. 41. 42.

43.

Edited by J. Karn (Received 29 June 2001; received in revised form 24 August 2001; accepted 30 August 2001)

