64

Review

TRENDS in Molecular Medicine Vol.7 No.2 February 2001

The molecular basis of copper-transport diseases
Julian F.B. Mercer
Copper (Cu) is a potentially toxic yet essential element. Menkes disease, a copper deficiency disorder, and Wilson disease, a copper toxicosis condition, are two human genetic disorders, caused by mutations of two closely related Cu-transporting ATPases. Both molecules efflux copper from cells. Quite diverse clinical phenotypes are produced by different mutations of these two Cu-transporting proteins. The understanding of copper homeostasis has become increasingly important in clinical medicine as the metal could be involved in the pathogenesis of some important neurological disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, motor neurone diseases and prion diseases.

Copper poses problems for all life forms. It is needed for a number of essential enzymes, but the ion is potentially toxic because it is a potent generator of free radicals. Thus, organisms have evolved various mechanisms to obtain and distribute copper safely and to excrete the excess. These copper homeostatic mechanisms have only recently been identified. The advances in knowledge have been catalyzed by the identification of the genes involved in two human disorders of copper transport, MENKES DISEASE (MD) (see Glossary) and WILSON DISEASE (WD). Recent interest in copper in the medical arena has also been stimulated by the growing realization that copper plays a role in common neurological conditions, such as Alzheimer's disease, the PRION diseases and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. The exact link between copper and the pathology of these diseases is still unclear; however, even a tenuous link with such important diseases has stimulated a burst of research activity into the identification of copper homeostatic mechanisms.
Why is copper essential for humans?

In addition to cytochrome c oxidase, which is essential for energy generation in the brain, copper is present in dopamine -monoxygenase, an enzyme involved in the catecholamine synthesis pathway, and in peptidyl -amidating monooxygenase (PAM), which modifies various peptide neurotransmitters. Ceruloplasmin is a plasma glycoprotein, which contains most of the copper in the blood. The ferroxidase activity of ceruloplasmin is thought to oxidize iron to allow it to bind to transferrin. Low ceruloplasmin resulting from nutritional Cu deficiency can cause anemia. The disease aceruloplasminemia, which is caused by mutations in the ceruloplasmin gene, manifests as an iron accumulation disorder5.
Genetic copper deficiency disorders

Julian F.B. Mercer Centre of Cellular and Molecular Biology, School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Deakin University, 221 Burwood Highway, Burwood Vic 3125, Australia. e-mail: jmercer@deakin.edu.au

Good background information on the essentiality of copper can be obtained from various excellent reviews and books on this topic, (for example, see Refs 1,2). Copper deficiency is not uncommon in domestic animals, but clinical copper deficiency is rare in adult humans. Marginal copper intake might contribute to connective tissue disorders including some cardiovascular conditions and osteoporosis3. Copper deficiency in infants causes iron-unresponsive anemia, NEUTROPENIA and bone abnormalities4. Table 1 lists some of the enzymes in humans that use copper as a cofactor. These include cytochrome c oxidase (a component of the mitochondrial electron transport chain), superoxide dismutase (part of the protection against reactive oxygen species), and lysyl oxidase, which is needed for the crosslinking of collagen and elastin. Copper is vitally important for brain function.

Classical MD is an X-linked copper deficiency syndrome with a frequency of about 1 in 200 000, first described in 1962 by John Menkes; affected boys usually die in early childhood and have multiple abnormalites that can be related to deficiencies in cuproenzymes (reviewed in Ref. 6). For example, their hair is hypopigmented, because of a deficiency of the enzyme tyrosinase needed for melanin synthesis. They have connective tissue abnormalities including aortic aneurisms, loose skin and fragile bones, resulting from reduced lysyl oxidase activity leading to defective collagen and elastin. A marked feature of the disease is severe neurological defects, and it is thought that the primary cause of these defects is reduced cytochrome c oxidase activity7. Menkes patients are often diagnosed from their unusual hair structure ­ termed pili torti ­ also known as kinky or steely hair, caused by reduced keratin cross-linking, a process that is catalyzed by an uncharacterized copper oxidase8. The link between copper and hair formation was first noted in sheep, which produce abnormal `steely wool' when copper deficient8. This observation played an important part in the realization that copper deficiency was the basis of MD9. Paradoxically, despite the overall copper deficiency, certain tissues in Menkes patients such as the kidney and the intestinal epithelial cells, accumulate copper. Cells cultured from Menkes patients also accumulate copper owing to a copper efflux defect; this feature is used for prenatal diagnosis10. There are several rare, milder clinical variants of classical MD. Mild MD is characterized by less severe neurological problems, and few connective tissue

http://tmm.trends.com 1471-4914/01/$ ­ see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. PII: S1471-4914(01)01920-7

Review

TRENDS in Molecular Medicine Vol.7 No.2 February 2001

65

Table 1. Some copper enzymes in humans
Enzyme Ceruloplasmin Cytochrome c oxidase Dopamine -monoxygenase Lysyl oxidase Peptidylglycine  amidating monooxygenase (PAM) Superoxide dismutase Tyrosinase Unknown enzyme Function Copper and iron transport Electron transport chain Catecholamine formation Cross-linking collagen, elastin Neuropeptide processing Free radical defence Formation of melanin Cross-linking of keratin Consequences of deficiency Iron accumulation and neurological damage Brain abnormalities, hypothermia, muscle weakness Neurological effects, possible hypothermia Connective tissue defects Unknown Sensitivity to oxidative stress Hypopigmentation Steely hair (wool)

defects6. OCCIPITAL HORN SYNDROME (OHS) is an X-linked connective tissue disorder, with only very mild neurological disease6. MD has sometimes been successfully treated by copper administration particularly when copper histidine is used11. However, treatment is not always successful. The reason for the variable clinical response is unclear, but it has been suggested that a successful clinical outcome is dependent on the presence of some residual Menkes protein activity7.
Genetic copper toxicosis: Wilson disease

Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive copper toxicosis condition with an incidence of one in 35 000 to 100 000. Very high concentrations of copper are accumulated in the liver because the biliary excretion of the metal ion is defective. The build up of copper causes death of hepatocytes, release of copper and accumulation in extra-hepatic tissues including the central nervous system; copper deposits can sometimes be seen in the cornea of the eyes ­ known as Kayser-Fleischer rings. When untreated, death can result from liver failure. The disease might present as a neurological condition with movement disorders a common feature. Psychiatric disturbance, dementia, anxiety, and disorientation are sometimes observed6, and age of onset is quite variable. WD patients often have a low level of plasma holoceruloplasmin (that is, ceruloplasmin containing copper) but the ceruloplasmin protein concentrations may be close to normal6,12. The reduced copper content of ceruloplasmin is caused by defective copper homeostasis in the liver ­ the site of plasma ceruloplasmin synthesis. WD can be treated by Cu-chelation therapy particularly if the disease is diagnosed before irreversible tissue damage occurs6. An alternative therapy is the use of oral zinc to reduce copper absorption from the diet13.
Copper physiology: uptake, efflux and distribution

The liver is central to copper homeostasis and most of the newly absorbed copper first enters this organ. The hepatic copper is either incorporated into ceruloplasmin or endogenous enzymes, and excess copper is secreted in the bile. If dietary intake of copper rises, the rate of biliary copper excretion increases correspondingly, maintaining total body copper within acceptable levels. Patients with WD cannot efflux copper in the bile, or incorporate copper into ceruloplasmin. Patients with MD also have defective transport of copper across the blood­brain barrier, resulting in severe brain copper deficiency. It is probable that copper is normally resorbed in the proximal tubules of the kidney, as under normal conditions very little copper is excreted in the urine2. Patients with MD cannot deliver the resorbed copper from the epithelial cells of the proximal tubules into the blood, and gradually
Glossary
Amyloid precursor protein: A transmembrane glycoprotein that is cleaved to form the Ab protein that is found in the amyloid plaques characteristic of Alzheimer's disease. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Also known as Lou-Gehrig's disease, is a neurodegenerative disorder that typically afflicts individuals in middle age, leading to paralysis and death. Menkes disease: A fatal X-linked copper deficiency disorder due to mutations affecting the ATP7A or MNK gene. Neutropenia: An abnormally low level of neutrophils in the blood. Occipital horn syndrome: An X-linked copper deficiency disorder characterized by severe connective tissue defects, caused by mutations of the Menkes gene ATP7A. P-type ATPases: Transmembrane cation transporting proteins characterized by the formation of an acylphosphate intermediate from ATP as part of the reaction cycle. Examples include the calcium ATPases in muscle and the sodium/potassium pumps in the plasma membrane. Prion protein: An infectious protein that causes transmissable neurodegenerative diseases, such as mad cow disease, Kuru and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. A normal isoform of the infectious protein is found in most cells.

The overall view of copper uptake, efflux and distribution in various tissues is shown in Fig. 1. The inhibition of copper transport that occurs in MD and WD are indicated. Copper is absorbed from dietary sources in the small intestine. In patients with MD, copper enters the intestinal enterocytes, but cannot be effluxed from the cell into the blood.
http://tmm.trends.com

transGolgi network (TGN): After passage through the Golgi stacks, proteins enter the TGN, a network of vesicles and tubules that is involved with sorting and distribution of proteins to different targets in the cell or into secretory vesicles.
Wilson disease: An autosomal recessive copper toxicity disorder affecting mainly the liver and central nervous system, fatal if untreated.

66

Review

TRENDS in Molecular Medicine Vol.7 No.2 February 2001

The Menkes and Wilson genes encode copper ATPases
Brain
Dietary copper

Tissues/organs

Blood [Cu] Ceruloplasmin Cu

Small intestine

Portal vein

Liver

Bile Feces Wilson disease Menkes disease
TRENDS in Molecular Medicine

Fig. 1. Pathway of copper in the body, and the blocks in Menkes and Wilson diseases. Copper is absorbed by the enterocytes of the small intestine and effluxed across the basolateral surface of these cells into the portal circulation. This latter process is defective in Menkes disease patients and results in accumulation of copper in the enterocytes and overall copper deficiency in the body. Most of the newly absorbed copper is normally taken up by the liver. In cases of copper overload, excess copper is excreted in the bile and this process is blocked in Wilson disease, as is the delivery of copper to ceruloplasmin, the principal copper carrier in the blood. Other low molecular-mass forms of copper (Cu) such as Cu-histidine are presumed to be important sources of copper for tissues. The transport of copper to the brain is blocked in patients with Menkes disease, leading to the severe neurological abnormalities characteristic of this condition.

A positional cloning strategy was used by three groups to isolate the gene affected in MD (Refs 15­17). The predicted protein was identified as a P-TYPE ATPASE based on characteristic amino acid motifs17. Consistent with the role of copper early in the evolution, Cu-transporting Menkes protein homologues have been found in bacteria and yeast (reviewed in Ref. 18). Shortly after the discovery of the Menkes gene, the Wilson gene was isolated, and it too was found to encode a P-type ATPase, with 67% amino acid identity to the Menkes protein19. The Menkes protein is known as ATP7A (or MNK) and the Wilson protein as ATP7B (or WND). A two-dimensional representation of these proteins is shown in Fig. 2. The eight transmembrane domains form a channel through which copper is pumped, driven by the hydrolysis of ATP. Both ATP7A and ATP7B have six copper-binding domains in the N-terminal region; these are presumed to accept metals from cytoplasmic carriers and/or assist in delivering copper to the channel.
Cu-induced trafficking: a key mechanism in copper homeostasis

accumulate high levels of copper in the kidneys, despite overall copper deficiency9. Defective transport of copper across the placenta is also found when the fetus is affected by MD. Studies with a mouse model of MD has demonstrated copper accumulation in the placenta, with greatly reduced transfer to the fetus14.

Extracellular Membrane Intracellular

TM 1­4

TM 5,6

TM 7,8

D-phosph Phosphatase

ATP

C

Cu-binding site N

Cytoplasm
TRENDS in Molecular Medicine

Fig. 2. Two-dimensional representation of the Menkes and Wilson Cu-ATPases. Both proteins are predicted to have eight transmembrane (TM) domains, with most of the protein on the cytoplasmic side. In addition to the ATP-binding site, phosphatase domain, and aspartic acid, which is phosphorylated (D-phosph) and common to all P-type ATPases, the N-terminal region contains six copper binding motifs that interact with copper chaperonins and presumably deliver copper to the channel.

Recent work on the intracellular localization of ATP7A and ATP7B has uncovered a fascinating mechanism by which these proteins manage to deliver copper to secreted cuproenzymes but also maintain cellular copper within safe limits. Using antibodies against the N-terminus of the protein, and ATP7A over-producing cells, the protein was localized to the TRANSGOLGI NETWORK (TGN) (Ref. 20). ATP7A functions in the TGN to pump copper to copper-dependent enzymes such as lysyl oxidase. When cells were cultured in media containing high concentrations of copper, the Menkes protein was found to redistribute to small cytoplasmic vesicles and to the plasma membrane20. As a result of this redistribution, excess copper can be pumped out of the cell by the Menkes protein, and when the intracellular copper levels are reduced, the protein returns to the TGN network20 (see Fig. 3A). The Wilson protein undergoes similar Cu-induced trafficking, but the protein moved from the TGN network to a vesicular compartment rather than the plasma membrane (Fig. 3b)21. The Wilson protein is thought to deliver copper into the vesicles (possibly late endosomes), and then return to the TGN. The copper-loaded vesicles can continue towards the biliary canalicular membrane of the hepatocyte, possibly fusing with lysosomes, and the copper is discharged into the bile by exocytosis21. Recent data suggest, however, that in polarized hepatocytes, ATP7B might localize to the apical canalicular membrane, thus this protein might pump copper directly into the bile22.

http://tmm.trends.com

Review

TRENDS in Molecular Medicine Vol.7 No.2 February 2001

67

(a)
Golgi ­Cu

Cu

(a)
Golgi

Hololysyloxidase

Nucleus +Cu Nucleus Secretory vesicle TGN Cu Golgi ­Cu Nucleus +Cu Nucleus TGN Occipital horn syndrome
TRENDS in Molecular Medicine

(b)

Partially active ATP7A

Mild Menkes disease

Cu Cu

(b)
Golgi Small amount active ATP7A on PM

Apo-lysyl oxidase

Wilson ATPase Menkes ATPase TGN Vesicles

Mutations Late endosome
TRENDS in Molecular Medicine

Secretory vesicle

Fig. 3. Copper-induced trafficking of the Menkes (a) and Wilson (b) CuATPase. Both proteins are located in the transGolgi network (TGN) in low copper, where they deliver copper to secreted cuproenzymes. They undergo a low level, constitutive recycling to the plasma membrane, which can be distinguished from the copper-induced pathway. The latter is blocked by mutations which prevent copper transport. In response to copper, the Wilson ATPase moves to a vesicular compartment (possibly the late endosome) rather than to the plasma membrane, in non-polarized cells. In polarized cells, ATP7B traffics to the apical surface of the cell.

Fig. 4. Cellular model to explain the milder phenotypes produced by mutations of ATP7A. (a) Mild MD could result from the presence of normal amounts of mutant ATP7A that has partial copper transport activity, but limited ability to traffic to the plasma membrane in response to copper. Thus Cu efflux from cells is reduced, but some active lysyl oxidase is produced. (b) Occipital horn syndrome (OHS) results from mutations that allow the production of a small amount of normal ATP7A. The protein is located almost entirely on the plasma membrane, owing to the accumulation of cytoplasmic copper, thus no copper is supplied to lysyl oxidase.

Molecular basis for the variable clinical phenotypes in MD

Many mutations causing classical MD and several milder variants have been identified23. The classical disease is caused by severe mutations predicted to prevent the formation of any functional protein. In one patient with mild MD a missense mutation in the seventh transmembrane domain was found. The mutant protein was located in the TGN, but surprisingly did not relocate to the plasma membrane in response to Cu (Ref. 24). Other missense mutations have also been found to block Cu-induced trafficking. The milder course of the disease suggests that the mutant protein retains some Cu-transport activity. One possible explanation for the clinical features (mild neurological effects, and mild connective tissue disease) could be because of the localization of a partially active protein in the TGN, which is able to deliver some Cu to lysyl oxidase (Fig. 4a). All cases of occipital horn syndrome described so far have been the result of splice site mutations that still permit the production of small amounts of normal protein25. A possible explanation for the pronounced connective tissue defects is that the ability of the cells to efflux Cu is reduced, and it requires exposure of the cell to only a small amount of Cu to induce relocalization of the protein to the plasma membrane. If this is the case, even in quite low copper concentrations, no ATP7A would be found
http://tmm.trends.com

in the TGN, hence copper is not supplied to lysyl oxidase (Fig. 4b). This clinical phenotype resulting from mutations of ATP7A is determined by a combination of effects of the mutations on the protein function, such as reduction in copper transport activity, altered intracellular location and trafficking response to copper.
Molecular basis of the phenotypic variability in WD

The age of onset of WD varies from two to more than 40 years, and patients can present with either hepatic or neurological symptoms. Although some WD patients have normal plasma ceruloplasmin, most have low levels. The use of low ceruloplasmin for diagnostic purposes is unreliable, especially in patients with liver disease26. The reason for this variable presentation is unclear, but some indication has been obtained by analysis of the types of mutations found in patients. Over 200 mutations have been described and are listed in a database (http://www.medgen.med.ualberta.ca/database). In North America, 38% of WD chromosomes harbour the His1069Gln mutation, whereas other population groups have different common mutations. The correlation between genotype and phenotype is complicated by the fact that many WD patients are compound heterozygotes; that is, they carry different

68

Review

TRENDS in Molecular Medicine Vol.7 No.2 February 2001

Cu efflux ATP7A Atox1 hCTR1 Cu uptake CCS Cu Cox17p Cytochrome c oxidase Superoxide dismutase
TRENDS in Molecular Medicine

Lysyl oxidase Apo-lysyl oxidase

Metallothioneins

Fig. 5. The cellular pathways of copper. Copper enters the cell through the specific copper transporter hCTR1, and is then distributed by specific protein chaperones (Atox1, Cox17p, CCS) that target various molecules for copper incorporation. Excess copper is effluxed by the Menkes ATPases (ATP7A) and if the efflux capacity is exceeded, metallothioneins are induced and sequester the excess copper

in the liver from ingestion of high quantities of copper during childhood. Children who developed this disease often received milk contaminated with copper after boiling in brass vessels31, although other cases appear not to be associated with excess copper ingestion32. A similar disorder has been reported in the Tyrol (Austria), again resulting from ingestion of milk heated in copper vessels. In these cases there is strong evidence of autosomal recessive inheritance33. Similar sporadic cases of childhood copper-associated cirrhosis have been reported associated with high levels of copper in drinking water34. It seems likely that all these disorders have a genetic basis, but usually require exposure to high levels of copper in early childhood to manifest. The candidate gene might encode a protein that is involved in copper homeostasis in the immature liver.
The intracellular copper pathway: are there any other genetic copper disorders?

ATP7B mutations on each chromosome 13. Patients that are homozygous for severe mutations have an earlier onset of disease and are sometimes not recognized as WD because of this fact 27. Milder mutations may present with later-onset neurological disease28. Similar to MD variants, mutations that cause mislocalization of the protein, or changes in Cu-induced trafficking might result in distinct phenotypes, such as WD patients with normal ceruloplasmin29. The clinical severity of WD might also be influenced by environmental factors such as the amount of copper ingested, or allelic variants of modifying genes, such as metallothioneins (MTs). Such factors could explain why the common His1069Gln mutation is associated with a range of clinical presentations30.
Other possible genetic copper toxicity disorders

Indian childhood cirrhosis (ICC) is a potentially fatal disease characterized by massive copper accumulation
Outstanding questions
· What are the specific signals that influence copper-induced trafficking of ATP7A and ATP7B and why do mutations prevent trafficking? Are there modifying genes that influence the severity of MD and WD? Are the childhood copper toxicosis conditions that occur the result of early exposure to excess copper, caused by mutations of an unidentified gene important for copper homeostasis in the immature liver? Are there diseases caused by mutations in copper chaperones that have yet to be attributed to defective copper homeostasis? What is the link between copper and neurological diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and the prion diseases?

· ·

·

A number of proteins are involved in the intracellular transport of copper (Fig. 5). Copper is thought to enter most human cells by a protein known as hCTR1 (Ref. 35). In the cytoplasm the copper is distributed between a number of proteins, known as copper chaperones, that deliver the metal to various destinations in the cell36. A small protein, ATOX1, carries the copper to the ATP7A and ATP7B proteins, for incorporation into secreted cuproenzymes such as lysyl oxidase. Another chaperone (COX17) has a role in delivering copper to mitochondria, for incorporation into cytochrome c oxidase. The protein CCS transports copper to copper/zinc superoxide dismutase. The genes encoding these proteins were originally identified in yeast, and the presence of mammalian homologues emphasizes the conservation of copper homeostatic mechanisms36. If the intake of copper exceeds the efflux capacity of the cell, such as in the hepatocytes of patients with WD, the accumulating copper induces the synthesis of MTs ­ small cysteine-rich proteins that sequester heavy metals. No human diseases have yet been associated with mutations in the copper chaperone genes. One prediction might be that the clinical phenotype of an ATOX1 mutant, for example, would resemble MD but would not show X-linked inheritance. Murine targetted deletion of CCS results in an increased sensitivity to oxidative damage because of failure of copper to reach apo-superoxide dismutase37. MTtargeted deletion mice do not appear to have any defects of copper metabolism, but show sensitivity to cadmium toxicity38. The disease phenotype of mouse knockouts for the other may lead to the discovery of other genetic disorders of copper in humans.
Copper and neurodegenerative diseases

·

Some very interesting recent findings have linked copper to some devastating neurological conditions, and a common theme that emerges is the possibility of Cu-induced free radical production leading to

http://tmm.trends.com

Review

TRENDS in Molecular Medicine Vol.7 No.2 February 2001

69

neuronal damage. For example, the AMYLOID PRECURSOR
PROTEIN involved in Alzheimer's disease, is a copper-

binding molecule, and can reduce Cu(II) to Cu(I), which can form reactive hydroxyl radicals39. The prion protein involved in Creutzfeldt­Jakob disease is a copper-binding protein and might have a role in copper uptake in neurones and delivery of copper to specific target proteins. The link between this role and the pathogenesis of the disease remains unclear40. Parkinson's disease appears to be associated with abnormalities of iron and copper. Patients have been found to have reduced levels of ceruloplasmin in their cerebrospinal fluid and this might be related to the raised iron levels in the basal ganglia41. AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS is a neurodegenerative disease affecting motor neurones, which leads to progressive muscular weakness, atrophy and death. An autosomal
References 1 Linder, M.C. (1991) Biochemistry of Copper. In Biochemistry of the Elements (Frieden, E., ed.), Plenum Press, New York 2 Danks, D.M. (1988) Copper deficiency in humans. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 8, 235­257 3 Klevay, L.M. (2000) Cardiovascular disease from copper deficiency ­ a history. J. Nutr. 130, 489S­492S 4 Olivares, M. and Uauy, R. (1996) Copper as an essential nutrient. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 63, 791S­796S 5 Yoshida, K. et al. (1995) A mutation in the ceruloplasmin gene is associated with systemic hemosiderosis in humans. Nat. Genet. 9, 267­272 6 Danks, D.M. (1995) Disorders of Copper Transport in The Metabolic and Molecular Basis of Inherited Disease (Scriver, C.R., Beaudet, A.L., Sly, W.M., and Valle, D., eds) (Vol. 1), (7th Ed.), pp. 2211-2235, McGraw-Hill 7 Kaler, S.G. (1994) Menkes Disease. Adv. Pediatr. 41, 262­303 8 Gillespie, J.M. (1973) Keratin structure and changes with copper deficiency. Aus. J. Derm. 14, 127­131 9 Danks, D.M. et al. (1972) Menkes's kinky hair syndrome: an inherited defect in copper absorption with wide-spread effects. Pediatrics 50, 188­201 10 Camakaris, J. et al. (1980) Altered copper metabolism in cultured cells from human Menkes' syndrome and mottled mouse mutants. Biochem. Genet. 18, 117­131 11 Sarkar, B. et al. (1993) Copper-histidine therapy for Menkes disease. J. Pediatr. 123, 828­830 12 Matsuda, I. et al. (1974) Determination of apoceruloplasmin by radioimmuneassay in nutritional copper deficiency, Menkes's Kinky hair syndrome, Wilson's disease, and umbilical cord blood. Pediatr. Res. 8, 821­824 13 Brewer, G.J. et al. (1989) Treatment of Wilson's Disease with Zinc. 6. Initial Treatment Studies. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 114, 633­638 14 Mann, J., Camakaris, J. and Danks, D.M. (1980) Copper metabolism in mottled mouse mutants: defective placental transfer of Cu-64 to foetal brindled (Mobr) mice. Biochem. J. 186, 629­631 15 Mercer, J.F.B. et al. (1993) Isolation of a partial candidate gene for Menkes disease by positional cloning. Nat. Genet. 3, 20­25
http://tmm.trends.com

dominant form is caused by mutations in the Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD). It appears that the disease results from a gain of function of Cu/Zn SOD, associated with abnormal forms of the protein in which copper is bound in a manner that allows the generation of reactive oxygen species42.
Conclusions

Copper diseases illustrate the equally devastating results of deficiency and excess and the consequences of breakdown of homeostatic mechanisms. The list of possible diseases involving this essential trace element continues to increase. Outcomes of research into the molecular basis of copper homeostasis will have an impact not just on the rare genetic disorders but also on common and serious progressive neurological diseases.
30 Duc, H.H. et al. (1998) His1069Gln and six novel Wilson disease mutations: analysis of relevance for early diagnosis and phenotype. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 6, 616­623 31 O'Neill, N.C. and Tanner, M.S. (1989) Uptake of copper from brass vessels by bovine milk and its relevance to Indian childhood cirrhosis. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 9, 167­72 32 Abiodun, P.O. et al. (2000) Indian Childhood-like cirrhosis in three Saudi Arabian siblings. Ann. Trop. Paediatr. 20, 61­66 33 Muller, T. et al. (1996) Endemic Tyrolean infantile cirrhosis: an ecogenetic disorder. Lancet 347, 877­880 34 Muller-Hocker, J. et al. (1987) Fatal copper storage disease of the liver in a German infant resembling Indian Childhood Cirrhosis. Virchows Arch. (Path. Anat.) 411, 379­385 35 Zhou, B. and Gitschier, J. (1997) hCTR1: A human gene for copper uptake identified by complementation in yeast. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94, 7481­7486 36 Harrison, M.D., Jones, C.E. and Dameron, C.T. (1999) Copper chaperones: function, structure and copper-binding properties. J. Biol. Inorg. Chem. 4, 145­153 37 Wong, P.C. et al. (2000) Copper chaperone for superoxide dismutase is essential to activate mammalian Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97, 2886­91 38 Michalska, A.E. and Choo, K.H.A. (1993) Targetting and germ line transmission of a null mutation at the metallothionein I and II loci in mouse. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 90, 8088­8092 39 White, A.R. et al. (1999) The alzheimer's disease amyloid precursor protein modulates copper-induced toxicity and oxidative stress in primary neuronal cultures. J. Neurosci. 19, 9170­9179 40 Pauly, P.C. and Harris, D. (1998) Copper stimulates the endocytosis of the prion protein. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 33107­33110 41 Boll, M.C. et al. (1999) Reduced ferroxidase activity in the cerebrospinal fluid from patients with Parkinson's disease. Neurosci.-Lett. 265, 155­158 42 Lyons, T.J. et al. (2000) The metal binding properties of the zinc site of yeast copper-zinc superoxide dismutase: implications for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J. Biol. Inorg. Chem. 5, 189­203

16 Chelly, J. et al. (1993) Isolation of a candidate gene for Menkes disease that encodes a potential heavy metal binding protein. Nat. Genet. 3, 14­19 17 Vulpe, C. et al. (1993) Isolation of a candidate gene for Menkes disease and evidence that it encodes a copper-transporting ATPase. Nat. Genet. 3, 7­13 18 Solioz, M. and Vulpe, C. (1996) CPX-type ATPases: a class of P-type ATPases that pump heavy metals. Trends Biochem. Sci. 21, 237­241 19 Bull, P.C. et al. (1993) The Wilson disease gene is a putative copper transporting P-type ATPase similar to the Menkes gene. Nat. Genet. 5, 327­337 20 Petris, M.J. et al. (1996) Ligand-regulated transport of the Menkes copper P-type ATPase efflux pump from the Golgi apparatus to the plasma membrane: a novel mechanism of regulated trafficking. EMBO J. 15, 6084­6095 21 Schaefer, M. et al. (1999) Hepatocyte-specific localization and copper-dependent trafficking of the Wilson's disease protein in the liver. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 39, G639­G646 22 Roelfosen, H. et al. (2000) Copper-induced apical trafficking of ATP7B in polarized hepatoma cells provides a mechanism for biliary copper excretion. Gastroenterol. 119, 782­793 23 Tümer, Z. et al. (1997) Identification of point mutations in 41 unrelated patients affected with Menkes disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 60, 63­71 24 Ambrosini, L.and Mercer, J.F.B. (1999) Defective copper-induced trafficking and localization fo the Menkes protein in patients with mild and coppertreated classical Menkes disease. Hum. Mol. Genet. 8, 1547­1555 25 Moller, L.B. et al. (2000) Similar splice-site mutations of the ATP7A gene lead to different phenotypes: classical Menkes disease or occipital horn syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66, 1211­1220 26 Steindl, P. et al. (1997) Wilson's disease in patients presenting with liver disease: a diagnostic challenge. Gastroenterol. 113, 212­218 27 Thomas, G.R. et al. (1995) The Wilson disease gene: spectrum of mutations and their consequences. Nat. Genet. 9, 210­216 28 Thomas, G.R. et al. (1995) Wilson disease in Iceland: a clinical and genetic study. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 56, 1140­1146 29 Forbes, J.R. and Cox, D.W. (2000) CopperDependent Trafficking of Wilson Disease Mutant ATP7B Proteins. Hum. Mol. Genet. 9, 1927­1935

