ARTICLE IN PRESS
Biologicals xxx (2010) 1­5

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Biologicals
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biologicals

Risks linked to endogenous retroviruses for vaccine production: A general overview
Marie Dewannieux a, b, *, David Ribet a, b, Thierry Heidmann a, b
a b

´ ´ ` ´ ´ ¨des des Eucaryotes Superieurs, CNRS UMR 8122, Institut Gustave Roussy, 39 rue Camille Desmoulins, 94805 Villejuif, France ´ Unite des Retrovirus Endogenes et Elements Retroi ´ Universite Paris-Sud, Orsay 91405, France

a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history: Received 10 January 2010 Accepted 10 January 2010 Keyword: Endogenous retrovirus

a b s t r a c t
Mammalian genomes contain a heavy load of retroelements, which are mobile sequences requiring reverse transcription for their amplification. A significant proportion of these elements is of retroviral origin, with thousands of sequences resembling the integrated form of infectious retroviruses with two LTRs bordering internal regions homologous to the gag, pol, and env genes. These elements, named endogenous retroviruses (ERVs), are thought to be the remnants of ancestral germline infections by active retroviruses, which have thereafter been transmitted in a Mendelian manner. The sequencing of several mammalian genomes has allowed a comprehensive study of their ERVs. They can be grouped according to sequence homologies into 10­100 families per genome, each containing a few to several hundred elements. Strong similarities between ERVs and present-day retroviruses can be inferred from phylogenetic analyses performed on the pol or env genes, suggesting a common history. As a general rule, most ERVs are old and degenerated, with their open reading frames disrupted, but a few proviruses have retained intact genes and the corresponding proteins can thus be expressed. Some elements still contain gag and pol genes that drive the synthesis of viral particles, as well as envelope genes whose product can be incorporated on their cognate or heterologous viral particles. This presentation will review the general properties of endogenous retroviruses, in relation with their possible consequences on vaccine production. Ó 2010 The International Association for Biologicals. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction In most mammalian genomes, only a small fraction of the nuclear DNA corresponds to coding sequences. For example, more than 40% of the human or murine genomes is occupied by moderately reiterated sequences that can replicate and thus increase their copy number (reviewed in [1,2]). In most mammals, the recent still-active elements use a RNA intermediate in their amplification cycle, and correspond to the retroelements. Most of these sequences have the structure of integrated of cDNAs and correspond to the so-called LINEs (Long Interspersed Nuclear Elements) and SINEs (Short Interspersed Nuclear Elements) elements which are not directly related to any known virus (reviewed in [3,4]). The second major class of retroelements that can be found in the genomes corresponds to the LTR retrotransposons, or endogenous retroviruses (ERVs). These elements

are defined by the presence of long terminal repeats ­ the LTRs- at both extremities, surrounding open reading frames (ORFs) similar to the ones encoded by infectious retroviruses. Two sub-categories can be defined, depending on the presence or not of an envelope gene (coding for a glycoprotein) downstream the well conserved ORFs corresponding to the retroviral structural and replicative proteins gag and pol (reviewed in [3,4]). 2. Origin and general properties of endogenous retroviruses 2.1. Relations between endogenous and infectious retroviruses Endogenous retroviruses can account for up to 10% of the genome of their host, which corresponds to thousands of distinct proviruses. They are classified into families based on their sequence: the members of each family all originate, directly or not, from a single founder element, and present accordingly a very high sequence similarity. The complete sequencing of several genomes has enabled the analysis of the relationship between endogenous retroviruses, their infectious counterparts and some related LTRcontaining elements that can be found in other types of genomes,

´ ´ ` ´ ´ * Corresponding author. Unite des Retrovirus Endogenes et Elements Retroides ¨ ´ des Eucaryotes Superieurs, CNRS UMR 8122, Institut Gustave Roussy, 39 rue Camille Desmoulins, 94805 Villejuif, France. Tel.: þ33 1 42 11 61 88; fax: þ33 1 42 11 53 42. E-mail address: Marie.Dewannieux@igr.fr (M. Dewannieux).

1045-1056/$36.00 Ó 2010 The International Association for Biologicals. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.biologicals.2010.01.006

Please cite this article in press as: Dewannieux M, et al., Risks linked to endogenous retroviruses for vaccine production: A general overview, Biologicals (2010), doi:10.1016/j.biologicals.2010.01.006

ARTICLE IN PRESS
2 M. Dewannieux et al. / Biologicals xxx (2010) 1­5

including yeast and fruit fly [3,5­7]. As shown in Fig. 1, these studies highlight the very close proximity between endogenous and infectious retroviruses: most retroviral phyla contain both types of elements, and they are clearly separated from the non-mammalian LTR elements. These studies also indicate that some endogenous retroviruses are closer to infectious elements than to other families of endogenous elements. 2.2. Origin of the endogenous retroviruses Given the close relationship that is observed between endogenous and infectious retroviruses, it is highly probable that they are genetically linked and that they share a common ancestor. The main hypothesis to account for the presence of the endogenous retroviruses in mammalian genomes is that they are initially created by an infectious retrovirus: the latter can infect various cell types in the course of a normal infection, and it is thought that, in some cases, viral particles may access the germline and integrate their genome there. Such germline insertions would result in the transmission of the proviral element to all the cells of a potential derived embryo, and it would from this point be transmitted like any other sequence, following a Mendelian pattern. Then, the virus can also increase its copy number by successive re-infections of the germline, which would explain the presence of some families of elements containing hundreds of copies (see Fig. 2). This model has been comforted by the observation of a natural invasion of a mammalian genome by a new type of endogenous

Fig. 2. Origin and evolution of endogenous retroviruses. Endogenous retroviruses are thought to be generated following a retroviral infection, when a retrovirus manages to infect the germline: the resulting provirus is then transmitted vertically to the offspring, in the genome of which it can amplify by successive re-infections of the germline (see text for more details).

retrovirus: KoRV. This is an infectious retrovirus that infects most koalas in Australia, causing leukaemia and lymphomas in its host (reviewed in [8]). But this element has also been shown to be endogenous in most natural populations, with the exception of small groups of animals that were isolated on an island since the beginning of the XXth century and are still free of the virus. This indicates that in the first stage of the endogenisation, the virus exists in two forms, infectious and endogenous [9]. It is expected that with time it should loose some of its pathogenic properties and become adapted to its host. 2.3. Differences in the evolution of infectious and endogenous retroviruses At the start of an endogenisation process, the endogenous and infectious elements are absolutely identical. However, the selection pressures exerted on these two kinds of elements are very different, and one would expect the status of a virus to change dramatically its evolution. Indeed the life cycle of an infectious retrovirus is characterised by a high mutation rate, due to the poor fidelity of the reverse-transcriptase. On the contrary, from the moment a retrovirus is endogenised, its replication is performed by the cellular machinery, the mutation rate of which is several orders of magnitudes lower than that of the retrovirus. Owing to their replicative cycle, infectious retroviruses are subjected to purifying selection,

Fig. 1. Phylogenetic relations between LTR retrotransposons, infectious retroviruses and a subset of mammalian endogenous retroviruses (taken from the mouse genome as an example). The Ty1/Copia and Ty3/Gypsy families are indicated as outgroups, and the different phyla of retroviruses are represented by a few elements. Endogenous retroviruses from the mouse genome are included in this tree (in italics) to illustrate their close proximity with the different types of infectious elements. It is noteworthy that endogenous proviruses related to the lentivirus phylum have been identified in other mammalian species (rabbit and lemur).

Please cite this article in press as: Dewannieux M, et al., Risks linked to endogenous retroviruses for vaccine production: A general overview, Biologicals (2010), doi:10.1016/j.biologicals.2010.01.006

ARTICLE IN PRESS
M. Dewannieux et al. / Biologicals xxx (2010) 1­5 3

which imposes their encoded proteins to remain functional. The situation of endogenous elements is very different: since they are replicated by the cell enzymes, there is no selective pressure for the conservation of their open reading frames. For this reason, most endogenous proviruses are mutated with some or all of their ORFs interrupted by nonsense mutations or frameshifts, all the more when the elements were inserted a long time ago. 2.4. General properties of endogenous retroviruses: the example of the mouse genome The mouse genome is a good model for the description of the properties of endogenous retroviruses: its complete sequencing added data to the ones that had been collected earlier in vivo on lab animals, and the whole set provides a clear image of the status of its LTR elements (see Fig. 3). According to the genomic data, there are more than fifteen families of proviruses (reviewed in [10]). These can be classified in three groups depending on their activity. The first one corresponds to long extinct elements, whose ORFs are completely degenerated and barely recognisable. These families (among which MuERV-Y for example) are most certainly ``transpositionnally dead'' (i.e. they cannot replicate and amplify anymore

within the genome) due to the loss of their genes, even though they can still be constituted by several hundreds of elements. The second category of proviruses corresponds to completely noncoding elements that contain sequences of unknown origin as well as the motifs necessary to be replicated by other endogenous retroviruses. These families (e.g. VL30 or ETn) are thus parasitic elements, and despite their being noncoding, there are still subjected to some sort of selective pressure to maintain the signals required for their replication ([11], reviewed in [10]). On a functional point of view, these elements are still mobile in vivo and can be responsible of de novo mutations following their insertion. The third category of elements comprises the autonomous proviruses, which are responsible for their own amplification as well as the amplification of the elements of the second category. Some families have developed a highly efficient strictly intracellular amplification cycle, like the IAPs (Intracisternal A-type Particles) or MusD elements, and are devoid of an envelope gene [11,12]. Others have conserved the full set of retroviral genes e.g. IAPE (Intracisternal A-type Particles with an envelope), or MLVs (Murine Leukemia Virus) and still replicate like infectious retroviruses with an extracellular phase, as observed in ex vivo experiments ([13],

Fig. 3. Summary of the families of endogenous retroviruses present in the mouse genome. The different families already described are presented with their ORFmap as well as their general properties: copy number, average provirus size, activity (þþþ: active in vivo; ex vivo: active in ex vivo assays; À: inactive; nd: not determined) and amplification mechanism (extra: infectious cycle with an extracellular phase; intra: intracellular transposition; nd: not determined).

Please cite this article in press as: Dewannieux M, et al., Risks linked to endogenous retroviruses for vaccine production: A general overview, Biologicals (2010), doi:10.1016/j.biologicals.2010.01.006

ARTICLE IN PRESS
4 M. Dewannieux et al. / Biologicals xxx (2010) 1­5

reviewed in [10]). Among this third class, the status of the families can differ: the IAPs for example comprise a high number (around 1000) of functional elements whereas others have just kept a single functional copy (e.g. MusD or IAPE) and are on their way to extinction. It is interesting to note that the host range of these functional elements (for the ones with an extracellular cycle of course) is very diverse, depending only on the envelope gene. Only some of the MLVs elements and the GLN proviruses are ecotropic (i.e. only able to infect murine cells), the others having a broader infection range. On the whole, there are in the mouse genome at least nine families of endogenous retroviruses that are still expected to be amplification-competent, even if no de novo insertion event has been observed for some of them. 2.5. ERVs status in other mammals As we just described, the mouse genome contains several hundreds of still-active LTR elements. But the situation in human is different: even if the total content in endogenous retroviruses is quite similar (around 8% of the genome in both cases), the studies that were performed indicate that only one family of elements could have retained one (or a few) functional endogenous provirus, that would be present only in a fraction of the population (reviewed in [1,14]). It was thus proposed that the situation observed in the mouse was extraordinary, and may be related to the way inbred mouse strains had been selected and kept. However, the data that became available from different species suggest that it is the situation observed in human that seems to be uncommon. For example, the cat genome, as well as the pig's, contains several families of endogenous retroviruses with infectious copies ([15], reviewed in [3]); and there is at least one active family of elements in the koala genome (see above). It seems therefore that most mammalian species possess in their genome one or several types of infectious endogenous retroviruses, most of which are expected to disclose a xeno- (infectious for most species except its host) or poly- (infectious for most species, including its host)-tropic host range. 3. Potential risks due to endogenous retroviruses for vaccine production 3.1. Risks due to autonomous endogenous retroviruses As described above, most mammalian species contain a few infectious endogenous retroviruses, some of which are expected to have a broad host range. The mere presence of such elements is a risk for vaccine production if it is based on the production of viral particles in mammalian cell lines, since endogenous viral particles could contaminate the vaccine virus and be injected together with the vaccine. If these elements are infectious and have a suitable tropism, this could result in the infection of the recipient animal, and thus in the introduction of a new virus in the considered species, the consequences of which cannot be predicted. Of course, this is the worst scenario hypothesis, and it would require that the endogenous retroviruses are expressed. As a general rule, these elements tend to be silenced in the cells, like other reiterated sequences, but they can be easily reactivated, in particular by cellular stresses including chemical treatments (e.g. 5-Azacytidine that affects the DNA methylation, 5-idodeoxyuridine, cytokines, hormones) but also heat shocks or viral infections, (see [16] and reviewed in [17]). It is therefore possible that the expression of the vaccine virus in itself, or a small change in the cell culture conditions, could be such a trigger and induce the cell line used to express an endogenous retrovirus previously silenced.

3.2. Recombination between defective endogenous retroviruses can generate new infectious viruses One possibility to avoid the problem of contamination of vaccines by infectious endogenous retrovirus would be, when this doesn't hamper the vaccine virus production of course, to use cell lines from species that do not contain any, like human ones, or some that only contain viruses with a ``safe'' tropism for the considered vaccine. The whole genome sequencing of an increasing number of species may provide new candidates. However, this would not be a complete guarantee since it is possible for several defective proviruses to recombine and create a new infectious element, or for a virus to acquire via recombination a new envelope gene, and thus a different host range. This kind of event is well described in the AKR mouse strain, in which a multi steps recombination reproducibly generates a new infectious virus that has a different tropism and expression pattern, and that ends up causing lethal tumours in its host ([18], reviewed in [3]). It is also the case of the infectious endogenous retrovirus RD114 from the cat, which was shown to have originated from a recombination between another pre-existing feline endogenous retrovirus and a element related to BaEV (Baboon Endogenous retrovirus), the latter providing a distinctive envelope gene [19]. The possibility for some retroviruses to accidently co-package two different retroviral genomes in the same particle probably accounts for some, if not most, recombination events. In fact, phylogenetic studies indicate that recombination between retroviruses is a rather common mechanism: if the trees based on the comparison of the pol and env genes generally overlap, some retroviruses are not classified in the same group depending on the alignment being made with pol or env, which indicates that these elements are chimeric and most certainly arose by recombination [20]. 3.3. Endogenous retroviruses can mobilise other types of sequences Endogenous retroviruses are closely related to the infectious retroviruses, and are thus expected to share the same replication mechanism, which is extremely specific since depending on a series of signals (e.g. PBS (Primer Binding Site), PPT (Poly Purine Tract), encapsidation signal) located on the RNA. However, there are ways to bypass these signals, and endogenous retroviruses can sometimes mobilise sequences that are unrelated to their genomes. For example, it was known for quite some time that, in murine infected cells, it is possible to find fragments of the LCMV (Lymphocytic ChorioMeningitis Virus) genome stably integrated, which should be impossible since it is a RNA virus without any reverse transcription step in its cycle [21]. Further studies indicated that these fragments were associated with a family of murine endogenous retroelements, the IAPs, and experimental data showed that the heterologous expression of a functional IAP in a cell infected by LCMV is sufficient to generate LCMV cDNA fragments inserted in the cell genome [22]. This interaction seems to be rather specific, always resulting in the insertion of an LCMV env fragment associated with an IAP provirus. However the precise molecular mechanisms involved are unknown. This kind of event demonstrates that endogenous retroviruses have the capacity to stably integrate foreign DNA in the cell genome, and associate it with other viral sequences, some of which may result in functional elements. Another illustration of the capacity of retroviruses to mobilise unrelated sequences is the well-known case of the Rous Sarcoma Virus. In this case, it is thought that the original infectious virus could replicate normally, until it happened to recombine with cellular DNA, resulting in the insertion of a cellular oncogene (src) in the retroviral genome. It was shown that the insertion of the srccontaining genome induces cancer in the host (reviewed in [23]). The same kind of events could happen with any functional

Please cite this article in press as: Dewannieux M, et al., Risks linked to endogenous retroviruses for vaccine production: A general overview, Biologicals (2010), doi:10.1016/j.biologicals.2010.01.006

ARTICLE IN PRESS
M. Dewannieux et al. / Biologicals xxx (2010) 1­5 5

endogenous retrovirus in theory. There are also some cases described in which retroviral proteins themselves are oncogenes e.g. the envelope protein from JSRV (Jaagsiekte Sheep RetroVirus) [24], suggesting that a virus can be oncogenic even without cellular gene capture. If endogenous retroviruses with a transforming activity exist or are generated by recombination, their contaminating a vaccine preparation could be noxious for the vaccines. 3.4. Endogenous retroviral envelopes can pseudotype various viral particles and change their host range The last potential risk caused by endogenous retroviruses for vaccine production that will be discussed here is related to the rather loose specificity that is observed in retroviral assembly. There are numerous examples of cases in which a specific retroviral core (constituted by the gag and pol products) can incorporate a foreign envelope protein, and thus gain a new host range (e.g. [25­27] for human endogenous envelopes). It is also possible for retroviral envelopes to be incorporated on the particles formed by another virus and to render them infectious (e.g. [28]). If a vaccine is prepared by infecting a particular cell line with a virus (attenuated or not), there is thus a possibility that the tropism of the resulting particles will not be the one of the vaccine strain, but could be extended by any of the endogenous envelope proteins that are expressed in the cell line. Obviously, the properties of such a synthetic element cannot be easily predicted, as well as cannot be predicted the consequences on such an element on the vaccines. 4. Conclusion Endogenous retroviruses are present at a high copy number in all the mammalian species that were investigated, and most of them are expected to contain fully infectious elements. Even when this is not the case, there are numerous ways by which endogenous retroviruses can generate new infectious retroviruses, modify the properties of another virus, or even acquire new properties via gene capture. This can happen due to the endogenous retroviruses own replication machinery, or, for defective elements, to another helper element since retroviral genomes can accidentally be packaged in a heterologous particle. For all these reasons endogenous retroviruses can be considered as a potential risk for vaccine production, in particular when the vaccine strain is produced using cell culture: endogenous retroviral particles can end up contaminating the vaccine strain or modify the properties of the vaccine strain that is being used. The effects of such events on the vaccines cannot be easily predicted but could in theory result in the transmission of viruses to new species the consequences of which will depend on each case. However, the sequencing of new mammalian genomes should give indications on cell lines which will have a lower probability of harbouring such events, because of a lower content in potentially active endogenous retroviruses. Such cell lines could be used when they allow the production of the considered vaccine virus, or could even be engineered to become competent for the production of a broader range of viruses. New genomic approaches based on high scale sequencing can also now provide us with a very detailed expression pattern of a cell line. This should constitute a good tool to assess the cell lines used for vaccine production and test them for endogenous retrovirus expression, even at very low level, as well as some low frequency recombination events resulting in the association of sequences that were previously unrelated.

References
[1] Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Zody MC, Baldwin J, et al. Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome. Nature 2001;409:860­921. [2] Waterston RH, Lindblad-Toh K, Birney E, Rogers J, Abril JF, Agarwal P, et al. Initial sequencing and comparative analysis of the mouse genome. Nature 2002;420:520­62. [3] Boeke JD, Stoye JP. Retrotransposons, endogenous retroviruses, and the evolution of retroelements. vol. In: Coffin JM, Hughes SH, Varmus HE, editors. Retroviruses. Cold Spring Harbor: Laboratory Press; 1997. p. 343­435. [4] Dewannieux M, Heidmann T. LINEs, SINEs and processed pseudogenes: parasitic strategies for genome modeling. Cytogenet Genome Res 2005;110: 35­48. [5] Eickbush TH. Origin and evolutionary relationships of retroelements. vol. In: Morse S, editor. The evolutionary biology of viruses. Raven Press; 1994. p. 121­57. [6] Malik HS, Eickbush TH. Phylogenetic analysis of ribonuclease H domains suggests a late, chimeric origin of LTR retrotransposable elements and retroviruses. Genome Res 2001;11:1187­97. [7] de Parseval N, Heidmann T. Human endogenous retroviruses: from infectious elements to human genes. Cytogenet Genome Res 2005;110:318­32. [8] Tarlinton R, Meers J, Young P. Biology and evolution of the endogenous koala retrovirus. Cell Mol Life Sci 2008;65(21):3413­21. [9] Tarlinton RE, Meers J, Young PR. Retroviral invasion of the koala genome. Nature 2006;442:79­81. [10] Stocking C, Kozak CA. Murine endogenous retroviruses. Cell Mol Life Sci 2008;65:3383­98. [11] Ribet D, Dewannieux M, Heidmann T. An active murine transposon family pair: retrotransposition of `master' MusD copies and ETn trans-mobilization. Genome Res 2004;14:2261­7. [12] Dewannieux M, Dupressoir A, Harper F, Pierron G, Heidmann T. Identification of autonomous IAP LTR retrotransposons mobile in mammalian cells. Nat Genet 2004;36:534­9. [13] Ribet D, Harper F, Dupressoir A, Dewannieux M, Pierron G, Heidmann T. An infectious progenitor for the murine IAP retrotransposon: emergence of an intracellular genetic parasite from an ancient retrovirus. Genome Res 2008;18:597­609. [14] Bannert N, Kurth R. Retroelements and the human genome: new perspectives on an old relation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004;101(Suppl. 2):14572­9. [15] Gemeniano M, Mpanju O, Salomon DR, Eiden MV, Wilson CA. The infectivity and host range of the ecotropic porcine endogenous retrovirus, PERV-C, is modulated by residues in the C-terminal region of its surface envelope protein. Virology 2006;346:108­17. [16] Contreras-Galindo R, Lopez P, Velez R, Yamamura Y. HIV-1 infection increases the expression of human endogenous retroviruses type K (HERV-K) in vitro. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 2007;23:116­22. [17] Taruscio D, Mantovani A. Factors regulating endogenous retroviral sequences in human and mouse. Cytogenet Genome Res 2004;105:351­62. [18] Stoye JP, Moroni C, Coffin JM. Virological events leading to spontaneous AKR thymomas. J Virol 1991;65:1273­85. [19] van der Kuyl AC, Dekker JT, Goudsmit J. Discovery of a new endogenous type C retrovirus (FcEV) in cats: evidence for RD-114 being an FcEV(Gag­Pol)/baboon endogenous virus BaEV(Env) recombinant. J Virol 1999;73:7994­8002. [20] Benit L, Dessen P, Heidmann T. Identification, phylogeny, and evolution of retroviral elements based on their envelope genes. J Virol 2001;75:11709­19. [21] Klenerman P, Hengartner H, Zinkernagel RM. A non-retroviral RNA virus persists in DNA form. Nature 1997;390:298­301. [22] Geuking MB, Weber J, Dewannieux M, Gorelik E, Heidmann T, Hengartner H, et al. Recombination of retrotransposon and exogenous RNA virus results in nonretroviral cDNA integration. Science 2009;323:393­6. [23] Martin GS. The road to Src. Oncogene 2004;23:7910­7. [24] Maeda I, Kohara Y, Yamamoto M, Sugimoto A. Large-scale analysis of gene function in Caenorhabditis elegans by high- throughput RNAi. Curr Biol 2001;11:171­6. [25] An DS, Xie YM, Chen ISY. Envelope gene of the human endogenous retrovirus HERV-W encodes a functional retrovirus envelope. J Virol 2001;75:3488­9. [26] Blaise S, Ruggieri A, Dewannieux M, Cosset F-L, Heidmann T. Identification of an envelope protein from the FRD family of Human Endogenous Retroviruses (HERV-FRD) conferring infectivity on retroviral particles and functional conservation among simians. J Virol 2004;78:1050­4. [27] Dewannieux M, Blaise S, Heidmann T. Identification of a functional envelope protein from the HERV-K family of human endogenous retroviruses. J Virol 2005;79:15573­7. [28] Bacsi A, Ebbesen P, Szabo J, Beck Z, Andirko I, Csoma E, et al. Pseudotypes of vesicular stomatitis virus-bearing envelope antigens of certain HIV-1 strains permissively infect human syncytiotrophoblasts cultured in vitro: implications for in vivo infection of syncytiotrophoblasts by cell-free HIV-1. J Med Virol 2001;64:387­97.

Please cite this article in press as: Dewannieux M, et al., Risks linked to endogenous retroviruses for vaccine production: A general overview, Biologicals (2010), doi:10.1016/j.biologicals.2010.01.006

