142
increased in the PVN of the maternal brain, but was not changed significantly in the PVN of the fetal brain. In conclusion, CRF and CRFRI mRNA were already expressed in the rat fetal brain by day 2- of gestation. In the rat fetal brain, LPS challenge increased CRF mRNA expression but didn' change CRF-RI mRNA expression in the PVN. t Conclusion: It is suggested that CRF upregulates its own receptor mRNA in the PVN of maternal brain, but the fetal brain doesn' yet have t this mechanism.

THURSDAY,

SEPTEMBER

7

P4.16.09 FACTOR V LEIDEN IN PATIENTS WITH RECURRENT FETAL LOSS M. Drabkova' M. Vojtiskovaz, A. Vasku3, T. Burnog' P. Janku' , , , K.Kankova3 ` Dept. of Obstet. Gynecol., ` Dept. of Genetic, 31nstitute of Pathological Physiology, Medical Faculty, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, Europe. Objectives: To determine the association of Factor V Leiden mutation (FVL) frequency and recurrent fetal loss. Study Methods: A total of 445 women 17 to 45 years old were included in this case-control study. We examined the prevalence of the point mutation in the factor V gene (R 506 Q or Leiden). 138 unselected women with a history of one or more (mean 2.5, range 1 to 5) spontaneous abortion or stillbirth of unexplained etiology. Mutation analysis was performed by polymerase chain reaction and restriction analysis with Mln I. The control group were 307 unselected women who gave birth at our department. The significance of the difference in both group was tested by the chi-square test. Results: The frequency of the FVL in the case group was 14.5 % (20/138), in the control group 7.0 % (221307) (p>O.O05). There were no differences in the group of the women with one abortion and control group (p= 0.121). The frequency of FVL in the group with two abortions was 14.0 % (10172) (p>O.O05), in the group with three and more abortions 18.0 % (8145) (p>O.O05). Significant increase of homozygous genotyp was found in the case group, especially in the group of women with repeated loss. Conclusions: population Czech women, a statistically significant association of the Leiden mutation with recurrent fetal losses was found. The risk for recurrence of fetal loss tended to be greater in homozygous carriers.

P4.16.11 MOLECULAR BIOLOGICAL CHARACTERIZATION OF SOLUBLE PLACENTAL TISSUE PROTEINS: PPlSIGALECTIN, PP17b/MANNOSE-6-PHOSPHATE RECEPTOR TRANSPORTER AND PP18/BRANCHED-CHAIN AMINO ACID AMINOTRANSFERASE N.G. Dept. Biochemistry, University of P&s, P&s, Hungary H. Bohn, Behringwerke AG, MarburgiLahn, Germany G.N. Than, Dept. OBIGYN, University of P&s, P&s, Hungary B. Siimegi, Dept. Biochemistry, University of P&s, P&s, Hungary Objectives: Soluble placental tissue proteins fJ' are synthesized in Ps) increased amounts &ring pregnancy and play an important role in the development of the fetus and placenta or in the maintenance of pegnancy. From the 26 different PPs four have been recently cloned and characterized by our research team. Study Methods: cDNAs encoding for PPs were isolated from a placental cDNA library with monospecific antisera and sequence analyzed. RNA expression in different tissues were examined by Northern-blot analyses. PP contents in human sera and in different human healthy and tumorous tissues were detected by chemiluminescence Western-blot analysis. Structural and functional characteristics of PPs were also investigated. Results: We have cloned and sequenced cDNAs encoding for pP13, PP18 and two members of the pP17 potein Emily @Pl7a, PP17b). By our results pP13 $ a new member of the :galactoside binding Stype animal lectin (gale&in) Emily, pP17b turned out to be a mannose-6-phosphate receptor @fPR) cargo potein while PP18 $ a branched-chain amino acid transaminase @CAT). Besides 6mctional godies, secondary and tertiary structural characteristics of the poteins have been computed. Specific expression patterns of the PPs in different healthy and timorous tissues have been detected, as well as the possibility of seromonitorization of cervical carcinoma ptients with PP17-assay has turned op. Conclusions: Seemingly PPs have oncodevelopmental functions: PP13igalectin may be involved in cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions; PP17blMPR transporter may function in HSV-2 infection and cervical cancer genesis; PP181BCAT may act in the cell cycle regulated by the c"zyc proto-oncogene.

P4.16.10 FLUORESCENCE IN SITU HYBRIDIZATION ON UNCULTURED AMNIOCYTES O.Torok (a), I. Zsupan (a), Zs. Buezico (a), R. Adany (b), M.Balazs (b) (a) Dept. OB/GYN (b) Dept. of Hygiene (c) University of Debrecen, Hungary. Objectives: To demonstrate the advantages of FISH in prenatal diagnosis of aneuploidies Study Methods: In an initial study the results of FISH on uncultured amniocytes were compared with standard karyotyping in 178 second trimester cases. Subsequently FISH was applied in cases undergoing amniocentesis for abnormal ultrasound finding or if the amniocentesis had to be repeated for the suspicion of low-level true mosaicism in culture of amniocytes. The results were controlled by standard karyotyping, Results: The hybridization was successful in 98% of cases and a good correlation was found in between FISH and the standard cytogenetic method. In 7 fetuses with major structural anomalies and in 4 cases with severe IUGR the correct diagnosis could be set up by FISH two days after the ammocentesis. In 5 samples with the suspicion of true mosaicism at least 200 interphase ammocytes could be scored using FISH. In 2 cases mosaicism of "trisomy 20" and "21" could be ruled out with high probability. In 2 cases FISH supported the presence of low level mosaic "trisomy 21" and "X" monosomy. Conventional cytogenetic analysis in the second amniotic fluid specimen confirmed the FISH findings. In one case contrary to FISH standard karyotyping from the second amniotic fluid sample did not reveal mosaicism. Conclusion: Our results suggest that in case of severe IUGR and structural anomalies detected by ultrasound the rapid result of FISH can be considered for further management decisions. In the diagnosis of chromosomal mosaicisms the role of FISH needs further examinations.

P4.16.12 PATERNITY IN PRENATAL PERIOD .I. Jovanovic-Privrodski (11, S. Romac (2), Z. Belopavlovic (3), M. Bogavac (3), A. Krstic (l), V. Manasijevic (2) Institute of Child and Youth Health Care, Novi Sad, Yugoslavia. Institute for Biology, Belgrade, Yugoslavia. University Clinic of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Novi Sad, Yugoslavia. The problem of paternity can exist in prenatal period like in other parts of life. This problem can be solved successfully using the most frequently used genetic marker - DNA probe. Most frequently the blood test is used for analyzing DNA, but sometimes the other genetic markers like chorion villi and amnion in prenatal period or (post-mortem) hair can be used as well. In this paper we describe prenatal exclusion of paternity using DNA. A pregnant women (20 weeks of pregnancy) came to visit genetic counseling. She wanted to solve the problem of paternity of her fetus (she had two partners but the blood could be gotten only from one of them). The fetal blood was gotten by cordocenthesis. Six gene locuses were determined using AmpliType PM+DQAI kit for human identification DNA. In this case paternity for the presumed father was excluded because the fetus had two gene locuses, but the presumed father did not.

P4.16.13 PHOSPHORYLATED INSULIN-LIKE GROWTH FACTOR (IGF) -BINDING PROTEIN-l (IGFBP-1) INHIBITS WHILE NONPHOSPHORYLATED IGFBP-1 STIMULATES IGF-I-INDUCED AMINO ACID UmAKE BY CULTURED TROPHOBLAST CELLS M. K. Tsuchiya, M. Iwashita, Y. Nakamura, Dept. OBIGYN, Kyorin University, School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan Objectives: IGFBP-1 has been found to be phosphorylated and four to five phosphorylated forms (pIGFBP-1) and one nonphosphorylated form

