doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2005.05.025

J. Mol. Biol. (2005) 350, 667­681

Sequence Correlations between Cro Recognition Helices and Cognate OR Consensus Half-sites Suggest Conserved Rules of Protein­DNA Recognition
Branwen M. Hall, Kelly R. LeFevre and Matthew H. J. Cordes*
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics University of Arizona, Tucson AZ 85721, USA The OR regions from several lambdoid bacteriophages contain the three regulatory sites OR1, OR2 and OR3, to which the Cro and CI proteins can bind. These sites show imperfect dyad symmetry, have similar sequences, and generally lie on the same face of the DNA double helix. We have developed a computational method, which analyzes the OR regions of additional phages and predicts the location of these three sites. After tuning the method to predict known OR sites accurately, we used it to predict unknown sites, and ultimately compiled a database of 32 known and predicted OR binding site sets. We then identified sequences of the recognition helices (RH) for the cognate Cro proteins through manual inspection of multiple sequence alignments. Comparison of Cro RH and consensus OR half-site sequences revealed strong one-to-one correlations between two amino acids at each of three RH positions and two bases at each of three half-site positions (H1/2, H3/5 and H6/6). In each of these three cases, one of the two amino acid/base-pairings corresponds to a contact observed in the crystal structure of a lambda Cro/consensus operator complex. The alternate amino acid/base combinations were rationalized using structural models. We suggest that the pairs of amino acid residues act as binary switches that efficiently modulate specificity for different consensus half-site variants during evolution. The observation of structurally reasonable amino acid-to-base correlations suggests that Cro proteins share some common rules of recognition despite their functional and structural diversity.
q 2005 Published by Elsevier Ltd. *Corresponding author

Keywords: DNA­protein interaction; helix-turn-helix motif; functional evolution; transcription factor; recognition code

Introduction
The determinants of sequence-specific DNA recognition by proteins are intricate and complex. Proteins have a rich chemical repertoire for binding to specific sites on DNA, in that many different amino acid side-chain and main-chain groups can make favorable direct hydrogen bond and/or van der Waals contacts to nucleotide bases.1­3 Equally rich is their stereochemical repertoire: DNA-binding protein structures and docking modes are diverse and often irregular, with the result that

Abbreviations used: RH, recognition helix; HTH, helixturn-helix; ZnF, zinc finger. E-mail address of the corresponding author: cordes@email.arizona.edu
0022-2836/$ - see front matter q 2005 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

there are many different possible geometries and environments for presenting a given amino acid residue to a given base, depending upon where the contact occurs within a complex and in what complex it occurs.1,4,5 This variable "structural context"5 modulates the relative free energy of different amino acid/base-pairings and can override intrinsic chemical preferences. The context dependence of specific interactions, when coupled with the diversity of possible contexts, rules out any universal one-to-one amino acid-to-base "recognition code".6,7 Furthermore, the context dependence also implies that amino acid residues not involved in direct base contacts can be important for specificity, to the extent that they indirectly influence the geometry and environment of the direct interactions. Mutational studies in which only the regions of a

668 protein sequence involved in direct base contacts are varied have shown that "recognition codes" can still have value if their scope is limited to narrowly defined situations. For example, directed evolution by phage display was used to formulate a set of rules that describe the specificity of variants of the zinc finger ZiF268, based on the sequence of a "recognition helix" (RH) that binds in the major groove.8­10 In the ZiF268 "recognition code", each of four positions in the recognition helix sequence determines specificity at one of four directly contacted base-pairs in the cognate DNA sequence. The rules are different for each of the pairings, since the structural context of each contact is different. This one-to-one code has been shown to have value for prediction and design of zinc finger recognition,11 but is inevitably imperfect for a number of reasons such as the importance of side-chain/sidechain interactions at the protein­DNA interface.12 The limitations of the one-to-one code have led to support for alternative "database" approaches to describing zinc finger recognition determinants, in which the entire RH sequence is considered as the fundamental unit encoding specificity for a three to four base-pair sequence.13,14 These complexities of protein­DNA recognition offer a framework for thinking about the functional evolution of DNA-binding proteins. While many families tend to conserve the same specificity over long periods of evolution, other groups of homologs are functionally multispecific, having highly diverse cognate binding sites.15 In these latter families, new binding site preferences might arise mostly by mutations that involve direct base contacts. These sequence changes could alter specificity either in a complex, interdependent way or in a simple, one-to-one manner that involves a recognition code (in the context of natural evolution one might call this an "evolutionary code"). Alternatively, new specificities could evolve by mutations elsewhere in the protein that alter base contacts indirectly through changes in backbone contacts, protein structure or other features. Several studies in the literature describe specific cases or general trends in which mutations of direct base contacting residues appear to explain natural evolution of specificity. For some homologous helixturn-helix domains that have different specificities and sequence identity as low as w30%, relative binding affinities can be interchanged by exchanging the direct base contacts in "helix swap" experiments.16,17 Similarly, randomization and selection of the recognition helix of ZiF268 for binding to alternate sites yielded some RH sequences with strong similarity to those of natural homologs that bind similar target sites.11 A recent survey of sequence conservation in DNA-binding proteins revealed that, in functionally multispecific families, base-contacting residues are poorly conserved while non-specific contacts are relatively well-conserved.15 This finding suggests that evolution of new specificities by alteration of base contacting residues might be a general trend.

DNA Recognition by Cro Proteins

One of the strongest indicators of functional evolution by changes in direct base contacts would be the existence of one-to-one evolutionary codes, or simple statistical relationships between protein and cognate DNA sequence that apply across a family. In principle, careful and comprehensive analyses of cognate protein­DNA sequence correlations in functionally multispecific families should be able to reveal such codes if they exist. However, few such attempts have been published,18 probably because of limitations imposed by the availability of functional data for a large-enough number of natural homologs, as well as by the extant diversity of binding specificity for a given family. Expanding small databases through parallel cloning and binding site characterization of multiple family members is traditionally laborious. On the other hand, a broad array of recent advances, including whole genome sequencing, transcriptional profiling, double-stranded DNA microarrays for rapid and highly parallel specificity characterization,19­21 and computational binding site prediction22 are now conspiring to enlarge databases of natural cognate protein­DNA sequence pairs. Here, we present an analysis of protein­DNA sequence correlations for the functionally diverse Cro family of bacteriophage helix-turn-helix (HTH) transcription factors. This study is enabled by the use of a novel binding-site prediction method to generate a sizeable and diverse database of cognate protein­DNA pairs from genomic sequence data. The Cro family was chosen for several reasons. First, Cros are highly diverse in sequence and recognize a broad array of specific binding sites,23 allowing a potentially informative comparison of protein and cognate DNA sequences. Second, the Cro HTH moieties, and the key recognition residues within them, are easily identified by inspection of multiple sequence alignments. Third, binding sites for Cro proteins occur within a small regulatory region (w100 bp) with a conserved genomic location directly adjacent to the Cro open reading frame. This region has a conserved architecture that allows for computational recognition of binding site location despite the lack of specific sequence conservation (see Results). Fourth, a significant number of relevant bacteriophage genomes have been sequenced, as have many bacterial genomes that contain prophage DNA.24 Fifth, the X-ray cocrystal structure of lambda Cro bound to a cognate DNA fragment has been solved, allowing for structure-based interpretation of any observed amino acid-to-base correlations.25 A cocrystal structure is also known for phage 434 Cro, but this protein has recently been shown to not be a true Cro family member26 (J. H. Konieczka & M.H.J.C., unpublished results) and will not be used in the present study. Sixth, Cros are diverse in fold,26 and a question of long-term interest in our laboratory is whether such structural changes alter the context of binding and thus change the rules of recognition. The presence or absence of conserved protein­DNA

DNA Recognition by Cro Proteins

669 cognate half-site sequences, and find several strong ones. We show that some of these correlations also apply to DNA recognition by the CI proteins, which are distant relatives of Cro. Finally, we offer interpretations of these correlations based on the lambda Cro:consensus binding site complex.25 These findings suggest that at least some aspects of functional evolution in this family follow a very simple evolutionary code that involves mutations of direct contacts.

Results
Identification of Cro recognition helices and OR binding sites in phage genomes Figure 2 shows a small region of lambdoid bacteriophage genomes containing two transcription factor genes, cro and cI, and the OR operator, which consists of the cro-cI intergenic region and contains binding sites for the Cro and CI proteins. This region can be recognized by its conserved location in the phage genome, and/or by sequence similarity of the Cro and CI proteins to known orthologs. Both Cro and CI proteins contain HTH DNA-binding domains that are related to each other by ancient gene duplication, but the cI gene is readily distinguishable from cro by the presence of an additional C-terminal domain. The HTH motifs in the two proteins have patterns of conserved hydrophobic and glycine residues that are recognizable by inspection.27 By examining multiple sequence alignments (not shown) we identified the HTH (and therefore the RH) sequences from a recently compiled library of 56 Cro/CI pairs from lambdoid phage and bacterial prophage genomes.26 The scope of the present work is primarily limited to correlation of the Cro RH sequences with their cognate OR binding sites, rather than the CI RH sequences. However, as discussed below, CI and Cro proteins bind the same regulatory sites, and the ability to easily extract the RH sequences for both provides for a ready comparison between these anciently related families. Thus, we also briefly consider the extent to which sequence correlations relevant to Cro recognition apply to the distantly related CI proteins. The Cro and CI proteins bind competitively to three sites within OR called OR1, OR2 and OR3 (Figure 2). Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of binding sites in six OR regions from proteobacterial phages (D3, phi-80, lambda, HK022, P22 and N15) for which site identification has been aided by footprinting, gel mobility-shift and/or mutagenesis data.28­33 Phage 43417 falls into this category but has not been included on the grounds that it is atypical, due to a genomic rearrangement involving displacement of cro by the DNA-binding domain of cI (M.H.J.C. & J. H. Konieczka, unpublished data).26 The three OR sites are generally similar in sequence to each other (S50% identical; Table 1), reflecting the fact that each of Cro and CI binds all three sites

Figure 1. Half of a complex between a lambda Cro dimer and its consensus binding site, accompanied by a diagram below showing base contacts made by amino acid residues in the recognition helix.25 Colored sidechains in the lambda Cro structure above correspond to colored amino acid residues in the contact diagram below. Broken lines show van der Waals contacts, while continuous lines show hydrogen bonding interactions. Structures were rendered using MOLSCRIPT54 and Raster3D.55 The PDB accession number is 6CRO.

sequence relationships may contribute clues and directions to the study of structure-function co-evolution in Cro. Figure 1 shows one half of a 2-fold symmetric complex between a lambda Cro dimer and its consensus binding site.25 The main cluster of residues responsible for direct readout of the DNA sequence are in the second helix of the HTH motif, often called the recognition helix (RH). The RH rests in the major groove, and five nearly contiguous residues (numbered herein as H1, H2, H3, H5 and H6) in this helix contact a span of seven base-pairs (numbered herein as 1­7) in the DNA half-site. Although most of these residues primarily contact a single base, several residues contact two bases. Here, we extract the recognition helices from a database of 56 Cro proteins, and predict cognate consensus half-sites for 32 of these. We next analyze the resulting protein­DNA database for significant correlations between the recognition helix and

670

DNA Recognition by Cro Proteins

Figure 2. Diagram of the region of lambdoid bacteriophage genomes containing the cro and cI genes and the OR intergenic region. Features allowing identification of OR binding site sequences are indicated, with site symmetry and site­site similarity used as primary criteria (continuous line) and site­site spacing used as a secondary criterion (broken line). A Cro dimer (shaded ovals) is shown bound to OR3, while two CI dimers (open ovals for the DNA-binding domain and filled rectangles for the C-terminal domain) are shown bound cooperatively to OR1/OR2. These indicate the preferred site occupancies for each protein. However, both Cro and CI can bind all three sites, and CI can also exhibit cooperative binding to OR2/OR3.

within approximately an order of magnitude of relative affinity.17,28,33­37 For the typical lambdoid phage, Cro somewhat prefers occupancy of OR3 and CI prefers simultaneous occupancy of OR1/ OR2 (Figure 2), but at higher concentrations either protein can generally occupy all three sites. Each site has approximate 2-fold symmetry (S50% identity with reverse complement; Table 1), reflecting the fact that Cro and CI bind individual sites as dimers (Figure 2) with dyad symmetry and each monomer binds one half-site. Binding site sizes span a limited range from 14 to 19 base-pairs (Table 1), reflecting the approximate length which can be specifically recognized by a Cro or CI dimer. Since the OR region lies directly in between cro and cI (Figure 2), we readily identified it for each of the 56 Cro/CI pairs in our library, and next considered how to predict the locations of OR1, OR2 and OR3 so that the consensus sequences might be correlated with their cognate Cro RH sequences. To avoid circularity, we ruled out a priori any

structure-based method that used the cognate protein sequence for binding site prediction, and instead considered two broad types of method that use only the DNA sequences of one or more regulatory regions as input. First, given a regulatory region or regions from a single genome containing multiple sites bound by the same transcription factor, computational recognition of repetitive patterns within the region(s) can be used to predict binding site location.38 Second, given regulatory regions bound by orthologous proteins from multiple related genomes, binding sites can be recognized from cross-genome sequence conservation, for example using phylogenetic footprinting.39 Since our database has many phage/prophage genomes, and since each one contains multiple similar binding sites, either type of approach or some combination thereof is tenable a priori. Several considerations led us to favor using only intragenomic analyses for site predictions in OR. First and foremost, the extreme sequence diversity

Table 1. Characteristics of binding sites from six experimentally characterized OR regions
Site symmetry (% id) Phage N15 Lambda HK022 D3 P22 phi-80 Consensus half-site TTATAGCT TATCACCG TGAACTA ATGGGAA ATT-AAGAAATCAACAT Site size (bp) 16 17 15 14 18 19 OR1 63 63 63 71 67 78 OR2 75 63 63 57 78 78 OR3 88 63 75 71 67 56 Site­site similarity (% id) OR1­OR2 50 53 65 93 67 74 OR2­OR3 81 59 65 64 56 53 OR1­OR3 63 59 88 79 78 53 Site­site spacing (bp) OR1­OR2 23 24 24 24 23 33 OR2­OR3 26 23 33 24 25 25

For each phage OR region are listed the consensus half-site sequences for the three binding sites; binding site size; symmetry within sites, defined as the percentage identity of a site to its reverse complement; similarity between sites, measured by percentage identity; and site to site spacing, measured as the number of base-pairs between equivalent points in adjacent sites.

DNA Recognition by Cro Proteins

671 dependent manner.40 In support of this idea, maxima of CI cooperativity for phage HK022 have been observed experimentally at center-to-center spacings of 24 and 33 base-pairs.40 This appears to be because CI dimers bound to adjacent sites will be on the same face of the double helix for both of these spacings, with the two numbers differing by approximately one turn. The agreement between the experimental results for HK022 CI and the observed site­site spacings for known OR regions suggests that OR has evolved to maximize CI cooperativity to at least some extent. To expand upon this analysis, we plotted the distribution of spacings observed for the known OR sets together with the sets predicted uniquely from our Cro/OR/CI library using only symmetry/ similarity criteria (Figure 3). This larger group of OR sets viewed collectively maintains a preference for center-to-center spacings of 23­25 bases and 33 bases, especially for OR1/OR2 but to a large extent also for OR2/OR3. This finding reinforces the view that OR evolution has selected for site­site spacings that yield cooperative binding between CI dimers at adjacent sites. The somewhat greater scatter for O R2/O R3 may reflect weaker CI cooperativity between these sites in some phage, such as HK022.33 Interestingly, OR2/OR3 spacings of 15 and 44 bases, representing approximately zero or three turn separations between adjacent CI dimers, were also observed at low frequency among the sets predicted from the library. Because of these trends, we felt that site­site spacing was a useful criterion for choosing the cognate set among a group of candidate sets with similar levels of site symmetry and site­site

of known consensus OR binding site sequences from proteobacterial phages (see Table 1),29 while advantageous for our correlative analysis of specificity determinants, is disadvantageous for binding site prediction methods that use crossgenome comparisons. Specifically, functional evolution in this family might be too rapid and extensive for cross-genome comparisons to yield interpretable conservation patterns. Conceivably, one could improve one's chances in such a case by clustering the Cro/CI protein database according to sequence similarity and then analyzing DNA sequence conservation only within groups of OR regions corresponding to groups of close Cro/CI homologs. However, we feared that an approach involving simultaneous analysis of multiple OR regions, and containing assumptions linking the evolutionary conservation of specific cognate DNA and protein sequences, carried some risk of biasing our intended correlative analyses of specificity on the resulting database. By contrast, recognition of conserved patterns among multiple intragenomic cognate binding sites allows one to make predictions for each OR region independently of all the others and also independently of any model of specific sequence conservation between orthologous OR binding sites. We regarded this as preferable for our purposes. We thus designed and trained an algorithm called Operation to predict known OR binding site sets based primarily on the criterion of similarity between the OR1, OR2 and OR3 sites, and included the additional requirements that the three sites be partially palindromic (dyad symmetric), that their sizes fall within known size ranges, and that they not overlap (see Table 1). Details of our algorithm are found in Materials and Methods. When the stringencies of the site­site similarity and site symmetry criteria were tuned to identify the previously reported binding site sets from the OR regions of the six phage in Table 1, non-cognate candidate sets were generally also identified. Overall, for five of the six phage, two to ten candidate sets were identified, while in only one case (HK022) could the algorithm identify the cognate OR set uniquely. When Operation was applied more broadly to our 56-member Cro/OR/CI library, unique candidate sets were identified in 19 cases, while two or more sets were identified in 23 cases. In the other 14 cases, no candidate sets at all were identified. These findings suggest that the use of site symmetry and site­site similarity could uniquely identify the cognate set for perhaps 30% of phage, while for many others additional criteria would be necessary to distinguish among multiple candidates. We next considered the feasibility of using site­ site spacing as a secondary criterion for deciding between multiple candidate sets in ambiguous cases. For the known OR sets, spacings from 23­26 bases and 33 bases are observed (Table 1), possibly reflecting the fact that CI binds cooperatively to pairs of adjacent sites (Figure 2) in a spacing-

Figure 3. Histogram of OR1/OR 2 and OR2/OR 3 spacings observed in six experimentally determined cognate OR binding site sets, along with 18 uniquely predicted on the basis of site symmetry and site­site similarity. For several cases, a set of four rather than three binding sites was identified. These were omitted from this analysis due to ambiguities as to how to assign the names OR1, OR2 and OR3.

672 similarity. For all of the five experimentally characterized phage with multiple predicted sets based on symmetry/similarity criteria, the use of favored site­site spacing as a secondary criterion (see Materials and Methods for details) allowed the cognate set to be identified uniquely. Site­site spacing also allowed for unique candidate set identification in eight of 23 ambiguous cases from the Cro/OR/CI library. The combined symmetry/ similarity/spacing analysis yielded a total of 32 uniquely predicted candidate sets from 56 OR regions.

DNA Recognition by Cro Proteins

Binary specificity switches in the recognition helix of Cro Each of the experimentally characterized and predicted binding site sets was analyzed to yield a consensus of the six OR half-sites (see Materials and Methods). These were then compared to the RH sequences extracted from inspection of multiple alignments. The complete set of consensus OR halfsites and cognate Cro RH sequences is shown in Figure 4. The Cro recognition helices and cognate half-sites in Figure 4 are clearly quite diverse in sequence, emphasizing the functionally multispecific nature of the Cro family. The amino acid and base distributions for each recognition helix and half-site position are depicted in sequence logo format in Figure 5.41 At each of the five DNAcontacting positions in the recognition helix, at least six different amino acids are observed in our Cro library. With the exception of alanine at H3, no single amino acid occurs more than about 40% of

Figure 4. Summary of consensus OR half-sites, cognate Cro recognition helices and sequence correlations between them. Nomenclature for phages and prophages is as described.24,26 A lowercase p (for putative) is attached to ten of the 32 entry names, indicating that the Cro and OR sequences come from a previously unnamed proteobacterial genetic element containing DNA of phage origin. Blank spaces in binding site sequences indicate positions without clear consensus (see Materials and Methods). Colored squares are drawn to indicate amino acid residues and bases that obey the major observed correlations (see Results). H1/2, H3/5 and H6/6 correlations are shown in blue, red and green, respectively. Broken colored circles show cases in which these correlations are violated, where an amino acid expected to specify a particular base is instead paired with a different base. Contacts observed in lambda Cro/consensus binding site structure are shown as continuous line (hydrogen bonds) or broken line (van der Waals contacts) arrows at the top of the chart. The Sym column refers to whether the full site has an odd or an even number of base-pairs.

Figure 5. Sequence logos showing position-specific compositional distributions of (a) Cro recognition helices, (b) consensus half-sites.41 Logos were generated using weblogo.berkeley.edu.

DNA Recognition by Cro Proteins

673 similarity). Thus, for all but one recognition helix position (H2), there is high usage of two residue types, and only very scattered usage of others. Similarly, at several half-site positions two of the four bases combine to dominate the residue usage distribution. For positions C2, C5 and C6, the two most frequently occurring bases collectively occur in over 90% of the sequences. Each of the two dominant bases at each of these positions occurs in at least 25% of the sequences. Intriguingly, the three RH positions (H1, H3, and H6; see Table 2) for which binary dominance is strongest contact the three most compositionally biased half-site basepairs (2, 5 and 6; see Table 2) in the lambda Croconsensus operator cocrystal structure. H1 contacts the C2 base, H3 contacts the K5 base and H6 contacts the K6 base. To us, these observations suggested the possibility that the two dominant amino acids at a single RH position might each confer specificity for one of the two dominant nucleotide bases at the contacted cognate half-site position. In agreement with this expectation, the identities of the dominant amino acids at each of the three biased RH positions were found to correlate strongly to the identities of the contacted base-pairs (see Figure 4 and Table 3A). At H1, the presence of Gln correlates to Ade at C2, while Pro correlates to Thy. At H3, Ala correlates to Ade at C5, while Ser/Thr correlates to Gua. At H6, Lys correlates to Cyt at C6, while Gln correlates to Gua. The amino acid-to-base correlations all show over 90% obedience and all apply to at least 65% of the 32 phage in our data set (Table 3A). The three amino acid residue pairs collectively predict 2.2 positions per half-site for the average phage, and the predictions have an overall 96% accuracy. These sequence correlations thus qualify statistically as predictive rules of recognition for Cro, though they do not predict the entire binding site sequence. The H1/2, H3/5 and H6/6 correlations are all less exclusive in the opposite direction (not

Table 2. Compositional bias of Cro recognition helices and consensus OR half-sites
Most frequent (%) A. Recognition helices H1 Q (37.5) H2 Q (25.0) H3 A (62.5) H5 S (40.6) H6 K (34.4) B. Consensus operator half-sites C1 A (21.9) C2 T (59.4) C3 T (43.8) C4 A (59.4) C5 A (65.6) C6 C (50.0) C7 C (43.8) Second-most frequent (%) P (31.3) S (21.9) S/T (25.0) N (25.5) Q (34.4) T (21.9) A (34.4) A (34.4) T (21.9) G (28.1) G (40.6) A/T (21.9) Percentage coverage 68.8 46.9 87.5 65.5 68.8 43.8 93.8 68.8 81.3 93.7 90.6 65.7a

The two most frequently observed amino acids are listed for each recognition helix position, along with the percentage of Cro proteins in which that residue occurs (in parentheses). The combined percentage occurrence (coverage) of the two dominant amino acids is shown in the right-hand column. The compositional bias of OR consensus half-sites is shown in a similar manner. a At position C7, Ade and Thy were observed at the same frequency.

the time at any RH position. At all half-site positions except C2 and C5, every nucleotide base occurs at least once in the library. No single base occurs more than two-thirds of the time at any half-site position. Nonetheless, both the protein and the DNA also show compositional biases consisting of what we will call "binary dominance" of the residue usage distribution at several positions. At four of five DNA-contacting RH positions (H1, H3, H5 and H6), at least 65% of the Cro sequences have one of only two amino acid types (Table 2). At these four compositionally biased positions, each of the two dominant residue types is found in at least 25% of the sequences (at H3, Ser and Thr are considered as a single type because of their close chemical

Table 3. Summary of observed recognition helix to half-site operator correlations
Position Observed correlation Instances 11 9 20 8 11 10 11 6 14 9 5 2 Violations 1 1 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 2 0 4 Coverage (%) 68.8 87.5 68.8 Percentage obeyed 90.1 100 95.5

A. Summary for Cro proteins H1 to C2 Gln/Ade Pro/Thy H3 to C5 Ala/Ade Set/Thr/Gua H6 to C6 Lys/Cyt Gln/Gua B. Summary for CI proteins Gln/Ade H1 to C2 Pro/Thy H3 to C5 Ala/Ade Set/Thr/Gua H6 to C6 Lys/Cyt Gln/Gua

61.3 80.6 35.5

89.5 92.0 63.6

In this analysis, correlations are considered in the amino acid to base direction. The number of observed instances and violations is listed for each correlation. For each position are also listed the percentage coverage, i.e. the frequency at which each dominant pair of amino acids occurs in the database, and percentage obeyed, i.e. how often the expected base occurs when one of the two dominant amino acids is present.

674 shown), with one of the dominant bases at each position sometimes pairing to a non-dominant amino acid residue type. For example, Thy at C2 was paired not only with the frequently occurring Pro at H1 but also with the scarcer Asn, Ser, Cys, Tyr, Leu, Asp and Ile residues. Also, some amino acid-to-base correlations may exist between other pairs of contacting RH and half-site positions, but they are weaker. For example, the most frequently occurring residue at H2, Gln, is always paired to the most frequently occurring base at C4, but the next most dominant residue, Ser, is paired to Cyt, Thy and Gua. Rather than attempt to wring meaning from weaker statistical relationships, we will focus further attention only on the three most obviously correlated pairs of positions. The three position-specific amino acid-to-base correlations appear essentially independent of one another, although a truly thorough analysis of covariation would require a considerably larger database. For 14 of the Cro proteins, one of the two dominant amino acids occurs at all three of the RH positions showing sequence correlations (H1, H3 and H6; Figure 4). Among these 14 cases, seven of the eight possible permutations of two residues at three RH positions are observed. Moreover, all possible permutations of any two of the three RH positions are observed, despite the relatively small size of our database. Statistical distributions at one site are not generally significantly perturbed by considering only Cros with a particular amino acid at a second site (data not shown). An exception is the relatively rare occurrence of Lys at H6 when H3 is Ser/Thr. Our data suggest a model in which pairs of amino acid residues at three positions in the Cro RH are acting as binary specificity switches that toggle the protein between preference for pairs of bases at three respective positions in the half-site. Specifically, two amino acids at each of the RH positions H1, H3 and H6 determine the choice between two base-pairs at half-site positions 2, 5 and 6, respectively. In other words, the recognition of diverse consensus OR half-sites by diverse Cro proteins may be partly explained by a one-to-one evolutionary code, though as noted above it is not statistically certain that the three putative switches behave independently. We next examined whether the RH sequences of CI proteins, which bind the same sequences as Cro and are distant relatives, obey the correlations observed for Cro (Table 3B and Supplementary Data). For two of the correlations (H1/2 and H3/5), the amino acids observed in Cro dominate the CI residue usage distribution to almost the same extent. At H1, Gln and Pro together are observed in 61% of database CI sequences versus 69% of database Cro sequences. At H3, Ala and Ser/Thr are observed in 80% of database CI sequences versus 88% of database Cro sequences. In addition, the percentage of these cases where the expected amino acid-to-base correlation is observed at H1 and H3 is approximately 90% or higher in CI, essentially as

DNA Recognition by Cro Proteins

high as in Cro. However, for the H6/6 correlation, considerably poorer coverage and percentage obedience are seen for CI than for Cro. This suggests that two of the three putative specificity switches in Cro also apply to CI, but that the third may not. Structural interpretation of proposed Cro binary specificity switches Do the Cro specificity switches make sense in light of known structural data? Each of the three relationships observed in our study involves pairs of positions for which an amino acid-to-base contact is present in the structure of lambda Cro bound to a consensus operator (Figure 1).25 Moreover, at each of the three "coding" RH positions, one of the two dominant amino acids is the wild-type lambda Cro residue, and this residue makes contact(s) with the cognate base in the binary switch correlation. This observation suggests that the switches have a rational structural basis. Below we offer a more detailed consideration of the relevant contacts in the lambda Cro/DNA complex, and use modeling of mutants, structures of lambda CI and 434 CI DNA complexes, and general principles to hypothesize how the alternate amino acid at each position might contact the alternate base. We suggest that the source of base discrimination may be rather different for each of the three switches. We also examine the reasons why only two of the three switches apply to CI proteins. The first binary switch observed consists of Gln/Ade and Pro/Thy for H1/C2. The Gln/Ade correspondence is readily rationalized on the basis of the lambda Cro/DNA complex.25 At the lambda Cro/DNA interface, Gln at H1 is approximately coplanar with Ade at C2, and the two contact each other in a bidentate hydrogen bonding interaction (Figures 1 and 6(a)). An equivalent contact also exists at the recognition helix/major groove interface of the CI proteins from phages 434 and lambda.42­45 The alternate Pro/Thy contact predicted by our code does not occur in a known Cro/CI structure, but general principles suggest that it should involve a van der Waals interaction between the side-chain of Pro and the methyl group of Thy. In surveys of protein­ DNA complexes,1 it has been observed both that thymine is the base most often involved in van der Waals interactions, and also that interactions between proline and base-pairs most often consist of van der Waals contacts. Modeling of a lambda Cro/operator complex with Pro substituted at H1 of lambda Cro and Thy at C2 of the operator does not explicitly show such an interaction, as there is a gap between the van der Waals surfaces of Pro and the methyl group of Thy (see arrow in Figure 6(a)). Thus, in the absence of more structural data, the Pro/Thy correlation can be rationalized only in a qualitative sense. In any case, we suggest that the H1/2 binary switch is likely to involve exchange between hydrogen bonding and van der Waals

DNA Recognition by Cro Proteins

675 backbone rather than the side-chain. Illustrating this point, structures of DNA complexes for lambda CI and 434 CI contain similar backbone-to-base contacts in some (though not all) half-sites containing Thy at K5, even though the residues at H3 are Gly and Ser, respectively (434 CI is one of the few violations of the Cro H3/5 rules).42­45 How does one then explain the Ser/Thr/Gua correlation for H3/C5? A contact between Ser at H3 and Cyt at K5 is present in one half of the structure of a 434 CI/OR3 complex,44 and can serve as a model for this residue pairing. The Ser sidechain adopts a rotamer with c1wK60, leading to a hydrogen bond between the hydroxyl group and the 5 0 phosphate at position K5 on the DNA. The peptide backbone-to-base contact present in the Ala/Thy interaction is now missing due to the absence of the Thy methyl group, and is replaced by a small gap between the van der Waals surfaces. In fact, no direct contact exists between the H3 Ser and the K5 base at all. The geometry of the Ser/Cyt interaction in 434 CI is extremely similar to that of the Ala/Thy interaction in lambda Cro, so much so that when Ser and Cyt mutations at H3 and K5 are modeled onto a lambda Cro/consensus operator complex using the Ser rotamer observed in 434 CI, precisely the same phosphate contact is seen, and a gap of similar size exists between the Ser residue and the base. The lambda Cro mutant model is shown in Figure 6(b). Models of a Ser/Thy "mismatch" within this conserved binding geometry (not shown) suggest that the backboneto-base van der Waals contact and the side-chain-tophosphate hydrogen bond could be formed simultaneously. In fact, the Ser hydroxyl group in the mismatch model abuts the Thy methyl group, providing a direct side-chain-to-base van der Waals contact not present in the correlated residue pair contacts. This simple model creates a dilemma, because it suggests that Ser, like Ala, should favor contact with Thy rather than Cyt. On the other hand, there is reason to think that the binding geometry in our models of the Ser/Thy mismatch might be incorrect, because Ser/Thy mismatches present in 434 CI complexes with OR1, OR2 and OR3 lack the phosphate contact and sometimes also the van der Waals interaction.42­44 This suggests that the Ser/Thy mismatch might contain unfavorable interactions not obvious from our models. We also suggest that our correlations could be explained if, in the Ser/Cyt pairing, a water molecule filled the gap between the peptide backbone and base van der Waals surfaces (see Figure 6(b)). This is quite speculative, since Rodgers and Harrison44 did not model water at this position in the Ser/Cyt interface in the 434 CI/OR3, but did include 40 ordered water molecules elsewhere in the structure. Nonetheless, there is space for a water molecule, and it would be nicely coordinated by both the Ser side-chain oxygen (Figure 6(b)) and the DNA phosphate backbone. If the Ser hydroxyl group prefers such an interaction to a van der Waals contact with a methyl group, it could lead to

Figure 6. Illustration of proposed structural basis for the observed binary switch sequence correlations: (a) H1/2, (b) H3/5, (c) H6/6. In each case, the pairing observed in the lambda Cro/DNA complex (6CRO) is shown at the left, while hypothetical interactions for the alternate pairing, based on mutant models, are shown at the right. Actual or proposed hydrogen bonds are shown as broken green lines, van der Waals contacts as continuous red lines and water molecules as plus signs.

interactions. In addition, the very similar Gln/Ade contacts present in both Cro and CI DNA complexes suggest why the H1/2 correlations should apply to both these groups of proteins. The second binary switch consists of Ala/Ade and Ser,Thr/Gua for H3/C5. The lambda Cro/ DNA interface includes a contact between Ala at H3 and Thy at K5 (Figures 1 and 6(b)), which basepairs to the Ade at C5 (refer to Figure 1 for numbering). This contact thus corresponds to the first of the two sequence correlations. The Ala sidechain points away from the major groove, but the backbone atoms form part of a hydrophobic pocket that holds the methyl group of Thy. This favorable van der Waals contact could explain why Ala at H3 correlates to Ade at C5 as opposed to the other dominant base Gua, since a Cyt residue at K5 would lack the Thy methyl group. However, other things being equal, residue types other than Ala might be expected to exhibit the same base preference, since the contact is from the peptide

676 specificity for a Ser/Cyt pairing over Ser/Thy. Meanwhile, in an Ala/Cyt pairing, a water molecule buried in the interface would receive no stabilization through coordination with the protein, since the Ala side-chain is non-polar. This would further heighten the preference for Ala/Thy pairings over Ala/Cyt. In sum, we propose that the Ser/Cyt pairing may involve favorable, purely polar interactions including interfacial water molecules, the Ala/Thy involves favorable, purely hydrophobic van der Waals interactions, and the mismatch pairings yield unfavorable mixed polar/ hydrophobic interfaces. We also note that the geometric similarities in CI and Cro complexes in this region explain why the H3/5 correlations, whatever their structural basis, apply to both proteins (Table 3). The third binary switch observed is Lys/Cyt and Gln/Gua for H6/C6. The Lys/Cyt correspondence is readily understood on the basis of the lambda Cro/DNA complex. At the lambda Cro/ DNA interface, Lys at H6 reaches towards the major groove of DNA and donates two hydrogen bonds to the Gua at K6 and one hydrogen bond to a Gua at K7 (Figures 1 and 6(c)). The contacted Gua at K6 base-pairs to Cyt at C6. The alternative Gln/Gua pair is found in 434 CI/DNA complexes, but interestingly the Gln at H6 in this case primarily contacts base-pair 5 rather than 6. In fact, the 434 CI complexes contain no strong direct base contacts to base-pair 6 at all. In lambda CI, base-pair 6 is also not contacted by H6, but is instead contacted by side-chains outside of the recognition helix.25,46 These strong differences between Cro and CI recognition of base-pair 6 suggest why the Cro H6/6 rules are obeyed poorly by CI, in contrast to the H1/2 and H3/5 correlations. Since the CI complexes did not provide an explanation for the alternate Gln/Gua pairing, we turned to the use of Cro mutant models (Figure 6(c)). A modeled Gln side-chain in lambda Cro can place its side-chain carbonyl group in a position to accept a hydrogen bond from the N4 of a modeled Cyt at K6. We suggest therefore that the structural basis for the H6/6 statistical pairings in Cro is switching between alternate hydrogen bond contacts.

DNA Recognition by Cro Proteins

Discussion
Presented above are strong correlations between recognition helix and consensus half-site sequences observed among a library of experimentally characterized and/or computationally predicted Cro/OR pairs. The correlations suggest that the Gln/Pro amino acid pair at RH position H1, the Ala/Ser-Thr pair at H3, and the Gln/Lys pair at H6 function as three binary specificity switches governing basepair preference at half-site positions 2, 5 and 6, respectively. The three switches potentially confer specificity for a total of eight different partial halfsite sequences, seven of which are observed in our database. Correlations corresponding to two of the

three Cro/OR binary switches are also observed for CI/OR pairs, which are distant relatives of Cro. Using known structures of Cro/DNA and CI/DNA complexes and mutant models, we have proposed a tentative physical basis for the changes in specificity. A surprising finding in our study is that the strongest observed Cro/OR sequence correlation (H3/5) does not appear to involve a direct side-chain-to-base contact, and likely could not have been predicted from existing structural data. Taken as a whole, our data suggest that the diversification of Cro specificity has in part resulted from use of an evolutionary code involving simple, limited mutations in direct base contacts. However, this code does not account for all features of Cro specificity and includes no sequence correlations for about half of the RH and consensus half-site positions. The failure to observe a complete evolutionary code could result from a variety of factors, including but not limited to side-chain/ side-chain interactions and the sensitivity of some contacts to subtle changes in binding geometry. It should also be noted that some apparently "noncoding" RH positions may serve more to determine differential binding of individual OR sites than to specify binding to a consensus site. Such effects would not be revealed by our study, which considers only consensus half-sites. The present database approach to finding limited evolutionary rules of sequence-specific recognition relies on relatively accurate identification of protein and cognate DNA sequences from genomic data. It must be noted that there is no guarantee that all of the binding sites predicted using our method are correct. Our choice of precise criteria and their relative priority in prediction are somewhat arbitrary, and were chosen mainly to optimize predictive success for known binding sites. It is quite possible that the method predicts non-cognate operators in some cases. Moreover, many of the phages in our library are prophages resident within bacterial genomes. Some of these prophages are likely to be cryptic,24 and in such cases the Cro proteins may be functionally degraded and not bind to any site within OR. However, prophage decay and errors in binding site prediction should only degrade sequence correlations, and should not cause false positive results. In fact, the violations of the correlations noted in our study could be artifactual rather than true mismatches. The above caveats do not, therefore, call into question the results presented here or their interpretation. Though tailored specifically to phage OR regions, the binding site prediction protocol developed here falls into the general category of motif-finding algorithms that take as input one or many identified regulatory regions containing multiple sequencesimilar sites for the same transcription factor.38 The criterion of similarity between different sites, inherent in all such methods, is imposed in our study using a very simple pairwise identity clustering routine. Such a straightforward approach

DNA Recognition by Cro Proteins

677 impossible to evaluate. In sum, the correlations observed for Cro could not have been predicted using the rules of existing general HTH codes. Whether this is due mostly to the functional peculiarities of the Cro family, or to limitations of the general HTH codes, remains to be seen. The C2H2 zinc fingers (ZnF) are the best studied example of a family of proteins that approach obedience to a one-to-one amino acid-to-base recognition code, though even these proteins exhibit complexities of binding that render such codes imperfect.11,13 The Cro rules proposed here differ somewhat from those proposed for ZnFs in their relationship to RH binding geometry. In the ZnF code proposed by Choo and Klug,8 three residues in the recognition helix each essentially determine specificity for one of three base-pairs, with a fourth residue playing mostly a supporting role. The three primary coding residues for ZnFs, usually labeled K1, 3 and 6, have side-chains that protrude from the same face of the helix, which is oriented in the major groove in such a way that each of the three alpha carbon atoms is approximately coplanar with a different nucleotide base. Each of the three side-chains typically contacts a single base. This geometry of binding has been postulated by Choo and Klug10 to be a key part of the physical basis for a one-to-one ZnF code. The situation at the protein/DNA interface of lambda Cro is more complex.25 Positions H1, H3 and H6 do not sit on the same face of the recognition helix, and in fact H1 sits essentially on the opposite face from the other two (see Figure 1). Each of positions H1 and H6 contacts more than one base, although it is only the identity of the more extensively contacted base that appears to be correlated in our study. Moreover, the alpha carbon atoms of H3 and H6 are essentially coplanar with the same base rather than with different bases. In Cro, it may be the different size of the amino acids at H3 and H6 that leads to recognition of different bases rather than the position of the alpha carbon atoms. Why has Cro evolution used the particular residue pairs observed here for the binary switches? One factor expected to be important is the ability of a pair of residues to form distinct contacts within the same geometric and spatial context, assuming that this context is conserved.5 Each of the switches observed here pairs amino acids that are similar in size but quite chemically distinct. For example, Ser/ Thr and Ala have small side-chains, but one is capable of hydrogen bonding and the other is not. Gln and Lys have relatively long unbranched sidechains with very different polar moieties at the end. Gln and Pro both have three backbone carbon atoms, but one can make hydrogen bond contacts while the other can make hydrophobic contacts. A second factor could be the ease of genetic interchangeability of the amino acids by simple mutations. Each of the binary switches observed here pairs amino acids that are interchangeable by single base mutations at the first or second codon positions. Gln can be easily mutated to Pro by the

can be effective for OR due to additional restrictions imposed by its known pecularities: we require that there be at least three non-overlapping pseudopalindromic sites within a w100 bp region, spaced in a certain manner. In the general case, a more sophisticated motif-finding algorithm using Gibbs sampling, expectation maximization or a consensus building greedy algorithm would be preferable (see Stormo38 for a review). Imposition of a palindromic model of the binding site has been shown to be useful in predictions of sites for dimeric prokaryotic transcription factors.39,47 To our knowledge, the use of site­site spacing as a prediction criterion is unique to our OR method, and could in principle be applied to other regulatory systems that involve cooperative binding to adjacent sites. It is quite conceivable that the rules of recognition described for Cro apply to a larger group of DNAbinding proteins, and indeed we have presented evidence that two Cro rules work for the paralogous CI family. Cro and CI are part of the same superfamily within the huge class of HTH DNAbinding proteins, and it is of interest to ask whether any of the features of our limited code correspond to known shared features of DNA binding by HTH proteins as a group. HTH proteins are clearly diverse in overall fold, while surveys of HTH binding mode and geometry have variously emphasized differences or similarities.48,49 Experiments in which recognition helices have been swapped between different HTH proteins have succeeded in exchanging binding site specificities only when the two proteins were fairly closely related.16,17,50,51 The prospects for universal HTH rules seem somewhat dim in light of these facts. There has been at least one major attempt to describe a comprehensive HTH recognition code, however. In the formalism proposed by Suzuki and Yagi,52 the favorability of a given amino acid-tobase interaction is scored by taking into account both universal chemical rules as well as stereochemical rules that are specific to different structural environments. The Suzuki­Yagi code defines DNA-binding by HTH proteins as the interaction of four amino acids with four base-pairs, corresponding to the RH positions H1, H2, H5 and H6 and the half-site positions 2­5 in the nomenclature of the present study. The limited code elucidated here for Cro, a small protein family within the HTH class, is quite distinct from this general HTH code and in fact exists largely outside of its predictive range. For example, in Cro/OR correlations are seen for H3/5, but RH position H3 is not considered in the Suzuki­Yagi code. Similarly, for the Cro/OR correlation H6/6, half-site position 6 is not included in the Suzuki­Yagi code. Rather, H6 in lambda Cro was predicted to correlate to position 5, and it was only later, when the cocrystal structure was solved, that H6 was revealed to contact base-pairs 6 and 7. For the correlation H1/2, interaction of Gln with Ade receives a favorable score in the Suzuki­Yagi code. Pro, on the other hand, is absent from the scoring tables, making its interaction with Thy

678 codon mutation CAN/CCN. Ala can be changed into Ser by the codon mutation GCN/TCN, and to Thr by the codon mutation GCN/ACN. Gln can be mutated to Lys by the codon mutation CAP/AAP. The above factors do not offer an obvious rationale for favoring a Gln/Pro pairing over a Gln/Leu pairing, or a Gln/Lys pairing over Gln/Arg. Presumably, the choice of the observed pairings relates in some way to the detailed geometric and spatial requirements at each position, as well as perhaps to the structural requirements of the protein. It has been shown recently that the Cro family is structurally diverse, encompassing at least two protein folds, and that the mixed alpha-beta fold of lambda Cro is a descendant of an all-alphahelical fold, represented by the recently determined structure of P22 Cro.26 The helical fold is also shared by the DNA-binding domain of CI proteins. Because alterations in the protein fold can indirectly affect specific interactions with the DNA, one might suppose that rules of recognition that are valid for all-alpha Cros like P22 Cro would not necessarily apply to mixed alpha-beta Cros like lambda Cro. The sequence correlations observed here suggest the alternative hypothesis, that some simple rules of direct recognition may be conserved despite radical changes in protein structure. It will be interesting to see if mutagenesis experiments coupled with in vitro measurements of changes in binding site specificity will show that the partial evolutionary code derived here applies equally well to all Cros regardless of fold class.

DNA Recognition by Cro Proteins

Materials and Methods
Identification of Cro, CI and OR sequences Cro and CI sequences for 56 phage and prophage strains were derived from a previously assembled library.26 The cro/cI intergenic region containing the OR binding sites was generally easy to identify by inspection. In a number of cases, the boundaries of the intergenic region were not clear due to multiple possibilities for the start codon of cro or cI. In such cases, the true start codon was estimated through comparison to other Cro or CI protein sequences in multiple alignments. In addition, in some phage, such as HK022,33 OR binding sites extend beyond the intergenic region and slightly overlap the cro or cI genes. To allow for this possibility, OR regions were defined generously so as to include ten base-pairs of coding DNA at each end of the intergenic sequence. Identification of recognition helices within Cro and CI and binding sites within OR HTH motifs and recognition helices were identified by inspection of multiple Cro or CI alignments constructed using CLUSTAL_X. 53 These identifications rely on conserved residue patterns in the HTH motif27 and on the location of this motif within the protein sequences. In a small number of cases, the HTH motifs were not obvious, and these were not analyzed further. Intergenic regions were analyzed for OR1, OR2 and OR3

binding sites using a Perl script called Operation, developed in our laboratory and available on request. Operation first applies a binding site symmetry criterion by using a sliding window to parse the OR region sequence for pseudo-palindromic subsequences. Window sizes of 14­19 bases in length are used so as to cover the size range of known sites (Table 1). Any subsequence that has percentage sequence identity with its reverse complement at or above a defined cutoff (stringency level) is considered as a candidate binding site. After all single operator candidates at a given stringency level have been identified, a site­site similarity criterion is applied to these candidates by comparing the sequences of each candidate site to every other candidate site, using the same identity stringency level as that applied to the symmetry criterion. A candidate OR binding site set is defined as a group of three non-overlapping individual candidate sites exhibiting complete similarity linkage (i.e. each operator is similar to both of the others). In evaluating percentage identity between an intergenic region subsequence and its reverse complement, the program takes into account that the dyad axis of symmetry for odd-sized binding sites falls on a base, and that this central base cannot be the same in the forward sequence and the reverse complement. This issue is dealt with simply by subtracting one base from the denominator of the percentage identity equation in the case of sites with odd numbers of bases. Thus, a 15 basepair binding site was treated as having 14 base-pairs, a 17 base-pair binding site was treated as having 16 basepairs, and a 19 base-pair site was treated as having 18 base-pairs. In evaluating similarity between different binding sites, on the other hand, the central base-pairs in odd sites can match. One approach to maintaining consistency between evaluations of site symmetry and site­site similarity for odd sites is to explicitly remove the central base from the sequence, and then treat the sequence as an even site. We chose an alternative approach, which was to require that each site­site comparison meet the sequence identity cutoff with respect to both the forward and reverse complement sequences. The central base-pair can match in one of these comparisons, but not both. The subtraction of one base from odd binding site sizes is done in the same manner as in site symmetry evaluations. The stringency for comparisons was initially set at a floor value of 50% sequence identity, based on trends observed in known OR site sets (Table 1). The stringency level was then incremented in steps to distinguish candidate sets meeting stricter criteria, until it was so high that no candidate sets were observed. Sets observed at the two highest stringency levels were retained. Retention of the two highest levels, rather than just the single highest level, was done to account for the possibility that non-cognate sets may exist that meet slightly stricter criteria than the cognate set. In cases where the floor stringency was the highest level yielding candidate sets, the 50% stringency level was also decremented once in order to include two levels. At a given stringency, the entire range of site sizes (14­19) was considered prior to incrementation, and long and short sites meeting the same stringencies were considered equally valid candidates. Stringencies were incremented by numbers of base matches, rather than by steps of percentage identity. This approach provides a smooth and even increase in the identity cutoff by avoiding the rounding off of numbers. Incrementation by single base matches confers a slight advantage on longer binding sites, because a single base match for a longer site

DNA Recognition by Cro Proteins

679
led to most favorable hydrogen bonding to the base at K6 was selected.

corresponds to a smaller percentage of the sequence. For example, for a site 14 bases in length, incrementation of one base match above 50% identity would require that eight of 14 bases match (57% identity). For a site 18 bases in length, the same incrementation would require that ten of 18 bases match (56% identity). The relevant raw Operation output typically consisted of numerous candidate binding site sets of various sizes identified across two stringency levels. Some small candidate sets were nested within larger candidate sets, such that they contained the same core sequence but lacked the peripheral base-pairs. In parsing the output to determine the number of unique candidate sets, nested sets were treated as a single candidate set of the highest observed size. In addition, for a few cases, analysis of the output revealed that sets of four mutually similar, nonoverlapping binding sites existed, rather than just the anticipated three. In such cases, the constituent sets of three were combined and considered as a single candidate set of four. Site­site spacing criteria, used to distinguish between multiple candidate sets identified by Operation, were implemented manually. Spacings most commonly observed in Figure 3, including 23­25 and 33 base-pairs, received two points. Spacings immediately surrounding these values, including 22, 26, 32 and 34, received one point. Spacings of 15 and 44 also received one point. All other spacings received zero points. A candidate set was predicted as the cognate set if it had a higher spacing score than any other candidate set among those selected using symmetry/similarity criteria. Consensus half-sites were derived from binding site sets by aligning the three (or four) binding sites and their reverse complements. A consensus base was defined as one that was present at a given position in at least half of the half-sites and in a higher number of half-sites than any other base. In cases where no base met this requirement, no consensus base was listed in Figure 4. Consensus halfsites of odd symmetry were numbered so as to reflect the nomenclature for lambda Cro's consensus binding site by Albright and Matthews.25 Odd sites of differing size were aligned to each other by matching the central base-pairs rather than the outer base-pairs, such that the numbering is referenced to the dyad axis. To match the published lambda Cro numbering, the central base-pair in all sites was numbered position 9. Even sites were treated in a similar manner, except that there is no central base-pair for these sites. Instead, the base-pair immediately adjacent to the dyad axis was always numbered as position 8. In effect, this means that even sites were aligned to odd by introducing a gap at the central basepair (position 9). In Figure 4, only base-pairs 1­7 are shown because these are equivalent to the base-pairs contacted by lambda Cro (Figure 1). Structural modeling of amino acid­base correlations Amino acid/nucleotide base-pairings suggested by our database analysis but not present in the lambda Cro cocrystal structure (6CRO) were analyzed by in silico modeling of the appropriate mutations onto the wild-type lambda Cro cocrystal structure and/or by examination of CI cocrystal structures. Amino acid mutations were introduced using Deep View, while nucleotide base substitutions were introduced using Insight II (Accelrys, San Diego). In the case of the Ala29Ser and Lys32Gln mutations, multiple rotamers were possible. The Ser29 rotamer was chosen based on the 434 CI cocrystal structure (see Results), while for Gln32 the rotamer that

Acknowledgements
We thank Vahe Bandarian, Nancy Horton and John Little for helpful comments on the manuscript.

Supplementary Data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2005.05.025

References
1. Luscombe, N. M., Laskowski, R. A. & Thornton, J. M. (2001). Amino acid-base interactions: a three-dimensional analysis of protein­DNA interactions at an atomic level. Nucl. Acids Res. 29, 2860­2874. 2. Mandel-Gutfreund, Y., Schueler, O. & Margalit, H. (1995). Comprehensive analysis of hydrogen bonds in regulatory protein DNA-complexes: in search of common principles. J. Mol. Biol. 253, 370­382. 3. Suzuki, M. (1994). A framework for the DNA­protein recognition code of the probe helix in transcription factors: the chemical and stereochemical rules. Structure, 2, 317­326. 4. Kono, H. & Sarai, A. (1999). Structure-based prediction of DNA target sites by regulatory proteins. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 35, 114­131. 5. Pabo, C. O. & Nekludova, L. (2000). Geometric analysis and comparison of protein­DNA interfaces: why is there no simple code for recognition? J. Mol. Biol. 301, 597­624. 6. Smith, T. L. (1998). Secret code. Nature Struct. Biol. 5, 100. 7. Matthews, B. W. (1988). Protein­DNA interaction. No code for recognition. Nature, 335, 294­295. 8. Choo, Y. & Klug, A. (1994). Selection of DNA binding sites for zinc fingers using rationally randomized DNA reveals coded interactions. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 91, 11168­11172. 9. Choo, Y. & Klug, A. (1994). Toward a code for the interactions of zinc fingers with DNA: selection of randomized fingers displayed on phage. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 91, 11163­11167. 10. Choo, Y. & Klug, A. (1997). Physical basis of a protein­ DNA recognition code. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 7, 117­125. 11. Wolfe, S. A., Greisman, H. A., Ramm, E. I. & Pabo, C. O. (1999). Analysis of zinc fingers optimized via phage display: evaluating the utility of a recognition code. J. Mol. Biol. 285, 1917­1934. 12. Miller, J. C. & Pabo, C. O. (2001). Rearrangement of side-chains in a Zif268 mutant highlights the complexities of zinc finger-DNA recognition. J. Mol. Biol. 313, 309­315. 13. Segal, D. J., Dreier, B., Beerli, R. R. & Barbas, C. F., III (1999). Toward controlling gene expression at will: selection and design of zinc finger domains recognizing each of the 5 0 -GNN-3 0 DNA target sequences. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 96, 2758­2763.

680
14. Dreier, B., Beerli, R. R., Segal, D. J., Flippin, J. D. & Barbas, C. F., III (2001). Development of zinc finger domains for recognition of the 5 0 -ANN-3 0 family of DNA sequences and their use in the construction of artificial transcription factors. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 29466­29478. 15. Luscombe, N. M. & Thornton, J. M. (2002). Protein­ DNA interactions: amino acid conservation and the effects of mutations on binding specificity. J. Mol. Biol. 320, 991­1009. 16. Wharton, R. P. & Ptashne, M. (1985). Changing the binding specificity of a repressor by redesigning an alpha-helix. Nature, 316, 601­605. 17. Wharton, R. P., Brown, E. L. & Ptashne, M. (1984). Substituting an alpha-helix switches the sequencespecific DNA interactions of a repressor. Cell, 38, 361­369. 18. Arguello-Astorga, G. R. & Ruiz-Medrano, R. (2001). An iteron-related domain is associated to Motif 1 in the replication proteins of geminiviruses: identification of potential interacting amino acid-base pairs by a comparative approach. Arch. Virol. 146, 1465­1485. 19. Mukherjee, S., Berger, M. F., Jona, G., Wang, X. S., Muzzey, D., Snyder, M. et al. (2004). Rapid analysis of the DNA-binding specificities of transcription factors with DNA microarrays. Nature Genet. 36, 1331­1339. 20. Bulyk, M. L., Gentalen, E., Lockhart, D. J. & Church, G. M. (1999). Quantifying DNA­protein interactions by double-stranded DNA arrays. Nature Biotechnol. 17, 573­577. 21. Bulyk, M. L., Huang, X., Choo, Y. & Church, G. M. (2001). Exploring the DNA-binding specificities of zinc fingers with DNA microarrays. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 98, 7158­7163. 22. Bulyk, M. L. (2003). Computational prediction of transcription-factor binding site locations. Genome Biol. 5, 201. 23. Fattah, K. R., Mizutani, S., Fattah, F. J., Matsushiro, A. & Sugino, Y. (2000). A comparative study of the immunity region of lambdoid phages including Shiga-toxin-converting phages: molecular basis for cross immunity. Genes Genet. Syst. 75, 223­232. 24. Casjens, S. (2003). Prophages and bacterial genomics: what have we learned so far? Mol. Microbiol. 49, 277­300. 25. Albright, R. A. & Matthews, B. W. (1998). Crystal structure of lambda-Cro bound to a consensus ° operator at 3.0 A resolution. J. Mol. Biol. 280, 137­151. 26. Newlove, T., Konieczka, J. H. & Cordes, M. H. (2004). Secondary structure switching in Cro protein evolution. Structure (Camb.), 12, 569­581. 27. Ohlendorf, D. H., Anderson, W. F. & Matthews, B. W. (1983). Many gene-regulatory proteins appear to have a similar alpha-helical fold that binds DNA and evolved from a common precursor. J. Mol. Evol. 19, 109­114. 28. Ogawa, T., Masukata, H. & Tomizawa, J. (1988). Transcriptional regulation of early functions of bacteriophage phi 80. J. Mol. Biol. 202, 551­563. 29. Poteete, A. R., Ptashne, M., Ballivet, M. & Eisen, H. (1980). Operator sequences of bacteriophages P22 and 21. J. Mol. Biol. 137, 81­91. 30. Lobocka, M. B., Svarchevsky, A. N., Rybchin, V. N. & Yarmolinsky, M. B. (1996). Characterization of the primary immunity region of the Escherichia coli linear plasmid prophage N15. J. Bacteriol. 178, 2902­2910. 31. Maniatis, T., Ptashne, M., Backman, K., Kield, D.,

DNA Recognition by Cro Proteins

32.

33. 34. 35. 36.

37. 38. 39.

40.

41. 42.

43. 44.

45. 46.

47.

48. 49. 50.

Flashman, S., Jeffrey, A. et al. (1975). Recognition sequences of repressor and polymerase in the operators of bacteriophage lambda. Cell, 5, 109­113. Farinha, M. A. & Kropinski, A. M. (1997). Overexpression, purification, and analysis of the c1 repressor protein of Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteriophage D3. Can. J. Microbiol. 43, 220­226. Carlson, N. G. & Little, J. W. (1993). Highly cooperative DNA binding by the coliphage HK022 repressor. J. Mol. Biol. 230, 1108­1130. Poteete, A. R. & Ptashne, M. (1982). Control of transcription by the bacteriophage P22 repressor. J. Mol. Biol. 157, 21­48. Poteete, A. R., Hehir, K. & Sauer, R. T. (1986). Bacteriophage P22 Cro protein: sequence, purification, and properties. Biochemistry, 25, 251­256. Johnson, A. D., Meyer, B. J. & Ptashne, M. (1979). Interactions between DNA-bound repressors govern regulation by the lambda phage repressor. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 76, 5061­5065. Carlson, N. G. (1992). Characterization of the repressor from the lambdoid phage HK022, PhD thesis, University of Arizona, Tucson. Stormo, G. D. (2000). DNA binding sites: representation and discovery. Bioinformatics, 16, 16­23. McCue, L., Thompson, W., Carmack, C., Ryan, M. P., Liu, J. S., Derbyshire, V. et al. (2001). Phylogenetic footprinting of transcription factor binding sites in proteobacterial genomes. Nucl. Acids Res. 29, 774­782. Mao, C., Carlson, N. G. & Little, J. W. (1994). Cooperative DNA­protein interactions. Effects of changing the spacing between adjacent binding sites. J. Mol. Biol. 235, 532­544. Schneider, T. D. & Stephens, R. M. (1990). Sequence logos: a new way to display consensus sequences. Nucl. Acids Res. 18, 6097­6100. Aggarwal, A. K., Rodgers, D. W., Drottar, M., Ptashne, M. & Harrison, S. C. (1988). Recognition of a DNA operator by the repressor of phage 434: a view at high resolution. Science, 242, 899­907. Shimon, L. J. & Harrison, S. C. (1993). The phage 434 ° OR2/R1-69 complex at 2.5 A resolution. J. Mol. Biol. 232, 826­838. Rodgers, D. W. & Harrison, S. C. (1993). The complex between phage 434 repressor DNA-binding domain and operator site OR3: structural differences between consensus and non-consensus half-sites. Structure, 1, 227­240. ° Beamer, L. J. & Pabo, C. O. (1992). Refined 1.8 A crystal structure of the lambda repressor­operator complex. J. Mol. Biol. 227, 177­196. Albright, R. A. & Matthews, B. W. (1998). How Cro and lambda-repressor distinguish between operators: the structural basis underlying a genetic switch. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 3431­3436. Lawrence, C. E. & Reilly, A. A. (1990). An expectation maximization (EM) algorithm for the identification and characterization of common sites in unaligned biopolymer sequences. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 7, 41­51. Wintjens, R. & Rooman, M. (1996). Structural classification of HTH DNA-binding domains and protein­ DNA interaction modes. J. Mol. Biol. 262, 294­313. Suzuki, M., Yagi, N. & Gerstein, M. (1995). DNA recognition and superstructure formation by helixturn-helix proteins. Protein Eng. 8, 329­338. Kolkhof, P., Teichmann, D., Kisters-Woike, B., von

DNA Recognition by Cro Proteins

681
53. Thompson, J. D., Gibson, T. J., Plewniak, F., Jeanmougin, F. & Higgins, D. G. (1997). The CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucl. Acids Res. 25, 4876­4882. 54. Kraulis, P. J. (1991). MOLSCRIPT: a program to produce both detailed and schematic plots of protein structures. J. Appl. Crystallog. 24, 946­950. 55. Merritt, E. A. & Bacon, D. J. (1997). Raster3D: photorealistic molecular graphics. Methods Enzymol. 277, 505­524.

Wilcken-Bergmann, B. & Muller-Hill, B. (1992). Lac repressor with the helix-turn-helix motif of lambda cro binds to lac operator. EMBO J. 11, 3031­3038. 51. Backes, H., Berens, C., Helbl, V., Walter, S., Schmid, F. X. & Hillen, W. (1997). Combinations of the alphahelix-turn-alpha-helix motif of TetR with respective residues from LacI or 434 Cro: DNA recognition, inducer binding, and urea-dependent denaturation. Biochemistry, 36, 5311­5322. 52. Suzuki, M. & Yagi, N. (1994). DNA recognition code of transcription factors in the helix-turn-helix, probe helix, hormone receptor, and zinc finger families. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 91, 12357­12361.

Edited by B. Honig (Received 19 January 2005; received in revised form 9 April 2005; accepted 12 May 2005)

