S16 Abstracts

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL FEBRUARY 2006

SATURDAY

61

TNF Release Results in Increased Expression of the Innate Immune Regulatory Molecule Surfactant Protein D (SP-D) in a Model of Aspergillus fumigatus (Af) and Ozone-Induced Airway Inflammation S. Kierstein1, Y. Cao1, X. Yang1, A. Das2, A. Haczku1; 1Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care, Universtiy of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 2Centocor, King of Prussia, PA. RATIONALE: TNF plays a critical role in the initiation of inflammatory changes in the lung by stimulating pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and the subsequent recruitment of inflammatory cells. We have previously shown that SP-D up-regulation is associated with resolution of airway inflammation. Whether there is a regulatory relationship between TNF and SP-D, is not known. METHODS: The kinetics of TNF production was evaluated in a murine model of Af sensitization and ozone-induced airway inflammation in wild-type and SP-D deficient mice. Cellular influx and cytokine release were analyzed at different time points between 1-96 hours. SP-D mRNA and protein expression was determined by real time PCR and Western blot. RESULTS: TNF release peaked 1 h after Af challenge and elevated levels were detected up to 12h. Ozone alone did not significantly increase TNF , but exacerbated TNF production in mice 96h after Af provocation. Influx of inflammatory cells was preceded by an increase in IL-4, IL-5, and MIP-1 upon allergen challenge, and IL-6, MIP-1 and TARC following ozone exposure. While MIP-1 and TARC were elevated in SP-D deficient mice, the inflammatory resolution 48h after Af challenge coincided with significant increases of SP-D in wild-type animals. Interestingly, transgenic mice overexpressing TNF had 4-fold greater SP-D expression in their BAL than control animals. CONCLUSIONS: TNF release may contribute to up-regulation of SP-D, which in turn facilitates timely resolution of the inflammation. We hypothesize that a negative feedback loop exists involving both TNF and SP-D to maintain immunological homeostasis in the lung. Funded by: R01 AI055593, ALA RG144N, Centocor Funding: NIH, Centocor, ALA House Dust Mite Allergen Der f Increase Bronchial Epithelial Cell Cytokine Expression B. Sun; Dept of Medicine, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Diseases, Guangzhou, CHINA. RATIONALE: The house dust mites (Dermatophagoides farinae (Derf) are a major source of aeroallergens implicated in the expression of atopic disorders, including asthma, allergic rhinitis, and atopic dermatitis . In particular, strong circumstantial evidence suggests that house dust mites antigens are important precipitating factors of Asthma. We have investigated whether Der f allergen proteases induced cytokine production from the epithelial cell line BEAS-2B. METHODS: Cells were cultured with four different concentrations with serial additions of Der f (0.02, 0.2, 2, 20ug/ml) alone for 24h to 96h. after which supernatants were assayed for IL-6 and IL-8 with ELISA, Reverse transcription-PCR was also performed. RESULTS: Cells treated with Der f allergen showed serial changes in the cohesiveness of the monolayer(Fig). There was a significant increase in the level of cytokine production compared with the untreaed sample. Statistically Significantly increased with addition of Der f caused the release of IL-6 and IL-8 expression as well as an increase in the expression of IL-6 and IL-8mRNA in time and concentration-dependent manner (p<0.05, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: HDM-induced airway inflammation may include Der f-mediated release of inflammatory mediators, and the proteolytic activity of an allergen may stimulate the release of proinflammatory cytokines from human bronchial epithelium. Suggesting that IL-6 and IL-8 production by bronchial epithelial cells may play a role in the pathogenesis of allergic asthma. Funding: Hongkong University

63

Il-21 Augments Function of Human Dendritic Cells

S. Desai, R. Pahwa, S. Pahwa; University of Miami, Miami, FL. RATIONALE: IL-21 is a -chain cytokine made exclusively by CD4+ T cells and acts almost on all immune cells. In the murine model, culture of DCs with IL-21 impaired their maturation. We investigated the influence of IL-21 on the maturation and function of human myeloid DCs in a standard culture system. METHODS: Monocyte derived dendritic cells were generated in GMCSF and IL-4 with and without 20ng/mL IL-21 (designated as IL-21 DC and control DC) for 5 days and matured in TNF- , IL1 and PGE2 for 2 days. DCs were phenotyped for expression of CD83, CD86, CD80, HLADR and CCR7. Proliferation and IFN- production by autologous T cells were evaluated after live flu infection of mature DCs. Capacity of DCs to secrete cytokine (TNF- ) after short-term stimulation with LPS was evaluated. RESULTS: In contrast to the report in mice, human IL-21DCs matured as well as control DCs with similar expression of maturation markers CD83, CCR7 and costimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86. T cells cultured with flu pulsed IL-21DCs exhibited a 2-fold increase in IFN- production and a 5-fold increase in proliferation compared to control DCs, indicating an augmentation in the antigen presentation by IL-21DCs. IL21DCs (20, 50, 100ng/mL) were hyperresponsive to LPS as observed by the dose dependant increase in TNF- secretion. CONCLUSIONS: DCs generated in presence of IL-21 mature normally, respond strongly to LPS and induce stronger T cell responses to flu virus infection. IL-21 augments myeloid DC function. The adjuvant activity of IL-21 in infectious and allergic diseases merits further investigation. Funding: NIH

64

62

Enhancement of Host Defense Gene Expression by Glucocorticoids (GC) is Mediated by CCAAT-Enhancer Binding Protein (C/EBP) N. Zhang, A. Q. Troung-Tran, B. Tancowny, R. P. Schleimer; Allergy and Immunology Division, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL. RATIONALE: Previous work showed that GC spare or enhance the expression of molecules associated with host defense and inhibit those associated with inflammation. In this study, we investigated the mechanism of these selective effects. METHODS: BEAS-2B and human primary bronchial epithelial cells were treated with fluticasone proprionate (FP) for 2 hours before stimulation with dsRNA (PolyIC, 25 g/ml) for 18 hours. Responses were monitored by real-time PCR, Western blot, EMSA and luciferase reporter assays. SiRNA was used to reduce the transcription factor C/EBP, which is known to be involved in the hepatic acute phase response. RESULTS: We detected mRNA for C/EBP , , and , but not , in resting cells. Both dsRNA and FP selectively induced C/EBPß and C/EBP mRNA in BEAS-2B cell and the combination produced a synergistic effect in both primary cells and the BEAS-2B cell line. Western Blot confirmed the induction of C/EBPß by FP and the combination of FP and dsRNA. The maximal effects of FP were observed at 10-9M and after treatment for 4 hours. Luciferase reporter assays and EMSA indicated that FP induced the DNA binding activity and functional activity of C/EBPß. SiRNA targeting C/EBPß and C/EBP blocked the enhancement by FP of the expression of the host defense genes CRP, SAA, MBL and C3, but not the inflammatory genes RANTES, GM-CSF, IL-8. CONCLUSIONS: The enhancement of airway host defense responses by GC is mediated in part by C/EBP. Funding: NIH

