VoL. 72, 1991 lized. In addition, the chemical and physical changes occurring in

145 streptomycin (SM)-producing Streptomyces griseus HUT6037, the proposal of another SM-resistant mechanism in addition to the mechanism of inactivation of SM with SM 6-phosphotransferase. Our study strongly suggested that a decrease in cell permeability to SM which develops with cell growth plays a role in the self-protection. (iv) Purification and properties of the antibiotic inactivating enzymes (streptomycin 6-phosphotransferase, puromycin 2"-N-acetyltransferase and blasticidin S acetyltransferase) which play an important role in self-protection of the producers. (v) Cloning of two genes coding for the streptomycin-phosphorylatingenzymes from S. griseus HUT6037. (vi) Analysis of the finding that when protoplasts of streptomycin-sensitive S. griseus KSN were regenerated to the mycelium form, SM-resistant colonies appeared at a high frequency. The resistance mechanism of these regenerated cultures was different from that of ancestral SM-producing S. griseus HUT6037, from which the parent S. griseus KSN was derived. While the resistance to SM of the HUT6037 strain was due mainly to the SM-phosphorylating activity of SM 6-phosphotransferase produced in the cells, the SM-resistant cultures regenerated from protoplasts produced no SM 6-phosphotransferase but the ribosomes changed and became resistant to SM. * Corresponding author.

awamori during the maturing process were investigated, resulting in a
basic understanding of how to improve the quality by maturation. Outline of our studies on the maturational control of awamori is discussed. * Corresponding author.
Mechanisms of Resistance to Antibiotics in Actinomycetes. --Monograph-MASANORISUOIYA~A(Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hiroshima

University, School of Medicine, Kasumi 1-2-3, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734) Hakkokogaku 69: 253-270. 1991.
Microorganisms which produce antibiotics must be protected from the lethal effects of their own products. The present paper reviews several of our studies concerning self-resistance mechanisms in actinomycetes which produce antibiotic inhibitors of protein synthesis: (i) Establishment of an in vitro protein-synthesizing system in Streptomyces. (ii) Investigation of the inhibitory effect of their own antibiotics on in vitro protein synthesis. As a result, it was shown that though the producers of streptomycin, neomycin, streptothricin, puromycin and blasticidin S all possessed drug-sensitive ribosomes, the protein syntheses could be protected from the action of the drugs by phosphorylation or acetylation of their own antibiotics. (iii) In

