3588

Biochemistry 2006, 45, 3588-3597

Structural Basis for Sequential Cleavage of Fibrinopeptides upon Fibrin Assembly,
Igor Pechik,§ Sergiy Yakovlev,| Michael W. Mosesson, Gary L. Gilliland,§,@ and Leonid Medved*,|
Center for AdVanced Research in Biotechnology, UniVersity of Maryland Biotechnology Institute and National Institute of Standards and Technology, RockVille, Maryland 20850, Center for Vascular and Inflammatory Diseases and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, UniVersity of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, and The Blood Research Institute of the Blood Center of Southeastern Wisconsin, P.O. Box 2178, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53201 ReceiVed December 12, 2005; ReVised Manuscript ReceiVed January 26, 2006

ABSTRACT: Nonsubstrate interaction of thrombin with fibrinogen promotes sequential cleavage of fibrinopeptides A and B (fpA and fpB, respectively) from the latter, resulting in its conversion into fibrin. The recently established crystal structure of human thrombin in complex with the central part of human fibrin clarified the mechanism of this interaction. Here, we reveal new details of the structure and present the results of molecular modeling of the fpA- and fpB-containing portions of the AR and B chains, not identified in the complex, in both fibrinogen and protofibrils. The analysis of the results reveals that in fibrinogen the fpA-containing portions are in a more favorable position to bind in the active site cleft of bound thrombin. Surface plasmon resonance experiments establish that the fpB-containing portions interact with the fibrin-derived dimeric D-D fragment, suggesting that in protofibrils they bind to the newly formed DD regions bringing fpB into the vicinity of bound thrombin. These findings provide a coherent rationale for the preferential removal of fpA from fibrinogen at the first stage of fibrin assembly and the accelerated cleavage of fpB from protofibrils and/or fibrils at the second stage.

Thrombin-mediated conversion of the plasma protein fibrinogen to the insoluble fibrin matrix is the major event in blood clotting. Fibrinogen consists of two identical disulfide-linked subunits, each of which is formed by three nonidentical polypeptide chains, AR, B , and  (1, 2). The NH2-terminal portions of all six chains form the central E region of the molecule, while their COOH-terminal portions form two identical distal D regions and two RC domains (1-4). The AR and B chains start with the 16-residue fibrinopeptide A (fpA1) and the 14-residue fibrinopeptide B (fpB) sequences, respectively. Proteolytic removal of fpA and fpB with thrombin exposes in each E region two pairs of polymerization sites (knobs), "A" and "B", starting with the Gly-Pro-Arg and Gly-His-Arg sequences, respectively. The interaction between these knobs and complementary
 This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant HL-56051 to L.M.  Atomic coordinates have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank as entry 2A45. * To whom correspondence should be addressed: Center for Vascular and Inflammatory Diseases, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 800 West Baltimore Street, Baltimore, MD 21201. Telephone: (410) 7068065. Fax: (410) 706-8121. E-mail: Lmedved@som.umaryland.edu. § University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute and National Institute of Standards and Technology. | University of Maryland School of Medicine.  The Blood Research Institute of the Blood Center of Southeastern Wisconsin. @ Current address: Centocor, Inc., 145 King of Prussia Road, Radnor, PA 19087. 1 Abbreviations: fpA and fpB, fibrinopeptides A and B, respectively. Fragment Eht is the thrombin-treated central region of fibrinogen prepared by digestion of human fibrinogen with proteolytic enzyme hementin (16). This fragment has the same NH2-terminal residues as fibrin, i.e., RGly17, Gly15, and Tyr1.

polymerization sites (holes) "a" and "b" located in the D regions of neighboring molecules (D-E-D interaction) results in spontaneous polymerization of monomeric fibrin to the insoluble fibrin polymer (clot) (2, 3, 5). Fibrin assembly is a highly ordered process that occurs in two stages. At the first stage, monomeric molecules assemble in a half-staggered manner through the D-E-D interactions to produce two-stranded protofibrils. At the second stage, protofibrils aggregate laterally to make thicker fibers that coalesce to form a three-dimensional network of fibrin clot. Numerous studies indicate that fpA is cleaved from fibrinogen much faster than fpB and that removal of fpA triggers formation of protofibrils, while removal of fpB coincides with their lateral aggregation (2, 6-10). It has also been shown that fpB release, which is very slow at the start of the reaction, is accelerated upon polymer formation (7-9, 11, 12). Such a delay in fpB cleavage is necessary for normal fibrin assembly (13). It is also connected with the formation of different types of clots, consisting of fibrin type I and type II (7). Fibrin I, in which only the fpAs are removed, is less compact and is more readily digested by plasmin, while fibrin II, lacking both fpA and fpB, is more compact and more resistant to fibrinolysis (7). Despite numerous studies, the mechanism underlying sequential cleavage of the fibrinopeptides is not completely understood. To remove the fibrinopeptides, thrombin binds to the central region of fibrinogen, not only through the active site cleft but also through its fibrinogen-binding exosite I (14, 15). The interaction via this exosite plays a major role in substrate recognition and removal of fpA and fpB, and it may be involved in their sequential cleavage. Recently, a complex between thrombin and fragment Eht derived from the central region of fibrinogen was crystallized, and its X-ray

10.1021/bi0525369 CCC: $33.50 © 2006 American Chemical Society Published on Web 02/24/2006

Sequential Cleavage of Fibrinogen Fibrinopeptides
Table 1: Crystallographic Parameters and Refinement Statistics data collection space group unit cell dimensions (Å) a, b c resolution (Å) I/(I) completeness (%) Rsym (%) redundancy refinement resolution (Å) no. of reflections Rwork/Rfree no. of atoms protein PPACK B-factor (Å2) rms deviations from ideal values bond lengths (Å) bond angles (deg)
a

Biochemistry, Vol. 45, No. 11, 2006 3589 the Eht-thrombin complex were built manually using computer graphics. Individual residues were added starting at ARCys28 and extending the chains toward ARArg19. The initial model was refined with short-term molecular dynamics at a constant temperature using CNS. The entire NH2-terminal portions of the AR and B chains in fibrinogen were initially generated as extended polypeptides. To randomize their conformations, several manual perturbations of the main chain dihedral angles were applied, followed by a 5 ps molecular dynamics calculation with simulated annealing. The docking of the fibrin(ogen) E region into the dimeric DD region was carried out manually guided by the topology of the molecular surfaces. The structure of the cross-linked D dimer in complex with the synthetic peptides mimicking polymerization knobs (19) (PDB entry 1FZB) was used as a template. The docking space was restricted to the area allowing the binding of knobs A into their complementary holes on the surface of the D-D dimer. The relative positions of the individual components in the manually built model were then subjected to final adjustment by a rigid body dynamics procedure with X-PLOR (20), followed by energy minimization of the individual atomic positions. The model illustrating possible localization of the NH2terminal portions of the B chains in a protofibril was prepared by manually arranging these portions on the surface of the dimeric D region. The initial arrangement was then adjusted with short-term molecular dynamics with CNS to relieve bad contacts and steric clashes. Figures. All figures were prepared with PyMol (21). Fibrinogen Fragments and Peptides. The D1 fragment was prepared from the plasmin digest of fibrinogen, while the D-D:E1 complex and D-D dimer were prepared from a plasmin digest of factor XIIIa-cross-linked fibrin as described previously (22, 23). The recombinant dimeric (B 1-66)2 fragment mimicking the dimeric arrangement of the B chain in fibrinogen and its H16P/P18V mutant, Mut-(B 1-66)2, were produced in Escherichia coli and purified as described previously (24). The truncated variant of the mutant, Mut( 18-66)2, was prepared by treatment of Mut-(B 1-66)2 with thrombin (24). Although thrombin was expected to cleave only fpB (B 1-14), when the digestion mixture was left for more then 1 h, the major degradation product was Mut-( 18-66)2. This was determined by NH2-terminal sequence analysis performed with a Hewlett-Packard model G 1000S sequencer. Synthetic peptides Gly-Pro-Arg-Pro and Gly-His-Arg-Pro mimicking polymerization knobs A and B, respectively, were purchased from Sigma. Fluorescence Study. Fluorescence measurements of thermal unfolding of the D-D:E1 complex and the D-D dimer loaded with the synthetic peptides were performed by monitoring the ratio of the fluorescence intensity at 370 nm to that at 330 nm with excitation at 280 nm in an SLM 8000-C fluorometer. The temperature was controlled with a circulating water bath programmed to increase the temperature at a rate of 1 °C/min. The concentrations of the D-D: E1 complex and the D-D dimer were 0.12 and 0.16 µM, respectively. Surface Plasmon Resonance. The interaction of the B chain fragment variants with the immobilized monomeric D1 fragment and the D-D dimer was studied by surface plasmon resonance using the BIAcore 3000 biosensor (BIAcore AB, Uppsala, Sweden), which assesses the as-

P31 76.2 192.4 20.0-3.65 (3.78-3.65)a 3.4 (1.9)a 93.4 (87.6)a 0.191 (0.389)a 2.2 (2.1)a 20.0-3.65 (3.78-3.65)a 25847 (2432)a 22.1 (26.2)/29.0 (31.6)a 6834 60 27.5 0.013 1.88

Values in parentheses are for the highest-resolution shell.

structure was determined (16). Although the locations of the NH2-terminal portions of the AR and B chains in the complex were not identified, the structure established the mode of the specific nonsubstrate interaction between these molecules via thrombin exosite I (16). In this work, the structure interpretation has been extended and molecular modeling of a possible arrangement of these portions in fibrinogen and a protofibril, both with bound thrombin, has been performed. The resulting three-dimensional models establish the structural basis for the preferential removal of fpA at the first stage of fibrin assembly and provide a coherent explanation for the accelerated cleavage of fpB at the second stage. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES2 Analysis of Electron Density and Model Building. The electron density was calculated on the basis of the diffraction data obtained previously from a crystal of the Eht-thrombin complex (16). Building of the additional NH2-terminal residues of the AR and B chains in the Eht-thrombin complex was performed with XtalView (17) using 2Fo Fc and Fo - Fc electron density maps contoured at 1.0 and 2.0, respectively. The residues were added one by one extending the chains for no more then one residue prior to each cycle of refinement. The result of each addition was subjected to conventional least-squares minimization of atomic coordinates with CNS (18) and validated by calculating an omit map. The crystallographic parameters and the refinement statistics are presented in Table 1. The statistics for the new coordinates are similar overall to those reported previously (16). However, the electron density map in the new areas that have been interpreted is markedly improved. Molecular Modeling. The AR20-28 segments connecting the newly built NH2-terminal residues of the AR chains with Arg19 of the fpA variant bound to thrombin molecules of
2 Certain commercial materials, instruments, and equipment are identified to specify the experimental procedure as completely as possible. In no case does such identification imply a recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials, instruments, or equipment identified is necessarily the best available for the purpose.

3590 Biochemistry, Vol. 45, No. 11, 2006 sociation and dissociation of proteins in real time. Immobilization of D1 and D-D to the CM5 sensor chip was performed using the amine coupling kit (BIAcore AB) according to the recommended procedure. Briefly, D1 at 25 µg/mL or D-D at 50 µg/mL, each in 10 mM sodium acetate (pH 5.0), was injected onto the chip surface to achieve the immobilization level of 1000 or 2000 response units (RU), respectively. Binding experiments were performed in binding buffer, HBS-P (BIAcore AB), containing 1 mM CaCl2, at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. The B chain fragment variants were injected at different concentrations, and the association between them and immobilized D1 or D-D was monitored by the change in the SPR response; the dissociation was assessed upon replacement of the ligand solution for the binding buffer without ligand. To regenerate the chip surface, complete dissociation of the complex was achieved by adding a solution containing 0.1 M sodium acetate (pH 4.0) and 2 M urea for 2 min followed by re-equilibration with the binding buffer. Experimental data were analyzed using BIAevaluation version 3.2 supplied with the instrument. Kinetic constants, kass and kdiss, were estimated by global analysis of the association-dissociation curves using the 1:1 Langmurian interaction model, and the dissociation equilibrium constant (Kd) was calculated with the relationship Kd ) kdiss/kass. The values were examined for self-consistency of the data as described in ref 25. RESULTS Analysis of Electron Density. Although our previous study (16) established the crystal structure of a complex between thrombin and the fibrinogen-derived thrombin-treated Eht fragment, locations of the NH2-terminal portions of the latter, including AR and B chain residues 17-31 and 15-55, respectively, were not identified. In that study, while the X-ray structure of the complex was refined, electron density in the vicinity of the first clearly observed NH2-terminal residues of the AR and B chains, ARAsp32 and B Glu56, respectively, was not interpreted because of its partial disorder. In the study presented here, the interpretation of this electron density has been extended. When the electron density was reanalyzed, three more residues, Lys29, Asp30, and Ser31, in each AR chain (Figure 1A) were added. Even though we did not interpret the density between two ARLys29 residues, it most likely corresponds to the disulfide bridge formed by two ARCys28 residues. Therefore, these residues were added to the model (Figure 1B). The locations of the ARCys28 residues imply antiparallel directions for the AR chain backbones. This in turn suggests that the electron density in the vicinity of each ARAsp30 most likely corresponds to two ARSer26 residues of the antiparallel AR chains. These residues were also added to the model, as well as the neighboring ARAla27 whose electron density was not observed. It should be noted that in the crystal structure of chicken fibrinogen (26) (PDB entry 1M1J, which replaced the original PDB entry 1JFE), in which positions of homologous ARCys28 and the neighboring ARSer27 residues were identified, the AR chains also have a similar configuration (Figure 1B). Similarly, when the electron density in the vicinity of B Glu56 was reanalyzed, two more residues in the NH2terminal portion of each B chain, B Lys54 and B Val55, were added to the model (Figure 1C). Although the final composite omit map displayed additional density adjacent

Pechik et al. to these residues, we did not attempt to interpret it due to its substantial disorder. The locations of all newly identified NH2-terminal residues in the Eht-thrombin complex are shown in Figure 2A. We next modeled possible conformations of the missing NH2-terminal portions of the AR and B chains, AR1-25 and B 1-53, respectively. Modeling of the NH2-Terminal Portions of the AR and B Chains. Since several structures of thrombin in complex with fpA variants are available (15, 27-30) (PDB entries 1FPH, 1BBR, 1UCY, 1YCP, and 1DM4, respectively), the conformation of the NH2-terminal portions of the AR chains in the thrombin-Eht complex was modeled assuming that their fpAs interact with thrombin in a manner similar to that observed in these structures. The atomic coordinates of one of the variants (28) (PDB entry 1UCY), which includes fpA residues AR7-16 and the flanking Gly17-Pro18-Arg19 composing polymerization knob A, were selected as a template. This variant was docked to the thrombin molecules of the Eht-thrombin complex (Figure 2A), and then the remaining six-residue segment, AR20-25, was added to connect Arg19, the last identified COOH-terminal residue of the fpA variant, with ARSer26, the newly built NH2terminal residues of the AR chains of the Eht fragment. The resulting model is shown in Figure 2B. The modeling of the NH2-terminal portions of the AR chains was tightly restricted by the length of the connecting AR20-25 segment (21.8 Å) and by the distance between the main chain carbonyl and nitrogen atoms of ARArg19 and ARSer26, respectively (20 Å). An additional conformational restriction for the AR20-25 segments comes from the topology of the molecular surface around the disulfide bridge. There are two pairs of wall-like structures, each formed by the AR and B chain residues (R- and -walls in Figure 3A), which sterically constrains the modeled segments forcing their accommodation in the canyonlike groove between them. In this configuration, several side chains of each segment can potentially interact through contacts (Figure 3B), which may further assist their localization in the groove. Most of the contacts could be formed with the AR and B chain residues composing the canyon walls. Particularly, NZ of ARLys29 is surrounded by a number of polar oxygen atoms, namely, by O of ARSer26 and by the main chain carbonyl oxygen atoms of ARGln25 and ARHis24. The side chain of ARGln25 may form hydrogen bonds with the main chain oxygen and nitrogen atoms of B Arg57 and B Ala59, respectively, and ARHis24 may form a salt bridge with ARAsp30. This salt bridge seems to cause a bend pointing the chain toward the active site cleft of bound thrombin. In addition, the side chains of fibrinogen ARGlu22 and thrombin Arg73 may form a salt bridge. The contacts described above imply that in fibrinogen these segments should be bound to the body of the molecule through interactions with His24, Gln25, and Ser26 even when thrombin is not present, while the remaining AR1-23 residues, whose structure in solution is not known, could be unbound or "free-swimming", i.e., in a random conformation. This was taken into account in the modeling of a possible arrangement of the entire 1-25 portions of the AR chains in fibrinogen. To model such an arrangement, we used the structure of the Eht fragment as a template for the newly built AR26-31 residues, to which we added the AR24-25 segment in the conformation presented in Figure 3. The remaining AR1-16 (fpA) and AR17-23 segments were

Sequential Cleavage of Fibrinogen Fibrinopeptides

Biochemistry, Vol. 45, No. 11, 2006 3591

FIGURE 1: Stereoview of the annealed composite omit electron density map of the regions surrounding the NH2-terminal portions of the AR (A and B) and B (C) chains in the complex of thrombin with the Eht fragment. The map is contoured at 0.8. Panels A and C show the newly built residues; panel B highlights those added through the modeling efforts. Carbon atoms of the newly built and modeled residues are colored white, while those built earlier (16) are colored blue for the AR chains and green for the B chains; nitrogen and oxygen atoms are colored blue and red. Panel B shows also the AR chains of chicken fibrinogen superimposed with the homologous chains of the Eht fragment. The chicken structure (26) is represented by a CR tracing (yellow); the first two identified residues, ARSer27 and ARCys28, are also shown as a wireframe model with their side chains.

generated in a random conformation. A possible arrangement of the entire AR1-25 portions in fibrinogen is depicted in Figure 4A. Modeling of the missing B 1-53 portions was more problematic since the structure of thrombin-bound fpB was not available, and the polypeptides to be modeled were much larger. Since the cleavage of both fpA and fpB requires that they fit into the active site cleft of thrombin, they should adopt similar conformations when bound to the cleft, at least in the area adjacent to the cleavage site. With such conformations, the distance between the last residue of fpB (Arg14) and the first newly built B chain residue (Lys54) was found to be 36 Å, which is much shorter than the length of the extended B 15-53 segment to be modeled (143.8 Å). Since there were no apparent conformational restrictions for positioning these segments on the surface of Eht, no attempt was made to locate them in the Eht-thrombin complex. With respect to the folding status of these portions,

it has been previously proposed, mainly on the basis of the secondary structure prediction, that in fibrinogen they adopt a specific conformation (31). However, residues corresponding to these portions were not identified in the crystal structures of chicken fibrinogen (26) or in the Eht-thrombin complex (16). Furthermore, the well-established fact that the NH2-terminal portions of the B chains are easily cleaved by proteases (1) is in agreement with the fact that they lack a compact structure. Thus, since there was no experimental evidence for a folded structure in these portions, we generated them in a random conformation (Figure 4A). To clarify a possible mechanism for cleavage of fibrinopeptides by thrombin, two thrombin molecules were added to the model of fibrinogen presented in Figure 4A, as they appear in the structure of the thrombin-Eht complex (16). The resulting complex of fibrinogen with thrombin (Figure 4B) clearly shows that the NH2-terminal portions of the fibrinogen AR chains are in more favorable positions to

3592 Biochemistry, Vol. 45, No. 11, 2006

Pechik et al.

FIGURE 2: Arrangement of the NH2-terminal portions of the AR chains in the structure of the complex of thrombin with the Eht fragment. Panel A shows a ribbon diagram of the thrombin-Eht complex with the newly built AR26-31 and B 54-55 residues shown as sticks colored by atom type: blue for nitrogens, red for oxygens, orange for sulfurs, and white for carbons; locations of B 54-55 residues are also indicated by the dotted circles. The thrombin-bound fpA variant (28) (PDB entry 1UCY) is shown as magenta (AR7-16) and yellow (AR17-19) sticks. Dotted lines indicate the distance between ARArg19 and ARSer26 (see the text). Panel B illustrates the solvent accessible surface of the complex with the newly modeled AR20-25 connecting segments shown as white sticks. In both panels, the AR, B , and  chains of Eht are colored blue, green, and red, respectively; thrombin molecules are colored beige.

occupy the active site cleft of thrombin than those of the B chains. This provides a plausible explanation for the preferential removal of fibrinopeptides A at the first stage of fibrin assembly, during which protofibrils are formed. Since numerous studies have established that polymer formation accelerates removal of fibrinpopeptides B (7-9, 11, 12), we next modeled a protofibril, which represents the simplest form of a fibrin polymer, to clarify the underlying mechanism. Modeling of a Protofibril. A number of previous attempts to model protofibrils have been carried out after crystal structures of fibrinogen and fibrin(ogen)-derived fragments were established (19, 32-34). The most detailed model of a protofibril was suggested by Yang et al. (5). It incorporated the low-resolution crystal structures of chicken fibrinogen and the fibrin-derived dimeric D fragment (D dimer or D-D)

FIGURE 3: Topology of the molecular surface around the modeled segments of the AR chains in the thrombin-Eht complex (A) and potential contacts between these segments and the complex (B). Panel A shows the solvent accessible surface of the thrombin-Eht complex with the AR20-28 segments (shown by sticks) located in the groove between the wall-like structures denoted as R and walls. The color scheme is the same as in Figure 2. The AR, B , and  chains of Eht are colored blue, green, and red, respectively, and thrombin molecules are colored beige. The AR20-25 segments are colored white; ARArg19 of the thrombin-bound fpA variant is colored yellow, and the AR26-28 segment is colored by atom type. Panel B shows a ribbon diagram of the thrombin-Eht complex in the same projection as in panel A with a potential set of polar contacts between individual residues of the AR22-30 segments and the bulk of the complex. The residues involved in contacts are represented by balls and sticks and colored according to atom type; interatomic contacts are shown as dashed lines.

complexed with synthetic peptides mimicking the polymerization knobs. In this model, the D and E regions were distant from one another and all contacts between them (D:E:D interactions) were limited to those between knobs A and B and complementary holes a and b. However, such a mode of interaction is in poor agreement with certain experimental observations. First, it was found that in the fibrin-derived D-D:E1 complex, which mimics the conformation and interactions of the D and E regions in (proto)fibrils (35), knobs B are exposed (35), suggesting that in this complex they are not involved in the D:E:D interactions. Second, it was shown that the D:E:D interactions in fibrin and in the

Sequential Cleavage of Fibrinogen Fibrinopeptides

Biochemistry, Vol. 45, No. 11, 2006 3593

FIGURE 4: Putative location of the NH2-terminal portions of the AR and B chains in fibrinogen. Panels A and B represent the ribbon diagram of fibrinogen and the solvent accessible surface of a complex of fibrinogen with thrombin, respectively. The newly modeled portions of the AR and B chains are presented in both panels by sticks. The model in panel A was generated by superimposing the chicken fibrinogen structure (26), which was used as a template, with that of the Eht fragment (16), followed by replacement of the overlapping regions with those from the latter. In the model, the AR, B , and  chains derived from Eht are colored blue, green, and red, respectively, and those derived from chicken fibrinogen are colored gray. The complete NH2-terminal portions of the AR and B chains including fpA and fpB (both colored magenta) were modeled as described in the text. Panel B represents the same fibrinogen molecule in complex with two thrombin molecules that were docked to its central region in the way that they appear in the structure of the thrombin-Eht complex (Figure 2). The complete AR, B , and  chains are colored blue, green, and red, respectively. Thrombin molecules are colored beige, and their catalytic triad is highlighted in red. The vertical lines denote approximate boundaries between the fibrinogen D and E regions.

D-D:E1 complex cause conformational changes in the D regions resulting in the exposure of their tPA- and plasminogen-binding sites (22). At the same time, binding of the synthetic peptides Gly-Pro-Arg-Pro and Gly-His-Arg-Pro, which mimic knobs A and B, respectively, to the complementary holes of the isolated D dimer was not sufficient for exposing the binding sites (22). Further, denaturation studies revealed that the D regions in the fibrin polymer and in the D-D:E1 complex had increased the thermal stability due to the D:E:D interactions (22, 36-38). To test whether the synthetic knobs could cause such stabilization, the thermal stability of the D-D:E1 complex was compared with that of the D dimer loaded with the Gly-His-Arg-Pro and/or GlyPro-Arg-Pro peptides. When these species were heated in the fluorometer while monitoring the ratio of fluorescence intensity at 370 nm to that at 330 nm as a measure of the spectral shift that accompanies unfolding, no thermal stabilization of D-D was observed in the presence of 16 µM (a 100-fold molar excess over D-D) of either one or both peptides (Figure 5). This peptide concentration is equal to the Kd for the interaction of Gly-Pro-Arg-Pro with the D1 fragment reported previously (39). Since the similarity in

the conformations of D1 and D-D (19) suggests similarity in their affinities for Gly-Pro-Arg-Pro, at this peptide concentration 50% of the binding sites in D-D should be saturated. Further increases in the Gly-Pro-Arg-Pro concentration to 160 µM (a 1000-fold molar excess over D-D), at which more than 90% of the binding sites should be saturated, did not change the thermal stability of D-D. Altogether, these observations suggest that the interaction between the D and E regions in protofibrils is not limited to the knob-to-hole binding; i.e., these regions may form additional contacts and therefore should be closer to each other. This was taken into account in subsequent modeling of the D:E:D contacts. In modeling the D:E:D contacts, fpA was first removed from the structure of the E region of fibrinogen presented in Figure 4 to expose knobs A. Then the dimeric D fragment (19) was positioned in a way that permitted docking of these knobs into the complementary holes a (Figure 6A). With such an arrangement, the central portion of the E region and the D dimer exhibit apparent surface complementarities. Namely, there is a ridge in the middle of the E region which seems to be complementary to the crevice formed by the 

3594 Biochemistry, Vol. 45, No. 11, 2006

Pechik et al.

FIGURE 5: Influence of the E1 fragment and the synthetic peptides mimicking knobs A and B on the stability of the fibrin-derived D dimer. Solid and dashed curves represent fluorescence-detected melting of the dimeric D-D fragment at 0.16 µM and the D-D:E1 complex at 0.12 µM, respectively. Data for melting of 0.16 µM D-D in the presence of a 100-fold molar excess of Gly-Pro-ArgPro or Gly-Pro-Arg-Pro and Gly-His-Arg-Pro are represented by empty and filled circles, respectively, while data for that in the presence of a 1000-fold excess of Gly-Pro-Arg-Pro are represented by empty triangles. All experiments were performed in 50 mM glycine buffer (pH 8.6) with 0.5 mM Ca2+.

chains of the D dimer. Assuming that the D:E:D interaction uses these complementarities, the structure of the E region was then docked to that of the D dimer. In the resulting structure (Figure 6B), which actually corresponds to that of the D-D:E1 complex and represents an essential portion of a protofibril (Figure 6B, bottom), the ridge interacts with the crevice burying 600 Å2 of its solvent accessible area. Such a contact area could be sufficient to account for the increased thermal stability and function-related conformational changes discussed above. It should be noted that in fibrinogen variant Naples I, which is characterized by defective thrombin binding, the rate of the removal of both fibrinopeptides, fpA and fpB, is substantially reduced (40). This implies that binding of thrombin to the E region is required for effective removal of both fpA and fpB and that interaction between the D-D and E regions in a protofibril should not interfere with this binding. This seems to be the case with the model of a protofibril presented in Figure 6. Indeed, docking the structure of thrombin with that of the protofibril reveals that both thrombin binding sites in the E region are accessible to thrombin, and there are no steric conflicts between bound thrombin and D-D (Figure 6C). Localization of the NH2-Terminal Portions of the B Chains in a Protofibril. Because of the length and possible conformational flexibility of the NH2-terminal portions of the B chains, fpB could be quite distant from the active site cleft of thrombin bound to fibrinogen (Figure 4B). At the same time, the well-established accelerating effect of polymer formation on fpB cleavage (7-9, 11, 12) suggests that the structure of protofibrils should reduce conformational space for these portions in a way that promotes the binding of fpB to the active site cleft. Indeed, visual inspection of the models presented in Figure 6 reveals that the D-D regions form a wall separating the NH2-terminal portions of the B chains from each other, thus restricting conformational space for each portion to one side of a protofibril. Another possible factor restricting such space in protofibrils would be an interaction of these portions with the D-D wall. In this regard, it has been proposed that the D-D:E1 complex is maintained

FIGURE 6: Putative arrangement of the D and E regions and location of the NH2-terminal portions of the B chains in a protofibril. Panel A represents docking of the D dimer (top) into the E region (bottom) in the direction shown by the double-headed arrow to model the D:E:D interaction in a protofibril presented in panel B (top). The location of the D and E regions in a protofibril is shown in the bottom panel of panel B by dashed lines; the individual fibrin monomer in the protofibril is also denoted. The D dimer and E region are shown with solvent accessible surfaces; the randomly generated AR17-23 and B 1-53 segments are represented by sticks. The AR, B , and  chains are colored blue, green, and red, respectively, fpBs magenta, polymerization knobs A of the E region (AR chain residues Gly17, Pro18, and Arg19) yellow, complementary holes a of the D regions white, and the thrombin-binding site in the E region is colored beige. Note that although the NH2-terminal portions of the B chains in panel B are shown in the same conformation as in panel A, in a protofibril they should interact with the newly formed D-D wall (see the text). Panel C shows the same model as panel B with thrombin (beige) bound to the E region and the NH2-terminal portion of the B chain bound to the D-D wall. Although the exact conformation of this portion and the mode of its interaction with D-D are yet to be identified, in the model it is arranged on the D-D wall in a way that would facilitate its interaction with the active site cleft of bound thrombin (see the text).

Sequential Cleavage of Fibrinogen Fibrinopeptides

Biochemistry, Vol. 45, No. 11, 2006 3595
Table 2: Dissociation Constants (Kd) for the Interaction of the Recombinant Fibrinogen (B 1-66)2 Fragment and Its Mutant Variants with the Fibrinogen-Derived D1 Fragment and Fibrin-Derived D-D Fragment Obtained by Surface Plasmon Resonancea recombinant fragment (B 1-66)2 Mut-(B 1-66) 2 Mut-( 18-66)2 Kd for interaction with D-D (µM) 13.0 ( 2.0 14.8 ( 3.7 14.0 ( 0.6 Kd for interaction with D1 (µM) 153 ( 16 148 ( 21 -

a Values are the means ( the standard deviation of at least three independent experiments.

FIGURE 7: Analysis of binding of the recombinant (B 1-66)2 fragment to the fibrin-derived D dimer (A) and the fibrinogenderived D1 fragment (B) by surface plasmon resonance. The (B 166)2 fragment was added at 0.5, 1, 2.5, 5, 10, 25, and 50 µM to the immobilized D dimer (A) or the D1 fragment (B), and its association and dissociation were monitored in real time while registering the resonance signal (response). The dotted curves represent the best fit of the binding data using global fitting analysis (see Experimental Procedures). The determined Kd values are listed in Table 2.

by the interaction through a composite polymerization site that includes AR chain residues 17-19 (knob A) and B chain residues 20-49 (35). This implies that in protofibrils the NH2-terminal portions of the B chains should interact with the DD regions through the residues located beyond fpB and knob B. To test this suggestion, the following experiments were performed. We have previously prepared a recombinant dimeric (B 1-66)2 fragment which mimics the dimeric arrangement and properties of the NH2-terminal portions of the B chains in fibrinogen (24). We have also prepared a recombinant dimeric (B 1-66)2 mutant, Mut-(B 1-66)2, with the His16Pro and Pro18Val mutations in knob B, and its truncated variant, Mut-(B 18-66)2, in which fpB and flanking knob B (residues 15-17) were missing (24). All three fragments were used to test the direct interactions between the NH2-terminal portions of the B chains and the fibrin(ogen) D regions by surface plasmon resonance (SPR). When increasing concentrations of the wild-type fragment, (B 1-66)2, were added to the fibrin-derived dimeric D fragment immobilized onto a BIAcore sensor chip, a dosedependent binding was observed (Figure 7A). The global fitting analysis (see Experimental Procedures) of the SPRdetected binding curves obtained at various concentrations of (B 1-66)2 gave a Kd value of 13 µM (Table 2). The recombinant mutant fragment and the truncated variant both exhibited binding to the D dimer with Kd values of 14.8 and 14 µM, respectively, very similar to that for the wild-type fragment (Table 2). These results provide direct evidence for the interaction between the NH2-terminal portions of the B chain and the dimeric D regions formed in protofibrils

and fibrils. They also indicate that fpB and flanking knob B (residues 1-17) are not involved in this interaction. Next the interactions between (B 1-66)2 or its mutant and the immobilized fibrinogen-derived monomeric D1 fragment were tested. Both the wild type and the mutant bound to D1, however, with a much lower affinity than to the D dimer. The Kd values were found to be 153 and 148 µM for (B 1-66)2 and Mut-(B 1-66)2, respectively (Table 2). With such an affinity, in plasma, where the normal fibrinogen concentration is 10 µM, the probability of interaction between individual fibrinogen molecules through the NH2-terminal portions of the B chains and the D regions should be quite low. At the same time, the Kd value for the interaction of (B 1-66)2 with the immobilized D dimer (Kd ) 13 µM) is comparable to the concentration of fibrinogen in plasma. This implies that binding of the NH2-terminal portions of the B chains to the D regions occurs mainly when these regions are brought together (dimerized) in protofibrils and fibrils by the D:E:D interactions. Such binding should reduce the flexibility of these portions and may immobilize them on the dimeric D regions in a conformation that promotes their cleavage by bound thrombin, as shown schematically in Figure 6C. This is in agreement with the accelerating effect of polymer formation on the cleavage of fpB. DISCUSSION According to the current view, fibrin assembly is a highly ordered process that occurs in two stages. At the first stage, thrombin cleaves a pair of fibrinopeptides A from fibrinogen to trigger the formation of protofibrils. Subsequent cleavage of a pair of fpBs at the second stage promotes lateral aggregation of protofibrils into thicker fibrils. Nonsubstrate interactions of thrombin with fibrin(ogen) play an important role at both stages. It is also well-established that during normal fibrin assembly fpB is mainly cleaved from assembled protofibrils and fibrils and that their formation accelerates fpB cleavage (7-9, 11, 12). At the same time, the mechanisms underlying these events remained to be clarified. In the previous study (16), we determined the crystal structure of thrombin in complex with a fragment, Eht, corresponding to the central region of fibrin and established the mode of the nonsubstrate interaction between them. In this study, we revealed new details of the crystal structure and modeled the NH2-terminal portions of the fibrin(ogen) AR and B chains that were not identified in the complex. We also modeled their possible arrangements in protofibrils. Analyses of the resulting models established a structural basis for the preferential cleavage of fpA at the

3596 Biochemistry, Vol. 45, No. 11, 2006 first stage of fibrin assembly and for the accelerated removal of fpB upon formation of protofibrils at the second stage of assembly. Modeling of the fpA-containing NH2-terminal portions of the AR chains (AR1-25) missing in the structure of the thrombin-Eht complex was straightforward since these portions were relatively short. More importantly, the crystal structure of thrombin in complex with almost half of the portion (AR7-19) that was available reduced the region to be modeled to a six-residue segment (AR20-25). Finally, when this segment is fully extended, it has practically the same length as the distance between AR19 and AR26. This together with the unique surface topology of Eht dictated the unambiguous accommodation of the segment on the surface of the complex, namely, in the groove between the R- and -walls that directs this segment and the adjacent fpA toward fibrinogen-bound thrombin (Figure 3). In contrast, the missing fpB-containing NH2-terminal portions of the B chains (B 1-53) were too large to be modeled unambiguously. Although the size of each of these polypeptide segments is sufficient to form a thermodynamically stable domain (41), there is no experimental evidence for the presence of a folded structure in them. Therefore, these portions of the molecule were generated in random conformations and located arbitrarily relative to the bulk of the molecule (Figure 4A). It should be noted that the conformation of the NH2terminal portion of the AR chain complexed with thrombin was modeled previously by Rose and Di Cera (42). According to their model, the 1-38 portion of the AR chain envelops thrombin making contacts with its exosite II, active site cleft, S groove, and exosite I. However, after the crystal structure of the thrombin-Eht complex was determined (16) and new details of the structure were revealed in this study, it became clear that the real conformation of the AR chains is very different from the previously modeled one. Because of the antiparallel arrangement of the AR chains in fibrinogen, thrombin interacts with the AR33-39 portion of one AR chain through exosite I (16), while its active site cleft is occupied by fibrinopeptide A coming from the other AR chain. This can be seen in Figures 2 and 3. The model presented in Figure 4B shows that each fpAcontaining portion of the AR chain is located in the vicinity of fibrinogen-bound thrombin and is actually directed toward its active site cleft. Furthermore, the length of each portion seems to be optimal for their fpAs to easily reach the cleft through minimal conformational adjustments. In contrast, the fpB-containing portions of the B chains could be quite distant from bound thrombin due to their length and their random orientation. Although these portions should have sufficient flexibility to reach the cleft, their excessive length would prevent them from doing that as efficiently as fpAcontaining portions do. Thus, the results of our modeling indicate that in fibrinogen fibrinopeptides A are "prepositioned" for an efficient cleavage by thrombin while fibrinopeptides B are not. This provides the structural basis for the preferential removal of fpA at the first stage of fibrin assembly. It should be noted that this is not the only factor governing the preferential removal of fpA. For example, the sequence of fpB is different from that of fpA, and therefore, its affinity for the active site cleft of thrombin may be lower than that of fpA, resulting in further reduction of the cleavage rate. In agreement, it was shown that mutation of Trp215 to

Pechik et al. Ala in the active site cleft of thrombin, which most probably affects its interaction with fpB to a lesser extent than that with fpA, results in the drop in thrombin specificity toward fibrinogen and the release of fpA and fpB with similar kinetics (43). It was also shown that substitution of a modified version of fpA (fpA) for fpB in the fibrinogen B chain increased the rate of the thrombin-catalyzed release of the former (44). However, even in such a mutant, the rate of fpA release from the fpAR chain was still higher than that from the fpA chain most probably due to the conformational restraints described above. To clarify the structural basis for the accelerated removal of fpB upon formation of protofibrils and fibrils, we modeled the structure of the D-D:E1 complex, which represents an essential portion of a protofibril, and analyzed the possible arrangement of the fpB-containing NH2-terminal portions of the B chains in this structure. While modeling the complex, we assumed that the interaction between D-D and E is not limited to the knob-to-hole contacts. As mentioned in the Results, this assumption is in agreement with the experimental data for the D:E:D interaction-induced stabilization of the D regions and the exposure of their functional sites. It was also taken into account that the NH2-terminal portions of the B chains interact with D-D. Such an interaction, which was previously suggested by Moskowitz and Budzynski (35) and confirmed by direct experiments in this study, provided a rationale for the accelerating effect of protofibril formation on the cleavage of fpB. Namely, when the D regions are brought together in a protofibril by the D:E:D interaction, the NH2-terminal portions of the B chains bind to them to position their fpB segments in the vicinity of the active site cleft of bound thrombin. It should be noted that other mechanisms of enhancing the cleavage of fpB from fibrin polymers cannot be excluded. For example, in fibrinogen, the NH2-terminal portions of the AR chains are located so close to bound thrombin that they may create a steric problem for binding of fpB to its active site cleft even after removal of their fpA. Such a problem should not exist in protofibrils and fibrils where these portions move away and become immobilized by the interaction with the complementary holes a. It should also be noted that the model presented in Figure 6C does not provide accurate positioning of the NH2-terminal portions of the B chains on the D-D wall as well as their exact conformations. In addition, the model does not reflect the previously proposed conformational changes in the D regions which occur upon the D:E:D interaction (5, 22). Only a crystal structure of the D-D:E1 complex would clarify such important structural details. At the same time, neither of these details is critical for the major conclusions of this study. In summary, the results of this work clearly indicate that the conformation of the fpA-containing NH2-terminal portions of the AR chains and their location relative to the thrombin-binding sites direct the preferential cleavage of fpA by fibrinogen-bound thrombin at the first stage of fibrin assembly. They also suggest that the accelerating effect of polymer formation on fpB cleavage is related mainly to the interaction of the fpB-containing NH2-terminal portions of the B chains with the dimeric DD regions formed in protofibrils and fibrils. Finally, this and the previous study (16) highlight the involvement of nonsubstrate interactions of thrombin with fibrin(ogen) in governing the two-stage fibrin assembly.

Sequential Cleavage of Fibrinogen Fibrinopeptides REFERENCES
1. Henschen, A., and McDonagh, J. (1986) Fibrinogen, fibrin and factor XIII, in Blood Coagulation (Zwaal, R. F. A., and Hemker, H. C., Eds.) pp 171-241, Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam. 2. Blomback, B. (1996) Fibrinogen and fibrin-proteins with complex roles in hemostasis and thrombosis, Thromb. Res. 83, 1-75. 3. Doolittle, R. F. (1984) Fibrinogen and fibrin, Annu. ReV. Biochem. 53, 195-229. 4. Weisel, J. W., and Medved, L. (2001) The structure and function of the RC domains of fibrinogen, Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 936, 312327. 5. Yang, Z., Mochalkin, I., and Doolittle, R. F. (2000) A model of fibrin formation based on crystal structures of fibrinogen and fibrin fragments complexed with synthetic peptides, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 14156-14161. 6. Blomback, B., and Vestermark, A. (1958) Isolation of fibrinopeptides by chromatography, Ark. Kemi 12, 173-182. 7. Blomback, B., Hessel, B., Hogg, D., and Therkildsen, L. (1978) A two-step fibrinogen-fibrin transition in blood coagulation, Nature 275, 501-505. 8. Martinelli, R. A., and Scheraga, H. A. (1980) Steady-state kinetic study of the bovine thrombin-fibrinogen interaction, Biochemistry 19, 2343-2350. 9. Higgins, D. L., Lewis, S. D., and Shafer, J. A. (1983) Steadystate kinetic parameters for the thrombin-catalyzed conversion of human fibrinogen to fibrin, J. Biol. Chem. 258, 9276-9282. 10. Hanna, L. S., Scheraga, H. A., Francis, C. W., and Marder, V. J. (1984) Comparison of structures of various human fibrinogens and a derivative thereof by a study of the kinetics of release of fibrinopeptides, Biochemistry 23, 4681-4687. 11. Hurlet-Jensen, A., Cummins, H. Z., Nossel, H. L., and Liu, C. Y. (1982) Fibrin polymerization and release of fibrinopeptide B by thrombin, Thromb. Res. 27, 419-427. 12. Ruf, W., Bender, A., Lane, D. A., Preissner, K. T., Selmayr, E., and Muller-Berghaus, G. (1988) Thrombin-induced fibrinopeptide B release from normal and variant fibrinogens: Influence of inhibitors of fibrin polymerization, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 965, 169-175. 13. Weisel, J. W., Veklich, Y., and Gorkun, O. (1993) The sequence of cleavage of fibrinopeptides from fibrinogen is important for protofibril formation and enhancement of lateral aggregation in fibrin clots, J. Mol. Biol. 232, 285-297. 14. Fenton, J. W., II, Olson, T. A., Zabinski, M. P., and Wilner, G. D. (1988) Anion-binding exosite of human R-thrombin and fibrin(ogen) recognition, Biochemistry 27, 7106-7112. 15. Stubbs, M. T., Oschkinat, H., Mayr, I., Huber, R., Angliker, H., Stone, S. R., and Bode, W. (1992) The interaction of thrombin with fibrinogen. A structural basis for its specificity, Eur. J. Biochem. 206, 187-195. 16. Pechik, I., Madrazo, J., Mosesson, M. W., Hernandez, I., Gilliland, G. L., and Medved, L. (2004) Crystal structure of the complex between thrombin and the central "E" region of fibrin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 2718-2723. 17. McRee, D. E. (1999) Practical Protein Crystallography, pp 271328, Academic, San Diego. 18. Brunger, A. T., Adams, P. D., Clore, G. M., DeLano, W. L., Gros, P., Grosse-Kunstleve, R. W., Jiang, J.-S., Kuszewski, J., Nilges, M., Pannu, N. S., Read, R. J., Rice, L. M., Simonson, T., and Warren, G. L. (1998) Crystallography and NMR system (CNS): A new software system for macromolecular structure determination, Acta Crystallogr. D54, 905-921. 19. Spraggon, G., Everse, S. J., and Doolittle, R. F. (1997) Crystal structures of fragment D from human fibrinogen and its crosslinked counterpart from fibrin, Nature 389, 455-462. 20. Brunger, A. T. (1992) X-PLOR. A system for X-ray crystallography and NMR, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT. 21. DeLano, W. L. (2002) The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, DeLano Scientific, San Carlos, CA. 22. Yakovlev, S., Makogonenko, E., Kurochkina, N., Nieuwenhuizen, W., Ingham, K., and Medved, L. (2000) Conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin: Mechanism of exposure of tPA- and plasminogenbinding sites, Biochemistry 39, 15730-15741. 23. Olexa, S. A., and Budzynski, A. Z. (1979) Primary soluble plasmic degradation product of human cross-linked fibrin. Isolation and stoichiometry of the (DD)E complex, Biochemistry 18, 991-995. 24. Gorlatov, S., and Medved, L. (2002) Interaction of fibrin(ogen) with the endothelial cell receptor VE-cadherin: Mapping of the

Biochemistry, Vol. 45, No. 11, 2006 3597
receptor-binding site in the NH2-terminal portions of the fibrin chains, Biochemistry 41, 4107-4116. 25. Schuck, P., and Minton, A. P. (1996) Kinetic analysis of biosensor data: Elementary tests for self-consistency, Trends Biochem. Sci. 21, 458-460. 26. Yang, Z., Kollman, J. M., Pandi, L., and Doolittle, R. F. (2001) Crystal structure of native chicken fibrinogen at 2.7 Å resolution, Biochemistry 40, 12515-12523. 27. Martin, P. D., Robertson, W., Turk, D., Huber, R., Bode, W., and Edwards, B. F. (1992) The structure of residues 7-16 of the ARchain of human fibrinogen bound to bovine thrombin at 2.3-Å resolution, J. Biol. Chem. 267, 7911-7920. 28. Martin, P. D., Malkowski, M. G., DiMaio, J., Konishi, Y., Ni, F., and Edwards, B. F. (1996) Bovine thrombin complexed with an uncleavable analog of residues 7-19 of fibrinogen AR: Geometry of the catalytic triad and interactions of the P1, P2, and P3 substrate residues, Biochemistry 35, 13030-13039. 29. Malkowski, M. G., Martin, P. D., Lord, S. T., and Edwards, B. F. (1997) Crystal structure of fibrinogen-AR peptide 1-23 (F8Y) bound to bovine thrombin explains why the mutation of Phe-8 to tyrosine strongly inhibits normal cleavage at Arg-16, Biochem. J. 326, 811-822. 30. Krishnan, R., Sadler, J. E., and Tulinsky, A. (2000) Structure of the Ser195Ala mutant of human R-thrombin complexed with fibrinopeptide A(7-16): Evidence for residual catalytic activity, Acta Crystallogr. D56, 406-410. 31. Pandya, B. V., Gabriel, J. L., O'Brien, J., and Budzynski, A. Z. (1991) Polymerization site in the chain of fibrin: Mapping of the B 1-55 sequence, Biochemistry 30, 162-168. 32. Brown, J. H., Volkmann, N., Jun, G., Henschen-Edman, A. H., and Cohen, C. (2000) The crystal structure of modified bovine fibrinogen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 85-90. 33. Yang, Z., Mochalkin, I., Veerapandian, L., Riley, M., and Doolittle, R. F. (2000) Crystal structure of native chicken fibrinogen at 5.5-Å resolution, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 3907-3912. 34. Madrazo, J., Brown, J. H., Litvinovich, S., Dominguez, R., Yakovlev, S., Medved, L., and Cohen, C. (2001) Crystal structure of the central region of bovine fibrinogen (E5 fragment) at 1.4-Å resolution, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 11967-11972. 35. Moskowitz, K. A., and Budzynski, A. Z. (1994) The (DD)E complex is maintained by a composite fibrin polymerization site, Biochemistry 33, 12937-12944. 36. Donovan, J. W., and Mihalyi, E. (1985) Clotting of fibrinogen. 1. Scanning calorimetric study of the effect of calcium, Biochemistry 24, 3434-3443. 37. Donovan, J. W., and Mihalyi, E. (1985) Clotting of fibrinogen. 2. Calorimetry of the reversal of the effect of calcium on clotting with thrombin and with ancrod, Biochemistry 24, 3443-3448. 38. Medved, L., Tsurupa, G., and Yakovlev, S. (2001) Conformational changes upon conversion of fibrinogen into fibrin. The mechanisms of exposure of cryptic sites, Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 936, 185204. 39. Laudano, A. P., Cottrell, B. A., and Doolittle, R. F. (1983) Synthetic peptides modeled on fibrin polymerization sites, Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 408, 315-329. 40. Koopman, J., Haverkate, F., Lord, S. T., Grimbergen, J., and Mannucci, P. M. (1992) Molecular basis of fibrinogen Naples associated with defective thrombin binding and thrombophilia. Homozygous substitution of B 68 AlafThr, J. Clin. InVest. 90, 238-244. 41. Privalov, P. L. (1979) Stability of proteins: Small globular proteins, AdV. Protein Chem. 33, 167-241. 42. Rose, T., and Di Cera, E. (2002) Three-dimensional modeling of thrombin-fibrinogen interaction, J. Biol. Chem. 277, 1887518880. 43. Arosio, D., Ayala, Y. M., and Di Cera, E. (2000) Mutation of W215 compromises thrombin cleavage of fibrinogen, but not of PAR-1 or protein C, Biochemistry 39, 8095-8101. 44. Mullin, J. L., Gorkun, O. V., Binnie, C. G., and Lord, S. T. (2000) Recombinant fibrinogen studies reveal that thrombin specificity dictates order of fibrinopeptide release, J. Biol. Chem. 275, 25239-25246. BI0525369

