Article No. mb982086

J. Mol. Biol. (1998) 284, 401±419

The Crystal Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase: A Bacterial PLP-dependent, Acyl-CoA-condensing Enzyme
Dmitriy Alexeev1, Marina Alexeeva2, Robert L. Baxter2* Dominic J. Campopiano2, Scott P. Webster2 and Lindsay Sawyer1*
Structural Biochemistry Group, The University of Edinburgh, Swann Building King's Buildings, May®eld Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JR Scotland Edinburgh Centre For Protein Technology, The University of Edinburgh, The Joseph Black Chemistry Building West Mains Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JJ, Scotland
2 1

8-Amino-7-oxononanoate synthase (or 8-amino-7-ketopelargonate synthase; EC 2.3.1.47; AONS) catalyses the decarboxylative condensation of L-alanine and pimeloyl-CoA in the ®rst committed step of biotin biosynthesis. We have cloned, over-expressed and puri®ed AONS from Escherichia coli and determined the crystal structures of the apo and PLPbound forms of the enzyme. The protein is a symmetrical homodimer with a tertiary structure and active site organisation similar to, but distinct from, those of other PLP-dependent enzymes whose three-dimensional structures are known. The critical PLP-binding lysine of AONS is located at the end of a deep cleft that allows access of the pantothenate arm of pimeloyl-CoA. A cluster of positively charged residues at the entrance to this cleft forms a putative diphosphate binding site for CoA. The structure of E. coli AONS enables identi®cation of the key residues of the PLP-binding site and thus provides a framework with which to understand the biochemical mechanism, which is similar to that catalysed by 5-aminolevulinate synthase and two other a-oxoamine synthases. Although AONS has a low overall sequence similarity with the catalytic domains of other a-oxoamine synthases, the structure reveals the regions of signi®cant identity to be functionally important. This suggests that the organisation of the conserved catalytic residues in the active site is similar for all enzymes of this sub-class of PLP-dependent enzymes and they share a common mechanism. Knowledge of the three-dimensional structure of AONS will enable characterisation of the structural features of this enzyme sub-family that are responsible for this important type of reaction.
# 1998 Academic Press

*Corresponding authors

Keywords: 8-amino-7-oxononanoate synthase; 5-aminolevulinate synthase; pyridoxal-5H -phosphate; biotin biosynthesis; X-ray crystal structure

Abbreviations used: CoA, coenzyme A; DTNB, dithionitrobenzoic acid; FOM, ®gure of merit; MIR, multiple isomorphus replacement; PCMBS, p-chloromercuribenzene sulfonate; ORF, open reading frame; PLP, pyridoxal-5H phosphate; AAT, aspartate aminotransferase (Arnone et al., 1985; McPhalen et al., 1992; Okamoto et al., 1994; Malashkevich et al., 1995); DGD, dialkylglycine decarboxylase (Toney et al., 1993, 1995); CBL, cystathionine b-lyase (Clausen et al., 1996); TPL, tyrosine phenol-lyase (Anston et al., 1993); APT, o-amino acid aminotransferase (Watanabe et al., 1989); TS, b subunit of tryptophan synthase (Hyde et al., 1988); OD, ornithine decarboxylase (Momany et al., 1995); dAAT, D-amino acid aminotransferase (Sugio et al., 1995); AR, alanine racemase (Shaw et al., 1997); Tnase, tryptophanase (Isupov et al., 1998); TD, threonine deaminase (Gallagher et al., 1998); OAT, ornithine aminotransferase (Shen et al., 1998); GSA-AT, glutamate-1-semialdehyde aminomutase (Hennig et al., 1997); AONS, 8-amino-7oxononanoate synthase (8-amino-7-ketopelargonate synthase); AKB, 2-amino-3-oxobutyrate CoA ligase; SPT, serine palmitoyltransferase; ALAS, 5-aminolevulinate synthase; 3D, three-dimensional; r.m.s., root-mean-square. E-mail address of the corresponding authors: R.Baxter@ed.ac.uk and L.Sawyer@ed.ac.uk
0022±2836/98/470401±19 $30.00/0 # 1998 Academic Press

402

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase

Introduction
The pyridoxal-5H -phosphate (PLP)-dependent enzymes are perhaps the most versatile of biocatalysts, being involved in a wide range of metabolic reactions. The initial steps of these reactions are invariant: (a) the transfer of the PLP group from the active centre lysine residue of the protein to the substrate amino group to form an ``external aldimine'' complex (i.e. a complex held in the active site but not covalently linked to the enzyme); and (b) the cleavage of a Ca bond of the substrate, adjacent to the imine C-N bond, to generate a reactive quinonoid form of the PLP complex. It is widely accepted that, irrespective of the nature of the bond-breaking step (i.e. proton abstraction, decarboxylation or retro-aldol cleavage), this is energetically feasible only when the bond that is cleaved is held perpendicular to the plane of the PLP Pyridine ring (Dunathan, 1966). The fate of the quinonoid intermediate, and hence the subsequent course of reaction, then depends upon the characteristics of the individual enzyme. It is not surprising that this core mechanistic similarity is paralleled by a structural relationship between the PLP enzymes. Indeed, the 3D structures of nine PLP-dependent enzymes out of the 13 determined

to date do show similarities in their main-chain folds. 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate synthase (AONS, EC 2.3.1.47) belongs to the small group of PLPdependent enzymes that catalyse condensations between amino acids and carboxylic acid CoA thioesters with concomitant decarboxylation of the amino acid. Three other enzymes that utilise this mechanistically intriguing strategy, shown in Figure 1, are 5-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS), serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT) and 2-amino-3oxobutyrate CoA ligase (AKB; Jordan, 1991; Merrill & Jones, 1990; Mukherjee & Dekker, 1987). Both 8-amino-7-oxononanoate and 5-aminolevulinate are compounds of key metabolic importance. The ®rst is an intermediate in biotin (vitamin H) synthesis (Eisenberg & Star, 1968) and the second is an intermediate in the tetrapyrrole pathway and hence vitamin B12 and chlorophyll synthesis (Jordan, 1991). Mutations in the latter enzyme have been implicated in human disease states such as hereditary sideroblastic anaemia (Edgar et al., 1997). Until recently, our understanding of the mechanism employed by these enzymes was largely limited to evidence obtained from studies on ALAS. Studies with the ALAS enzyme from Rhodopseudomonas sphaeroides have shown that the transformation occurs in

Figure 1. (a) Reactions catalysed by the acyl-CoA transferases. For 8-amino-7-oxononanoate synthase (AONS; E.C. 2.3.1.47), R  CH3 and RH  (CH2)4COÀ; for 5-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS, E.C. 2.3.1.37), R  H and 2 RH  CH2COÀ; for serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT, E.C. 2.3.1.50), R  CH2OH and RH  (CH2)14CH3; and for 2-amino2 3-oxobutyrate CoA ligase (AKB, E.C. 2.3.1.29), R  RH  H. (b) Proposed mechanism for AONS where R  CH3, RH  (CH2)4COÀ and P  OPO2À. 3 2

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase

403 base change (G to A) at position 15, which was introduced intentionally in our cloning strategy, and a C to G change at position 1040, which results in substitution of Ala347 by Gly. It is not clear from the evidence that is available at present whether the Ala347Gly change is real or is the result of a PCR error. Over-expression of the bioF clone gave a cell extract containing >30 mg/l of AONS. Puri®cation of the enzyme was achieved by ammonium sulphate fractionation of the cell extract followed by sequential gel permeation, reverse phase, and ion-exchange chromatography (see Materials and Methods). The expressed, catalytically competent, dimeric AONS protein was adjudged homogeneous on the basis of gel-permeation chromatography, nativePAGE and SDSPAGE, electrospray mass spectrometry and N-terminal protein sequencing. Protein sequencing and mass spectrometry showed that the N-terminal methionine residue had been removed post-translationally. This is similar to another protein of the E. coli bio operon, the bioD product dethiobiotin synthetase (Alexeev et al., 1994). Catalytic activity The steady-state kinetics of E. coli AONS were determined using both the direct thioester assay developed by Marquet (Ploux & Marquet, 1996) for the B. sphaericus enzyme and a more sensitive, linked assay adapted from that described by Hunter & Ferreira (1995) for ALAS. The KM values for L-alanine and pimeloyl-CoA are 0.9 mM and 60 mM, respectively, and the kcat is 0.1 sÀ1 (S.P.W. et al., unpublished results). Structure determination and quality While the absorption spectrum of expressed AONS proved characteristic of a PLP-containing enzyme (with lmax 425 nm at pH 7.5), under the conditions used to prepare crystals of AONS suitable for diffraction studies (pH 8.5 to 8.9, with ammonium sulphate as precipitant and no added PLP), the protein lost its cofactor and colourless crystals of the AONS apoenzyme were obtained. The AONS apoenzyme was solved by conventional multiple isomorphus replacement using two derivatives. All X-ray datasets were collected from ¯ash-frozen crystals at 100 K. Excellent anomalous scattering data obtained from synchrotron data greatly enhanced the structure solution and the ®nal model had an R-factor of 16.2% (Rfree 25.0%) for all data in the resolution range from 10 to Ê 1.9 A. The original apoenzyme was collected to a Ê resolution of 1.9 A: there were 30,937 unique re¯ections and 2912 protein atoms, giving an observation to parameter ratio of 2.6 without considering the restraint information. The system was thus well determined and the value of Rfree decreased from 42% for the ®rst model to 25% for Ê the ®nal model at 1.9 A. The Ramachandran plot of the native structure (Figure 2) shows that 98.0%

two steps (Jordan, 1991). The ®rst involves the stereospeci®c abstraction of the Ca-HR proton of the external PLP-glycine aldimine to generate a quinonoid (carbanion equivalent) species that displaces the SCoA group of succinoyl-CoA to form a b-ketoacid intermediate. This intermediate is then decarboxylated to afford the PLP-bound form of the product a-oxamine. Recent detailed studies on the mechanism of Bacillus sphaericus AONS have shown that the sequence of reactions involved is similar (Ploux & Marquet, 1992, 1996). Here, it should be noted that while in the overall reaction sequence there is no net inversion of stereochemistry, one of the steps in the process, the acylation at Ca, occurs with inversion. In Figure 1(b) we show the deprotonation of the Ca of the ®rst external aldimine (the proton is removed from behind the plane of the picture), and approach by the thioester from the si-face of the ®rst PLP-quinonoid intermediate (from above the plane), which leads to the inverted conformation of the second external aldimine relative to the ®rst PLP-alanine complex. Formally, it is possible that the thioester reacts at the re-face, from the same direction from which the proton is abstracted from the ®rst external aldimine; but it would require signi®cantly more movement of the PLP-bound intermediate in the active site and this appears extremely unlikely. Reprotonation of a second PLP-quinonoid intermediate (after decarboxylation) must occur from the re-face (from behind the plane in Figure 1(b) to retain the chirality of the product. Resolution of the details of the mechanism has awaited high-resolution structural studies of the enzyme. However, neither an ALAS nor the B. sphaericus AONS (Spinelli et al., 1996) has yet been crystallised in a form wholly suitable for X-ray structural studies. Here, we describe the high-resolution structure of the apo form of AONS from E. coli and the structure of the enzyme with PLP bound. Further, we show that, despite a low level of overall sequence identity, the homodimeric AONS (83 kDa) has striking overall structural similarity to other PLP-dependent enzymes, especially in the active-site regions. Signi®cant overall sequence identity (26 to 33%) between AONS and the proteins from the acyl-CoA a-oxamine synthase sub-family reveals that there is a high degree of conservation amongst amino acid residues in the active-site region.

Results
Expression, purification and crystallisation The E. coli bioF gene, which encodes the AONS protein, was ampli®ed from a plasmid containing a genomic bioBF construct using PCR and cloned into a pET-derived expression vector. DNA sequencing con®rmed the previously published gene sequence (Otsuka et al., 1988), derived from a lbio clone, with the exception of a conservative

404 of the amino acid residues are, as expected, within the allowed areas, with 81% in the inner core region (80% expected, Kleywegt & Jones, 1996). The electron density map around the outliers is clear and con®rms that they do indeed have atypical conformations. The overall error in the atomic Ê positions estimated from a Luzatti plot is 0.20 A. Ê model There was a single region in the 1.9 A (Arg349-Pro350-Pro351-Thr352-Val353-Pro354Ala355-Gly356) where the course of the polypeptide chain was clear but the density for the sidechains, particularly that of Arg349 and Pro350, was weaker than that of the rest of the model. We do not know whether this region is important; it was Ê the only one poorly de®ned in the 1.9 A map. A second data set was collected from another Ê apoenzyme crystal to 1.65 A resolution and re®ned to an R-factor of 18.5% (Rfree 26.7%) for all data in Ê the resolution range from 10 to 1.65 A (44,628 re¯ections). The r.m.s deviation from the ideal Ê bond lengths was 0.008 A and for the bond angles 2.0 . The mean overall temperature factor for the Ê re®ned structure was 30.2 A2 and that of the Ê Ê observed data 32.7 A2. At 1.65 A the poorly de®ned electron density around residues 349 to 356 becomes as good as that for the rest of the structure and it shows complete connectivity at a level of around 1.8s. To determine the position of PLP, apoenzyme crystals were soaked overnight in their well solutions containing 10 mM fresh PLP. The X-ray data set on a PLP-soaked enzyme crystal was colÊ lected at 100 K to a resolution of 2.1 A (23,434 unique re¯ections). The re®ned high-resolution structure of the apoenzyme was used to phase the

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase

diffraction data collected from the PLP-bound enzyme. Because the PLP-soaked crystals were not isomorphous with the apoenzyme, the structure had to be solved by molecular replacement. Following full re®nement (see Materials and Methods), the mean coordinate error as estimated Ê from a Luzatti plot is 0.2 A. The r.m.s. deviation Ê from the ideal bond lengths was 0.006 A and for the bond angles 2.0 . The mean temperature factor Ê of PLP in the re®ned structure was 48.8 A2, the same as for the protein atoms. The resulting re®ned structure showed that PLP-binding caused signi®cant conformational changes of the apoenzyme structure. The superposition of the re®ned apo-bound and PLP-bound structures (see Figure 5(b), bottom) showed that the r.m.s. displacement of the Ca atoms between the PLP-free and Ê bound forms was 1.0 A. The electron density for the PLP bound to Lys236 is shown in Figure 3. The structure of AONS The enzyme is a homodimer with each monomer consisting of three domains as shown in Figures 4 to 6. Figure 4 shows the observed secondary structure assignment of AONS above the amino acid sequence. A small N-terminal domain (blue in Figure 5) is linked directly to a larger central domain (purple) which is followed by a C-terminal domain (yellow) of approximately 100 residues. The monomers are related by crystallographic symmetry and the dimer structure is shown in Figure 5(b). The fold of the dimer is shown schematically in Figure 6, and in this Figure the colours of the domains are the same as those used in Figure 5. The major, central domain (purple) is a seven-stranded b-sheet in which six strands (b4, b9, b8, b7, b5 and b6) are parallel, with the antiparallel strand b10 interposed between b3 and b13. The b-sheet is ¯anked on both sides by a-helices and the sheet is curved around two a-helices (a5 and a4), which are packed against their symmetryrelated mates in the centre of the dimer (Figures 5 and 6). Three long a-helices in the central domain (a2, a9 and a3) are paired with their symmetryrelated partners (coloured grey in the centre of Figure 6) to form a continuous wall at the back of the dimer. Three other helices (a6, a7 and a8) of the central domain, together with the three helices of the C-terminal domain (a10, a12 and a11), complete the concave, external wall of a-helices of the dimer. The overall structure can be likened to an open left hand with the thumb representing the N-terminal helix and the ®ngers being the a-helices of the central domain. The rest of the N-terminal domain and the C domain comprise the ball of the thumb and the heel of the hand, with the remainder of the palm and ®ngers being the central domain. The helices thus mostly lie on the back of the hand and the dimer brings the palm of one hand into contact with the palm of the other. The N-terminal a-helical ``thumb'' (a1) is then directed away from its ``hand'' and lies next to the a-helical

Figure 2. The Ramachandran plot for the apo structure as produced by SHELX97 (Sheldrick & Schneider, 1997). The glycine residues are shown as open squares. The Ramachandran plot for the PLP-bound structure is essentially identical.

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase

405

Figure 3. An example of the (3jFobsj À 2jFcalcj), acalc electron density map in the PLP-binding site of the PLP-bound form. The electron density is drawn in stereo at a level of 1.6s. The view is similar to that shown in Figure 8.

``®ngers'' (a8) of the opposite monomer of the dimer, where it forms an intermolecular strap to the other monomer. The three-stranded antiparallel b-sheet (b1, b2 and b3) of the small N-terminal domain is linked to the antiparallel sheet of the Cterminal domain (b11, b12, b15 and b14) through parallel b-strands b3 and b14, which together form a continuous sheet roughly perpendicular to the sheet of the C-terminal domain. The b-sheets of the central and C-terminal domains are also approximately perpendicular to each other and come together at the bottom of the concave surface formed by the a-helices. Derivatisation experiments (R.L.B. et al. unpublished results) have shown that the PLP cofactor is attached to Lys236, which can be seen in the X-ray structure at the junction between the b-sheets at the bottom of the deep cleft formed between the major and C-terminal domains (see Figures 5(b) and 7). Mapping to the electrostatic potential of the solvent-accessible surface of the apoenzyme dimer (Figure 7) shows a basic area (the blue patch at the very bottom of the deep cleft) that is involved in binding the phosphate group of PLP (compare with Figure 5(b)). The positively charged protruding surface close to the centre of the dimer (coloured blue in Figure 7) that obstructs the view into the cleft, is a putative binding site for the diphosphate moiety of the pimeloyl CoA (see Discussion). The differences between the apo and PLP-bound forms The overall difference between the two forms is highlighted in the bottom section of Figure 5(b). The parts of the molecule that do not move are coloured, and the parts of the molecule that move signi®cantly as a result of PLP-binding are black. Strands b6, b5 and b7 of the b-sheet in the major domain move away from the active centre

together with helix a5 of the same monomer and helix a8 of the opposite monomer. The N-terminal helix a1 is remote from the active centre but is in direct contact with helix a8 of the opposite monomer, following its movement (shown in blue in Figure 5(b)). The local changes in the active centre are shown in Figure 8. The phosphate group of PLP (Figure 8, bottom) is coordinated to two main-chain nitrogen atoms (Gly108 and Ser107) at the N-terminal end of helix a4, to another main-chain nitrogen atom (Thr266) in the loop between helices a8 and a9 of the other monomer, and the hydroxyl groups of two threonine residues: Thr233 at the end of strand b9 and Thr266 in the opposite monomer. In the apo structure (Figure 8, top), a sulphate ion lies in a position similar to that of the phosphate group of PLP but is rotated by about 45 around an axis lying approximately from Gly108 to Thr233 of the other monomer. All four oxygen atoms of the sulphate group are coordinated to the protein, while only three of the PLP phosphate oxygen atoms are so bound: the oxygen atom that links the phosphate group to the pyridine moiety of PLP is not coordinated to the protein. In the apo enzyme structure, the sulphate ion is not connected to Thr233 but, instead, coordinates to the charged Lys236. The space occupied by PLP in the holoenzyme is ®lled with solvent molecules in the apo structure (red spheres in Figure 8, top). The most noticeable change between the apo and PLP-structures is the rotation of the His133 sidechain that allows PLP to move into its binding site in such a way that the His imidazole and the PLP pyridine rings stack parallel with one another. The opposite face of the pyridine ring forms hydrophobic contacts with Ala206 and CG2 of Thr233, which rotates on binding so that OG1 of Thr233 moves towards the phosphate group of PLP.

Figure 4. Sequence alignment of four acyl-CoA transferases showing secondary structural elements (with the three domains colour-coded as in Figure 5) derived from the AONS crystal structure. The top line shows the E. coli AONS sequence. Subsequent lines show the alignment with the ORFs of 2-amino-3-oxobutyrate CoA ligase (AKB), serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT), and the catalytic domain of human erythroid 5-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS). Residues in colour indicate identity (red) with or similarity (beige) to the AONS sequence. Red arrows indicate residues identi®ed in the active site of AONS. The bottom line shows the sequence of dialkylglycine decarboxylase (DGD) as aligned by three-dimensional superposition of the DGD structure onto that of AONS, without consideration of the sequence. The amino acids whose spatial positions match in the two structures are bold. This Figure was produced using ALSCRIPT (Barton, 1993).

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase

407 the catalytic domain of human ALAS (as a representative member of the large family of known ALAS sequences) is shown in Figure 4. While the sequence identity between any pair of these sequences is around 30%, the multiple alignment in Figure 4 reveals only about 12% identity between all four representatives. However, in regions of the AONS structure that mostly lie between secondary structural elements, there is a much higher local sequence identity and, further, the residues His133, Glu175, Asp204, His207, Lys236 and Tyr264, which we identify as active site components, are highly conserved. It seems likely therefore that all of these enzymes have similar structures, very similar active-site geometries and a common mechanism. The 3D structure of AONS is similar to other PLP-utilising enzymes The 3D fold of AONS was compared with the other known structures of PLP-dependent enzymes involved in amino acid metabolism: dialkylglycine decarboxylase (DGD; Toney et al., 1993, 1995), aspartate aminotransferases (AAT) from various sources (from chicken mitochondria (McPhalen et al., 1992), from chicken cytosol (Malashkevich et al., 1995), for pig cytosol (Arnone et al., 1985) and from E. coli (Kamitori et al., 1988)); o-amino acid aminotransferase (APT; Watanabe et al., 1989); tyrosine phenol-lyase (TPL; Antson et al., 1993); cystathionine b-lyase (CBL; Clausen et al., 1996); ornithine decarboxylase (OD; Momany et al., 1995); the b subunit of tryptophan synthase (TS; Hyde et al., 1988); D-amino acid aminotransferase (dAAT; Sugio et al., 1995); alanine racemase (AR; Shaw et al., 1997); tryptophanase (Tnase; Isupov

AONS is closely related to the other PLP-dependent acyl-CoA a -oxoamine synthases We used the E. coli AONS sequence in a FASTA (Pearson & Lipman, 1988) search of the entire amino acid sequence database to identify all related sequences. This identi®ed seven other sequences of AONS from various organisms: those from Serratia marcescens (Sakurai et al., 1996), Bacillus sphaericus (Gloeckler et al., 1990), Erwinia herbicolae (Wu et al., 1997), Mycobacterium leprae (accession no. P45487), Bacillus subtilis (Bower et al., 1996), Haemophilus in¯uenzae (Fleischmann et al., 1995), and Synechocystis (Kaneko & Tabata, 1997). These have between 35% and 64% sequence identity in pairwise comparisons. The program CLUSTAL (Higgins et al., 1994) was used to compile an alignment of these sequences. Conserved and similar amino acid residues are shown in the top line in Figure 4 (the other AONS sequences are not shown). An important point is that the residues that we have shown are associated with the active site of E. coli AONS (boxed in Figure 4) and are conserved in essentially all of the AONS sequences. A sequence search using the AONS sequence showed no sequences of other PLP-dependent enzymes of known 3D structure within the ®rst 200 hits of MPsearch (Coulson et al., 1987; http://www.DNA.affrc.go.jp/htdocs/MPsrch/ index.html). In fact, the only sequences in the list apart from AONS that were signi®cantly related were the three other acyl-CoA a-oxoamine enzymes that appear to share a similar mechanism with AONS (Figure 1(a) and (b)). An alignment of E. coli AONS with the sequences of SPT, AKB and

Figure 5(a) (legend on page 408)

408

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase

Figure 5. A MOLSCRIPT (Kraulis, 1991) stereodiagram of the AONS fold. The N-terminal domain is blue, the major domain is purple and the C-terminal domain is yellow, as in Figure 4. The catalytic Lys236 and its complex with PLP are both shown as balls-and-sticks. (a) The monomer of AONS with the secondary structure assignments (compare with Figures 4 and 6). (b) The dimer of the apo form (the top panel) and the changes upon PLP binding (the bottom panel). The major changes caused by the PLP-binding are shown in black lines in the bottom section.

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase

409 organisation. Despite the differences in mechanism, we found that the overall structure of AONS is strikingly similar to that of this group of nine enzymes. However, the sequence relationship between AONS and the enzymes of the group is so weak that is could not be identi®ed by sequence comparisons alone. Dialkylglycine decarboxylase (DGD) proved to have the best 3D structural overlap with AONS, with an r.m.s. deviation between Ê the 215 structurally equivalent Ca atoms of 2.2 A. The overlay of the Ca atoms of AONS and DGD (see Figure 9, top) shows that AONS and DGD do indeed fold in practically the same way despite having a statistically insigni®cant sequence similarity. The pairwise alignment of AONS and DGD with MPsearch (Coulson et al., 1987) gives a sequence identity of 23.7% over an alignment length of 113 amino acid residues. This is well within the ``grey area'' (Chothia & Lesk, 1986), and appeared after more than 200 random hits. The sequence alignment in Figure 4, derived solely from the structural (not sequence) superimposition, is shown to highlight the low level of sequence identity between AONS and DGD. The characteristic topological feature of the group of ten (including AONS) similar enzymes is the unique seven-stranded b-sheet of the major domain: a Àg f e d b c. It was ®rst discovered in the structure of AAT (Ford et al., 1980) and is the characteristic feature of most aminotransferases (see Discussion). For AONS, it comprises the strands 4b Àb10 b9 b8 b7 b5

Figure 6. Topology diagram for AONS. The squares and triangles show the b-strands pointing away and towards the viewer, respectively. The circles and long rectangles are the a-helices. The domains are coloured as in Figures 4 and 5, and the symmetry-related monomer is grey. The secondary structure elements were assigned by the program DSSP (Kabsch & Sander, 1983). The catalytic lysine position is marked.

et al., 1998); threonine deaminase (TD; Gallagher et al., 1998), ornithine aminotransferase (OAT; Shen et al., 1998) and glutamate-1-semialdehyde aminomutase (GSA-AT; Hennig et al., 1998). Nine of these (AAT, DGD, APT, TPL, CBL. OD, Tnase, OAT and GSA-AT) have been shown to share a similar polypeptide fold and active-site

Figure 7. The electrostatic potential at the accessible surface of the AONS dimer as calculated and displayed by GRASP (Nicholls et al., 1993) and the view is as in Figure 5. The blue colour corresponds to positive potential and the red to negative. The arginine residues proposed for the putative CoA-binding site are indicated on one of the two symmetry-related monomers. The PLP-binding site is at the bottom of the deep cleft between the monomers of the dimer (compare with Figure 5).

410

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase

Figure 8. Stereo drawings of the empty active site for the AONS apo-enzyme structure (top) and of the PLP-bound form (bottom). The domain colours are as in Figures 4, 5 and 6. Most of the active-site residues belong to the major domain (purple), Asn47 and Tyr49 come from the N-terminal domain (blue), Arg361 comes from the C-terminal domain (yellow), Tyr264 and Thr266 belong to the major domain (grey) that comes from the symmetry-related monomer of the dimer. Important side-chains are shown as balls and sticks.

b6 as shown in Figure 6. The catalytic Lys236 on the major domain is located in the loop between strands Àg and f (Àb10 and b9 for AONS in Figure 6). The minimal catalytic unit of all the enzymes in the group is a dimer and the active site is formed at the interface between the monomers. The major difference between the overall structures of AONS and DGD (taken as the closest representative of the group of similar PLP-dependent enzyme structures) is associated with the way the dimer is formed. The N-terminal helix a1 of AONS swings away from its own monomer (see Figure 5(a)) and folds over the opposite monomer in the dimer. In contrast, in the DGD structure, this helix packs onto its own monomer and for this reason the ®rst 34 amino acids of DGD are not spatially equivalent to those of the structure of AONS. A similar location of the N and terminal region on the opposite monomer of the dimer is observed in the structures of CBL, where it is also a helix (Clausen et al., 1996), and in AAT where it is extended (McPhalen et al., 1992); but the positions of the N and C-terminal domains relative to the major domain, as well as the geometrical arrangement of

two major domains within the AONS dimer, are very different from CBL and the AONS fold is closer to that of DGD. However, despite having similar 3D structures and PLP-binding features, AONS is functionally quite distinct from the enzymes that catalyse transamination, decarboxylation or side-chain cleavage. The catalytic mechanism of AONS involves both condensation of an acyl-CoA substrate and decarboxylation. The only other known structure of a PLP-dependent ligase is tryptophan synthase (Hyde et al., 1988) but this has an entirely different mechanism and belongs to another subfamily of PLP-enzymes. The active-centre residues are conserved within the wider family of PLP enzymes The architecture of the AONS active site resembles that of DGD and the other eight enzymes in the group (see above). The PLP in E. coli AONS is bound to Lys236, which has a structural equivalent in all of the PLP-dependent enzymes (e.g. Lys272 of DGD) and this is the only

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase

411

Figure 9. The overlaid Ca traces of the AONS and DGD monomers. The Ca atoms of AONS are coloured as in Figures 4, 5 and 6, and the DGD trace is shown in grey lines. The r.m.s. deviation between the 215 structurally equivÊ alent Ca atoms is 2.2 A. The bottom half shows the AONS monomer alone.

conserved lysine residues in all known AONS sequences (Figure 4). The orientation of the PLP ring relative to the Lys236 is the same as in other PLP-dependent enzymes that act on L-amino acids (Christen et al., 1996). The aspartate residue (Asp204 in AONS, Asp243 in DGD) interacts with the pyridine N of PLP. Another acidic residue (Glu175 in AONS, Glu210 in DGD) is situated next to the aspartate residue and interacts with it through a water molecule (Figure 8, top). This Lys-Asp couple appears to be essential for the catalytic involvement of PLP and is always conserved. A number of the other potentially important amino acid residues in the AONS active site are matched in the DGD structure. A pair of residues, Tyr264*-Asn47, of AONS (the asterisk indicates the opposite monomer, grey in Figure 8) equates to Tyr301*-Gln52 of DGD, where they were identi®ed as a potential substrate-binding site (Toney et al., 1995). In the active site of DGD, the tyrosine residue points towards the glutamine

residue and in AONS, away from it. We might expect it to move towards Asn47 upon substrate binding. This movement would then be similar to the 90 rotation of the equivalent Tyr301* towards Gln52 of DGD, which is observed between the inactive Na and the active K-forms of DGD. Tyr264* is not strictly conserved among the four a-oxoamine synthases: it can be substituted by Phe in other members of the sub-family, so that another function remains a possibility. The position of Tyr264* at the interface between the monomers at the mouth of the binding site also suggests that its role might be to orient a substrate parallel with its planar ring before presenting it to the binding site. Thr266*, Thr233 and Gly108 of AONS form the phosphate-binding site and are equivalent to Thr303*, Ser271 and Gly111 of DGD. In common with DGD, no positively charged group is associated with the negatively charged phosphate group as is found in AAT, CBL and other 3D-related enzymes.

412 Ala206 is equivalent to Ala245 of DGD and supports the hydrophobic PLP ring from underneath (Figures 4 and 8). Another notable residue in the active site of AONS is Arg361, which matches the Arg406 of DGD needed to bind the carboxylate group of the substrate amino acid in the course of the transamination (Toney et al., 1995). This suggests a similar role for Arg361 in AONS but we do not have experimental evidence to support this assignment. If we model the amino group of the substrate (alanine) next to the NZ atom of Lys236 for the ®rst transamination step of the reaction, and direct the carboxylate group towards Arg361, then the Ca proton of alanine points towards the side-chain amine group of Lys236, suggesting that this group is responsible for the initial proton abstraction as in other PLP-enzymes (Christen et al., 1996). It would follow that the subsequent approach of pimeloyl-CoA would occur from the opposite, si-face of the next intermediate. It is dif®cult to model alanine into the active site the other way round, because the carboxylate group clashes with the phosphate group of PLP and the methyl group with Lys236. Within the same overall orientation, the carboxylate group of alanine is within reach of either Arg361 or Asn47. This is similar to the binding of the carboxylate groups in the two half-reactions catalysed by DGD: in the course of transamination, the carboxylate group binds to Arg406 and during decarboxylation, to Gln52. The two amino acid residues of AONS (Arg361 and Asn47) might similarly bind the substrate carboxylate group at various stages of the reaction. His207 is spatially equivalent to Gln246 of DGD: both bind O3H of PLP. His133 of AONS is equivalent to Trp138: both cover the pyridine ring of PLP. We believe that both histidine residues are essential to the AONS reaction mechanism and return to this point in the Discussion.

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase

Discussion
The active-site residues A major feature of the active site of AONS is the presence of His133 in a parallel, stacked arrangement with the PLP ring. In DGD, the His is replaced by Trp138, which is perpendicular to the PLP ring. A stacked arrangement (similar to AONS) is observed in AAT (Trp140), CBL (Tyr111) and in other PLP-enzymes. An aromatic residue lies parallel with the PLP plane and holds it in position, which exposes the reactive O3H and C4H of the pyridine ring towards the lysine residue and the substrates. His133 is one of the few conserved active-site residues among the a-oxoamine family (Figure 4). In AONS, NE1 of His133 (in the bound Ê form) is hydrogen bonded (distance 2.6 A) to the hydroxyl group of another conserved residue, Ser135 (see Figure 8), which is also hydrogen Ê bonded (2.9 A) to the NH2 (ND2) of the conserved Asn112. Through the other hydrogen atom of

Ê ND2, Asn112 is bonded (2.9 A) to the carboxylate OD1 of Asp204, which in turn is hydrogen bonded Ê to the N1 of PLP (2.6 A). The amide OD1 of Asn112 does not make any hydrogen bonds: it points towards the hydrophobic interface between the helix a4 and the b-sheet of the major domain. Thus, four absolutely conserved residues, together with the pyridine ring of PLP, form a geometrically perfect, hydrogen bonded chain centered around Asn112. This chain provides an additional link between the already stacked electronic structures of PLP and His133. In contrast to AAT and DGD, AONS requires an additional binding site close to C4H for pimeloyl-CoA. If ND2 of His133 was to bind the pimeloyl-CoA, modelling shows that it can be appropriately oriented next to the external aldimine intermediate. Thus, we can speculate that the formation of the ®rst reaction intermediate and the binding of pimeloyl-CoA may be coupled. AAT and DGD do not require a CoA substrate and so do not have such a hydrogen bonded link. The other conserved histidine residue in the active site, His207, is hydrogen bonded to Tyr49 and to O3H of PLP (see Figure 8). Tyr49 can easily move from His207 to Asn47. Asn47 is analogous to Gln52 of DGD, which has been implicated in the carboxylate binding during the decarboxylation half-reaction (Toney et al., 1995). Tyr49 is conserved among a-oxoamine family members and does not have a structural equivalent in DGD. The movement of Tyr49 would allow His207 either to accept or donate a proton to O3H in the course of the reaction, and this ability might be linked with the binding of the carboxylate group of the substrate amino acid (L-alanine) in the decarboxylation stage of the reaction, by analogy with Gln52 of DGD. We believe that both histidine residues (His133 and His207), together with the conserved residues associated with them, play an important role in the mechanism. We are investigating the exact function of each of these residues by sitedirected mutagenesis and crystallography. At present, we do not have any evidence about the binding of the relatively bulky pantothenate arm of pimeloyl-CoA in the active site: our attempts to soak it into the crystals have been so far unsuccessful. We speculate, however, that the phosphate groups of CoA could bind to a positively charge patch (Arg125, Arg130, Arg148 and Arg149) located on the outside surface of the protein (positive blue patch in Figure 7) and close to the centre of the dimer. This region is approxiÊ mately 20 A from the active site, which is consistent with the total length of the pantothenate arm. These basic residues are not conserved and the only evidence that we have is the presence of a sulphate ion, found between two arginine residues (Arg130 and Arg148) in the suspected area, which might indicate one of the phosphate-binding sites of CoA. We are seeking direct experimental evidence about the pimeloyl-CoA binding site.

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase

413 surface of helix a10, and Gln321 at the start of strand b12, respectively (Figures 4 and 5). These are both in the C-terminal domain and on the basis of this study, do not appear to be implicated in the active-site geometry. It seems likely that these mutations are not directly involved in modi®cation of the catalytic activity but they may affect interactions of the catalytic domain of the ALAS protein with other structural elements. Gong & Ferriera (1995) have suggested that the conserved GXGXGG region of ALAS, which is equivalent to the 70-75 region in the major domain of AONS (Figures 4 and 5) between helices a2 and a3, may be important in phosphate group binding. In the AONS structure, we ®nd that this motif is remote from either the phosphate-binding site of PLP or the proposed diphosphate-binding site of the CoA thioester. However, it does play an important structural role in stabilising dimer interactions both with the conserved 47 to 53 sequence (e.g. Gly74 NH - Gln47 CO and Ile71 NH - Ser53 CO) and, crucially, with the residues of the loop containing the catalytically important Lys236 (e.g. Gly72 NH - Gly239 CO). Thus, mutations in the GXGXGG region, whilst they are unlikely to lead to the dissociation of the dimer, could alter the dimer structure and affect the geometry of the PLP binding site (at the interface between monomers) to produce a loss of activity. Until a crystal structure of ALAS is available, we suggest that the structure of AONS described here can provide a means whereby the relationship between some of the mutations to the ALAS sequence and their pathology can be interpreted at a molecular level. AONS and the evolutionary relationships among PLP-utilising enzymes The sequence identity between AONS and the group of PLP-enzymes of similar structure is very weak, with the best match being between DGD and AONS. However, the folds of AONS and DGD are suf®ciently similar that, if information about the secondary structures is incorporated into a search, the relationship between them can be identi®ed. Indeed, a search with the program SSSalign, which takes account of secondary structure (Sturrock & Dryden, 1997), ®nds three of these enzymes, despite insigni®cant sequence identity. The similar fold and elements of the active site organisation of AONS, DGD, AAT, APT, TPL, CBL, Tnase, OAT, GCA-AT and OD suggest that they may be evolutionarily related. The evolutionary tree of all aminotransferases was found to have four major branches (subgroups; Mehta et al., 1993). Subgroups I, II and IV are interrelated and subgroup III is distinct. Further analysis showed that a number of other PLP-enzymes that catalyse different reactions, are homologous to the branches of the evolutionary tree of transaminases. In particular, AONS was shown to be equally related to the subgroups I and II (Mehta & Christen, 1994). DGD, the closest structural neighbour of AONS, is

Lability of the PLP-enzyme complex As previously mentioned, the enzyme loses the PLP cofactor during crystallisation. In solution, the PLP-AONS complex can be observed spectroscopically in two distinct forms: PLP can either be attached to Lys236 as an internal aldimine or bound non-covalently (S.P.W. et al., unpublished results). Similar spectral changes were recently reported for Tnase and GSA-AT. The PLP lability suggests that the conformational changes induced by the PLP-binding in the crystal are a necessary part of the reaction mechanism. The PLP-enzyme complex is less stable in AONS than in other enzymes because there is no counteracting basic residue for the phosphate group of PLP. This absence is observed in AONS and DGD, whereas in AAT, CBL and in the other 3D-related enzymes the phosphate group is anchored to an arginine residue. The PLP-enzyme complex is considerably more stable in AAT (Toney & Kirsch, 1991) than it is in DGD (Bailey & Dempsey, 1967) and AONS. It seems not unreasonable that in the course of the reaction Lys236 oscillates between C4H of the pyridine ring and a phosphate oxygen atom. We see this movement when comparing the structure of the PLP-bound enzyme with that of the apoenzyme, in which Lys236 is directly bound to a sulphate ion from the crystallisation buffer. This sulphate ion mimics the position of the phosphate group of PLP (see Figure 8). The presence of a basic residue bound to the PLP phosphate group, as in AAT, would hinder the lysine-phosphate interaction.{ Implications for the other PLP-dependent acyl-CoA a -oxoamine synthases The sequence analysis of the family of four a-oxoamine synthases suggests that AONS, SPT, AKB and ALAS may share a similar fold, activesite geometry and mechanism. Our structural observations on AONS may also be of signi®cance in studies on the mutations to ALAS that have been implicated in human disease states. For example, the Arg452His and Ile476Asn mutations in the catalytic domain of human ALAS have been implicated in hereditary erythroid sideroblastic anaemia (Edgar et al., 1997). In the AONS structure, these residues map to Ala297 on the outer
{ The loss of PLP during crystallisation of AONS might be attributed to the presence of ammonium sulphate in the crystallisation mixture. However, our spectroscopy measurements show that the enzyme slowly loses PLP even when no nucleophile is present. We noticed that while the crystallisation droplets lose colour during crystallisation, the same solutions without the protein do not, implying that the PLP instability is associated with the protein. Combined with the observed Lys236 movement in the crystals, it is reasonable to suggest that our interpretation is not just a crystallisation artefact.

414 homologous to the related subgroup II, It was noticed that the division of transaminases into subgroups correlates with the type of amino acid substrate. This feature would imply a relationship of AONS to subgroup II. All PLP-dependent enzymes were included in the analysis and were classi®ed (Alexander et al., 1994) according to the reaction regio-speci®city to the a, b or g-carbon atom of the substrate amino acid. This categorisation has been shown to correlate with the pro®le-derived homologies within a, b and g-families (Alexander et al., 1994; Hayashi, 1995) and AONS belongs to the largest, the a-family. Otsuka et al. (1988) have pointed out that the sequence of AONS is related to 7,8-diaminononanoate synthase (DANS or DapaAT; Mehta et al., 1993), the next enzyme after AONS in the biotin biosynthesis pathway. DANS belongs to the same subgroup II as AONS, and we speculate that it may share the same fold. A similar link might exist between ALAS and the preceding enzyme in the tetrapyrrole biosynthesis pathway, GSA-AT. ALAS and AONS catalyse very similar reactions and are believed to have a similar fold and mechanism. The fold of GSA-AT is similar (Hennig et al., 1997) to the subgroup II a-family and to AONS in particular. We may speculate that these pairs of consecutive enzymes in two different biosynthetic pathways (GSA-AT - ALAS and AONS DANS) could have a common fold, mechanism and evolutionary history. Table 1 summarises the data for the enzymes of known 3D structure in terms of a, b and g categories. To satisfy the classi®cation, the structures should lie on the diagonal of the Table (belong to the same group both by sequence and reaction type) and should have distinct folds shown by different colours. The major group of a-a structures in the top left corner and two b-b structures in the centre of Table 1 conform to the classi®cation, and the ®ve off-diagonal structures, do not. The four different colours shown in the Table indicate four different fold types known for PLP-enzymes. It seems an over simpli®cation to describe each enzyme as a, b or g on the basis of remote sequence similarity and the reaction type. However, this lies beyond the scope of the present discussion.

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase Table 1. Family assignments for PLP-enzymes

The rows are the family assignments (a,b,g) based on the sequence pro®le analysis, and the columns are based on the type of reaction (Alexander et al., 1994). The sequences of OD, dAAT and AR cannot be attributed to any of the sequencederived families and occupy a separate row at the bottom. Four colours designate four distinct 3D folds observed for PLPenzymes: similarly folded enzymes have the same colour. The group stands for AAT, DGD, AONS, Tnase, OAT, GSA-AT, OD, TPL and APT. The enzymes that conform to the classi®cation must lie on the diagonal and the diagonal boxes must be coloured differently from each other (have distinct folds). For full names of the enzymes, see the Abbreviations used footnote.

ferred from other PLP-dependent enzymes to the subfamily of a-oxoamine synthases. From our modelling based on the architecture of the AONS active site, we suggest that the Ca proton of the ®rst reaction intermediate (PLP-alanine complex, see Figure 1(b)) points towards Lys236, which moves between C4H and the phosphate group of PLP, and carries out the deprotonation. The acyl-CoA unit must then approach from the opposite, si-face of the ®rst quinonoid intermediate. Subsequent decarboxylation to give the second quinonoid intermediate may be assisted by the PLP and/or the b-ketone. The ®nal protonation must occur from the re-face of the complex (Figure 1(b)). This scheme is consistent with the mechanism suggested by Ploux & Marquet (1996) for AONS and with the mechanisms of related PLPdependent enzymes (John, 1995; Christen et al., 1996). Detailed analysis of the steps involved await structural and kinetic studies of active-site mutants, intermediate analogues and inhibitor complexes.

Materials and Methods
All chemicals were obtained from Sigma Plc, Poole, Dorset, unless otherwise speci®ed and were of the highest available grade. Growth medium was prepared according to Sambrook et al. (1989). Preparation of the bioF overexpressing construct pET-16b/HindIII/bioF A plasmid designed to overexpress bioF was constructed using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify the gene. PCR primers were designed to create a unique BspHI (5H CGC GGA AGC TTC ATG AGC TGG CAG GAA AAA ATC 3H ) site 5H to the initiation codon. The 3H primer was an M13 primer that anneals downstream from the HindIII site of pUC18. These primers were used to amplify the AONS gene bioF from plasmid pUC18/RBS/bioBF (a pUC18 derivative containing the

Conclusion
Intensive studies of PLP-dependent a-oxoamine synthases (mostly of ALAS) over a number of years have failed to provide a structural basis for the mechanism of subfamily of enzymes. The determination of the structures of the native and PLP-bound AONS is a ®rst step in understanding the complex series of reactions catalysed by the four enzymes of the subfamily. The AONS fold is found to be very similar to subgroup II of the a-family transaminases. An extensive body of biochemistry and structural biology can now be trans-

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase bioBF fragment from pBO30ÁbioC; Birch et al., 1995). The isolated fragment was digested with BspHI and HindIII, and ligated into plasmid pET-16b.HindIII (a pET-16b derivative containing an additional HindIII cloning site) cut with NcoI and HindIII. This construct places the bioF gene under the control of the bacteriophage promoter and the lac operator (Studier et al., 1990). The new plasmid, pET-16b/HindIII/bioF was transformed into E. coli HMS174 (DE3). These cells were then screened for their ability to overexpress bioF. Colonies were grown in 10 ml of LB containing ampicillin (100 mg/ml) at 37 C until their A600  1. Protein expression was induced by the addition of IPTG (isopropyl-b-D thiogalactoside) to 1 mM ®nal concentration. After a further three hours growth, 1 ml of these cells was collected and a portion subjected to SDS-PAGE. A large band at 42 kDa was observed in induced cells, whereas no band was apparent in noninduced cells. For DNA sequencing, cells were grown under the same conditions overnight, pelleted by centrifugation and the plasmid DNA puri®ed using the Wizard Plus SV DNA puri®cation Kit (Promega). Sequencing reactions were carried out using the Thermosequenase Kit (Amersham) and the sequence determined using an ABI Prism 377 automated sequencer. Assay of AONS activity

415

AONS activity was determined at 340 nm on a Hewlett Packard 8452A Diode Array Spectrophotometer, thermostatically controlled at 30 C. A typical assay contained 20 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.5), 1 mM a-ketoglutarate, 0.25 mM thiamine pyrophosphate, 1 mM NAD, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.1 unit of a-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, and 2 to 10 mg of AONS in a total volume of 1 ml. L-Alanine and pimeloyl-CoA were added to each assay to give the desired ®nal concentrations. Data were analysed using HP 89532 K Multicell Kinetics Software. Crystallography The protein solution after the last puri®cation step (0.5 mg/ml protein in 10 mM bis-Tris/propane, 50 to 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5) was concentrated to 10 mg/ml in Centricon concentrators (Amicon). Crystals of AONS were grown by the hanging drop method from 1.6 M ammonium sulphate, 200 mM bis-Tris/propane buffer at pH 8.5. Crystals were mounted in Cryoloops (Hampton Research) and routinely frozen by rapid immersion directly into liquid nitrogen with a cryoprotectant made by adding 30% (v/v) glycerol to the well solution. The structure of the apo form was solved by the multiple isomorphous replacement (MIR) method. The derivative crystals were also frozen after soaking in the well solution made 5 mM in heavy metal salt. The crystals deteriorated if soaked for more than two hours even at concentrations of heavy metal as low as 100 mM. Soaking in PCMBS (and several other mercurial salts) either destroyed the crystals or did not show any heavy metal binding. The best result was obtained when small crystals (less than 0.1 mm) were transferred to a 5 mM heavy metal solution for as short time as possible (two to three seconds) before freezing directly in liquid nitrogen. A low-resolution native data set was collected in the Ê resolution range 75 to 4.0 A using an ENRAF-Nonius FR571 X-ray source with graphite-monochromatised CuKa radiation and a MarResearch 30 cm image plate Ê system. Higher-resolution native (1.9 A) from the same crystal, and derivative data sets (see Table 2) were colÊ lected at a wavelength of 1.488 A using a similar image plate system at the SRS, CLRC Daresbury Laboratory. The high-resolution data set was collected at a waveÊ length of 1.0 A at EMBL/DESY, Hamburg to a resolÊ ution of 1.65 A. The temperature factor of the Native1 Ê Ê data was 28 A2 and that of Native2 was 25 A2. The derivative data were collected out to a resolution of Ê Ê 2.6 A for the Na2IrCl6 derivative and to 2.4 A for PCMBS. All of the data were processed with DENZO and scaled with SCALEPACK (Otwinowski & Minor, 1997). The details of the data collection together with those of the structure determination are presented in Table 2. The cell parameters and diffraction pattern for all crystals were consistent with space group P3112 Ê Ê (a,b  58.52 A, c  194.77 A, g  120 for the Native1 crystal) with one monomer per asymmetric unit and an estimated solvent content of 46% (v/v). A long unit cell Ê parameter of about 200 A made high-resolution data collection dif®cult. We aligned all crystals with the c edge at a small angle to the spindle and moved the detector (MAR 300 mm image plate) to the minimum possible distance to collect the whole resolution range and at the same time, to avoid spot overlap, the distance between

Expression and purification of AONS The protein was expressed in the E. coli strain HMS174(DE3). An overnight seed culture was used to inoculate LB supplemented with ampicillin (100 mg/ml). The culture was grown (37 C, 250 rpm) to A600  1.0 before inducing with 1 mM IPTG. The culture was grown for a further three hours. The cells were harvested by centrifugation in a Sorvall RC5-B centrifuge using a GS3 head at 5000 rpm for 15 minutes at 4 C and washed with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5). The cells were resuspended in 20 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.5), 2 mM EDTA, and 100 mM PLP and disrupted by sonication (15 pulses of 30 seconds at 30 second intervals) at 4 C. The cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 20 minutes at 4 C using a Sorvall SS34 rotor. The supernatant was clari®ed by slow addition of ammonium sulphate to a concentration of 1.5 M followed by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 20 minutes at 4 C. The supernatant was retained and further ammonium sulphate added to a ®nal concentration of 3 M. The protein was pelleted at 10,000 rpm for 20 minutes at 4 C and resuspended in the minimum volume of 20 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.5), 2 mM EDTA, 100 mM PLP. The supernatant was loaded onto a Superdex 75 HR gel-®ltration column (Pharmacia) equilibrated with 20 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA. Fractions containing the AONS protein were identi®ed by SDS-PAGE and combined. The protein solution was adjusted to 3 M NaCl and loaded onto a Phenyl-Sepharose column (Pharmacia) equilibrated with 20 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5), 3 M NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 100 mM PLP. The protein was eluted with a linear gradient (3 M to 0 M NaCl in buffer) over ten column volumes. Fractions containing AONS were pooled and loaded onto a ResourceQ anion-exchange column (Pharmacia) equilibrated with 10 mM bis-Tris/propane (pH 7.5). The protein was eluted with a linear salt gradient (0 M to 1 M NaCl) over 20 column volumes. N-terminal sequencing of AONS was carried out as described (Hayes et al., 1989). The preparation of pimeloyl-CoA was carried out essentially as described (Ploux & Marquet, 1992, 1996).

416
Table 2. Data collection, phasing and re®nement
Ê Res. (A) Native1 Native2 Na2IrCl6 PCMBS Nat-PLP 1.9 1.65 2.6 2.4 2.1 Complete (%) I/s(I) 99.5 (96.1) 99.9 (99.6) 99.6 (99.8) 100.0 (99.9) 100.0 (100.0) 24.5 (2.3) 31.3 (3.3) 19.3 (4.9) 29.7 (11.4) 21.2 (2.6) Rmerge (%) 7.2 (27.9) 8.4 (36.9) 3.3 (10.3) 7.5 (16.7) 9.7 (58.3) Redundancy 11.1 (2.7) 14.3 (8.8) 1.9 (2.0) 14.8 (13.9) 9.8 (7.6)

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase

Ê Unit cell a (A) 58.52 58.22 (À0.30) 58.64 (0.12) 58.54 (0.02) 58.65 (0.13)

Ê c (A) 194.77 194.83 (0.06) 195.19 (0.42) 197.30 (2.53) 200.20 (5.43)

R (%) 16.2 (25.0) 18.3 (26.7) 16.2 22.2 17.4 (28.0)

Phasing power ± ± 2.6 1.5 ±

The numbers in parentheses refer to the outer resolution shell, except for the unit cell edges, where they show the difference from Ê Native1. The Native1 dataset is the result of merging the low-resolution data (75 to 4.0 A) collected in Edinburgh with the higherÊ resolution data (15 to 1.9 A) collected from the same crystal on station 7.2 at the SRS, CLRC Daresbury Laboratory, UK. The NatPLP and the derivative datasets were all collected on station 7.2. The Native2 high-resolution dataset was collected at the EMBL BW7A beamline of the DORIS storage ring, DESY, Hamburg. Redundancy is the ratio between the number of observations and the number of unique re¯ections as produced by DENZO (Otwinowski & Minor 1997). The value in the R (%) column for the derivatives is the R-factor between the native and derivative data sets. For two native crystals of the apo form of the enzyme (Native1 and Native2) and for the crystal of the enzyme in the holo form (Nat-PLP) the value in the R-factor column is the residual of the re®nement against all data without a cutoff level and the value of Rfree (%) is in the parentheses. Because of signi®cant non-isomorphism Ê of the derivative PCMBS, only the data to a resolution of 3.5 A were used for phasing.

spot centres for the high-resolution run was as small as eight pixels. High multiplicity of the data (due to the symmetry of the unit cell) helped to average out possible errors, but the Rmerge value of 8.4% indicates that overlap errors were still present. The good quality of the ®nal electron density maps and low R-factors of the models proved that the chosen data collection strategy was a good compromise between the resolution and the quality of the data. The structure was solved using two heavy-atom derivatives: PCMBS and Na2IrCl6. In the beamtime available we were unable to optimise the wavelength but the high intensity of the X-ray source combined with the high symmetry of the crystal form provided a reliable anomalous signal for both derivatives. For the Ir derivative, both the isomorphous and anomalous difference Patterson maps were very clear and were solved by inspection for the two major binding sites. Hg distorted the unit cell considerably (see Table 2) and the isomorphous Patterson map was not as good as that for the Ir derivative. However, the anomalous signal was strong and two heavy-atom positions were easily found, one of them in common with the Ir derivative. The binding sites were re®ned with MLPHARE (CCP4, 1994). The isomorphous and anomalous occupancies for the common Ir-Hg site were isoIr1  0.60, anoIr1  0.41, isoHg1  0.53, anoHg1  0.25 and the occupancies of the second (different) sites were high enough to resolve the phase ambiguity: isoIr2  0.45, anoIr2  0.32, isoHg2  0.44, anoHg2  0.25. The MIR phases were deterÊ mined for the resolution range 20.0 to 3.5 A (where the anomalous signal was signi®cant) with a mean ®gure merit (FOM) of 0.62. The isomorphous and anomalous Cullis R-factors for the derivatives were: isoIr  0.48, anoIr  0.89 and isoHg  0.71, anoHg  0.83. the molecular boundaries, b-strands and a-helices were identi®able in the MIR map. Solvent ¯attening, histogram matching and phase extension was carried out using the program DM and the phases were extended to a resolution range of 75 to Ê Ê 2.8 A. The resulting FOM was 0.59 for the data to 2.8 A Ê and 0.74 for the data to 3.5 A resolution. The polypeptide chain was ®tted as poly(Ala) with the program O (Jones et al., 1991) and the model phases then combined with the experimental phases with SIGMAA (Read,

1986). The FOM was 0.57 for the resolution range 75 to Ê 2.8 A. The quality of the map was good enough to identify and add all of the side-chains, and the complete model was then rebuilt with O. The R-factor before the re®nement was 42.0%. After simulated annealing and positional re®nement with the program XPLOR (Brunger & Krukowski, 1990) the model was manually corrected and the atomic positions were re®ned with a bulk solvent correction. The R-factor for the resolution range 75 Ê to 1.9 A was 28% (Rfree  36% for 5% of the data). Further re®nement was done with SHELX97 (Sheldrick Ê & Schneider, 1997) for the resolution range 10.0 to 1.9 A. The temperature factors were re®ned and the water molecules were added by the program SHELXWAT. The electron density map was reinspected, the model corrected again and three sulphate ions were identi®ed. There were 423 water molecules found (clear electron density and at least one hydrogen bond to a protein atom). The ®nal R was 16.2% (Rfree  25.0%) for all the Ê data in the resolution range 10.0 to 1.9 A. Ê The 1.9 A model was re®ned with SHELX97 against the higher-resolution data collected from another crystal Ê to the resolution of 1.65 A. The re®nement rapidly converged to an R-factor of 18.3% (Rfree  26.7%) after addition of more water molecules. There were 44,628 unique re¯ections, 2912 protein atoms, 569 water molecules and three sulphate ions. The mean temperature Ê factor for the proteins atoms was 31.0 A2, for the water Ê molecules, 40.1 A2 and the overall B-factor for the data Ê was 32.7 A2. The coordinates have been submitted to the PDB with accession number 1bs0. Crystals of the apo-enzyme were soaked in 10 mM PLP overnight. The binding of PLP changed the crystal structure dramatically: the longest unit cell dimension Ê became 5.4 A longer. The diffraction from the PLPbound enzyme could not be phased using the apo model. The rotation function with the rigid apo model did not show any signi®cant peaks. Three domains of the apo model were used in rigid-body simulated annealing followed by slow cooling, which converged to an R-factor of 29.5% (Rfree 38.1%). The model was rebuilt and it ®nally re®ned to an R-factor of 17.4% Ê (Rfree  28.0%) in the resolution range from 15 to 2.1 A with 23,434 unique re¯ections. The mean B-factor for the Ê protein atoms was 48.8 A2 and for the 472 water mol-

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase Ê ecules in this structure 59.4 A2. The temperature factor Ê for the data was 40.8 A2. The ®nal model showed that the dimer of the whole PLP-enzyme had rotated by 2.4 around the dyad axis parallel to the b edge of the unit cell, relative to the apo-enzyme. Protein Data Bank Accession Number The coordinates have been deposited in the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank with accession number 1bs0.

417
Christen, P., Kasper, P., Gehring, H. & Sterk, M. (1996). Stereochemical constraint in the evolution of pyridoxal-5H -phosphate-dependent enzymes ± a hypothesis. FEBS Letters, 389, 12± 14. Clausen, T., Huber, R., Laber, B., Pohlenz, H. & Messerschmidt, A. (1996). Crystal structure of the pyridoxal-5H -phosphate dependent cystathionine Ê b-lyase from Escherichia coli at 1.83 A. J. Mol. Biol. 262, 202± 224. Collaborative Computational Project No. 4 (1994). The CCP4 suite: programs for protein crystallography. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 50, 760± 763. Coulson, A. F. W., Collins, J. F. & Lyall, A. (1987). Protein and nucleic acid sequence database searching: a suitable case for parallel processing. Comput. J. 30, 420± 424. Dunathan, H. C. (1966). Conformation and reaction speci®city in pyridoxal phosphate enzymes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 55, 712± 716. Edgar, A. J., Losowsky, M. S., Noble, J. S. & Wickramasinghe, S. N. (1997). Identi®cation of an arginine452 to histidine substitution in the erythroid 5-aminolevulinate synthetase gene in a large pedigree with X-linked hereditary sideroblastic anaemia. Eur. J. Haematol. 58, 1 ±4. Eisenberg, M. A. & Star, C. (1968). Synthesis of 7-oxo-8aminopelargonic acid, a biotin vitamer, in cell-free extracts of Escherichia coli biotin auxotrophs. J. Bacteriol. 96, 1291± 1297. Fleischmann, R. D., Adams, M. D., White, O., Clayton, R. A., Kirkness, E. F., Kerlavage, A. R., Bult, C. J., Tomb, J. F., Dougherty, B. A., Merrick, J. M., McKenney, K., Sutton, G., Fitzhugh, W., Fields, C. & Gocayne, J. D., et al. (1995). Whole-genome random sequencing and assembly of Haemophilus in¯uenzae Rd. Science, 269, 496±512. Ford, G. C., Eichele, G. & Jansonius, J. N. (1980). Threedimensional structure of a pyridoxal phosphate dependent enzyme, mitochondrial aspartate aminotransferase. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 77, 2559± 2563. Gallagher, D. T., Gilliland, G. L., Xiao, G., Zondlo, J., Fisher, K. E., Chinchilla, D. & Eisenstein, E. (1998). Structure and control of pyridoxal phosphate dependent allosteric threonine deaminase. Structure, 6, 465± 475. Gloeckler, R., Ohsawa, I., Speck, D., Ledoux, C., Bernard, S., Zinsius, M., Villeval, D., Kisou, T., Kamogawa, K. & Lemoine, Y. (1990). Cloning and characterization of the Bacillus sphaericus genes controlling the bioconversion of pimelate into dethiobiotin. Gene, 87, 63 ± 70. Gong, J. & Ferreira, G. C. (1995). 5-Aminolevulinate synthase: functionally important residues at a glycine loop putative, a pyridoxal phosphate cofactorbinding site. Biochemistry, 34, 1678±1685. Hayashi, H. (1995). Pyridoxal enzymes: mechanistic diversity and uniformity. J. Biochem. 118, 463± 473. Hayes, J. D., Kerr, L. A. & Cronshaw, A. D. (1989). Evidence that gluthathione S-transferases B1B1 and B2B2 are the products of separate genes. Biochem. J. 264, 437± 445. Hennig, M., Grimm, B., Contestabile, R., John, R. A. & Jansonius, J. N. (1997). Crystal structure of glutamate-1-semialdehyde aminomutase: an alphadimeric vitamin B6-dependent enzyme with asymmetry in structure and active site reactivity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 94, 4866± 4871.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to BBSRC and to Zeneca plc for ®nancial support for this work. We are also indebted to the staff of CLRC Daresbury Laboratory and EMBL/DESY, Hamburg, for provision of synchrotron facilities, and to the staff of the Welmet Protein Characterisation Facility for N-terminal sequencing. We thank Robin McAlpine for his help on manuscript production.

References
Alexander, F. W., Sandmeier, E., Mehta, P. & Christen, P. (1994). Evolutionary relationships among pyridoxal-5H -phosphate-dependent enzymes. Regiospeci®c a, b and g families. Eur. J. Biochem. 219, 953± 960. Alexeev, D., Baxter, R. L. & Sawyer, L. (1994). Mechanistic implications and family relationships from the structure of dethiobiotin synthetase. Structure, 2, 1061± 1107. Antson, A. A., Demidkina, T. V., Gollnick, P., Dauter, Z., von Tersch, R. L., Long, J., Berezhnoy, S. N., Phillips, R. S., Harutyunyan, E. H. & Wilson, K. S. (1993). Three-dimensional structure of tyrosine phenol-lyase. Biochemistry, 32, 4195± 4206. Amone, A., Rogers, P. H., Hyde, C. C., Briley, P. D., Metzler, C. M. & Metzler, D. E. (1985). Pig cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase: the structures of internal aldimine, external aldimine and ketimine and of the b subform. In Transaminases (Christen, P. & Metzler, D. E., eds), pp. 138±155, Wiley, New York. Bailey, G. B. & Dempsey, W. B. (1967). Puri®cation and properties of an a-dialkyl amino acid transaminase. Biochemistry, 6, 1526± 1533. Barton, G. J. (1993). ALSCRIPT ± A tool to format multiple sequence alignments. Protein Eng. 6, 37 ± 40. Birch, O. M., Fuhrmann, M. & Shaw, N. M. (1995). Biotin synthase from Escherichia coli, an investigation of the low molecular weight and protein components required for activity in vitro. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 19158± 19165. Bower, S., Perkins, J. B., Yocum, R. R., Howitt, C. L., Rahaim, P. & Pero, J. (1996). Cloning, sequencing, and characterization of the Bacillus subtilis biotin biosynthetic operon. J. Bacteriol. 178, 4122± 4130. Brunger, A. T. & Krukowski, A. (1990). Slow-cooling protocols for crystallographic re®nement by simulated annealing. Acta Crystallog. sect. A, 46, 585± 593. Chothia, C. & Lesk, A. M. (1986). The relation between the divergence of sequence and structure in proteins. EMBO J. 5, 823±826.

418
Higgins, D., Bleasby, A. J. & Fuchs, R. (1994). CLUSTAL-V-improved software for multiple sequence alignment. Scientist, 8, 17 ± 21. Hunter, G. A. & Ferreira, G. C. (1995). A continuous spectrophotometric assay for 5-aminolevulinate synthase that utilizes substrate cycling. Anal. Biochem. 226, 221±224. Hyde, C. C., Ahmed, S. A., Padlan, E. A., Miles, E. W. & Davies, D. R. (1988). Three-dimensional structure of the tryptophan synthetase a2b2 multienzyme complex from Salmonella typhimurium. J. Biol. Chem. 263, 17857± 17871. Isupov, M. N., Anston, A. A., Dodson, E. J., Dodson, G. G., Dementieva, I. S., Zakomirdina, L. N., Wilson, K. S., Dauter, Z., Lebedev, A. A. & Harutyunyan, E. H. (1998). Crystal structure of tryptophanase. J. Mol. Biol. 276, 603± 623. John, R. A. (1995). Pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzymes. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1248, 81 ± 96. Jones, T. A., Zou, J. Y., Cowan, S. W. & Kjeldgaard, M. (1991). Improved methods for building protein models in electron density maps and the location of errors in these models. Acta Crystallog. Sect A, 47, 110± 119. Jordan, P. M. (1991). The biosynthesis of 5-aminolaevulinic acid and its transformation into uroporphyrinogen III. In Biosynthesis of Tetrapyrroles (Jordan, P. M., ed.), pp. 1 ± 66, Elsevier, Amsterdam. Kabsch, W. & Sander, C. (1983). Dictionary of protein secondary structure ± pattern recognition of hydrogen bonded and geometrical features. Biopolymers, 22, 2577± 2637. Kamitori, S., Hirotsu, K., Higuchi, T., Kondo, K., Inoue, K., Kuramitsu, S., Kagamiyama, H., Higuchi, Y., Yasuoka, N., Kusunoki, M. & Matsuura, Y. (1988). Three-dimensional structure of aspartate aminoÊ transferase from Escherichia coli at 2.8 A resolution. J. Biochem. 104, 317± 318. Kaneko, T. & Tabata, S. (1997). Complete genome structure of the unicellular cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC6803. Plant Cell Physiol. 38, 1171 ±1176. Kleywegt, G. J. & Jones, T. A. (1996). Phi/psi-chology: Ramachandran revisited. Structure, 4, 1395± 1400. Kraulis, P. J. (1991). MOLSCRIPT: a program to produce both detailed and schematic plots of protein structure. J. Appl. Crystallog. 24, 946± 950. Malashkevich, V., Strokopytov, B. V., Borisov, V. V., Dauter, Z., Wilson, K. S. & Torchinsky, Yu. M. (1995). Crystal structure of the closed form of chicken cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase at Ê 1.9 A. J. Mol. Biol. 247, 111± 124. McPhalen, C. A., Vincent, M. G. & Jansonius, J. N. (1992). X-ray structure re®nement and comparison of three forms of mitochondrial aspartate aminotransferase. J. Mol. Biol. 225, 495 ±517. Mehta, P. K. & Christen, P. (1994). Homology of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate synthase, 8-amino-7oxonanoate synthase, 2-amino-6-caprolactam racemase, 2,2-dialkyglycone decarboxylase, glutamate-1semialdehyde 2,1-aminomutase and isopenicillin-Nepimerase with aminotransferases. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 198, 138± 143. Mehta, P. K., Hale, T. I. & Christen, P. (1993). Aminotransferases: demonstration of homology and division into evolutionary subgroups. Eur. J. Biochem. 214, 549± 561. Merrill, A. H. J. & Jones, D. D. (1990). An update of the enzymology and regulation of sphingomyelin metabolism. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1037, 24 ± 29.

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase Momany, C., Ernst, S., Ghosh, R., Chang, N.-L. & Hackert, M. L. (1995). Crystallographic structure of a PLP-dependent ornithine decarboxylase from LacÊ tobacillus 30a to 3.0 A resolution. J. Mol. Biol. 252, 643± 655. Mukherjee, J. J. & Dekker, E. E. (1987). Puri®cation, properties and N-terminal amino acid sequence of homogeneous Escherichia coli 2-amino-3-ketobutyrate CoA ligase, a pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzyme. J. Biol. Chem. 262, 14441± 14447. Nicholls, A., Bharadwaj, R. & Honig, B. (1993). GRASP: graphical representation and analysis of surface properties. Biophys. J. 64, 166± 170. Okamoto, A., Higuchi, T., Hirotsu, K., Kuramitsu, S. & Kagamiyama, H. (1994). X-ray crystallographic study of pyridoxal 5H -phosphate aspartate aminotransferases from Escherichia coli in open and closed form. J. Biochem. 116, 95 ±107. Otsuka, A. J., Buoncristiani, M. R., Howard, P. K., Flamm, J., Johnson, C., Yamamoto, R., Uchida, K., Cook, C., Ruppert, J. & Matsuzaki, J. (1988). The Escherichia coli biotin biosynthetic enzyme sequences predicted from the nucleotide sequence of the bio operon. J. Biol. Chem. 263, 19577± 19585. Otwinowski, Z. & Minor, W. (1997). Processing of X-ray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode. Methods Enzymol. 276, 307±326. Pearson, W. R. & Lipman, D. J. (1988). Improved tools for biological sequence comparison. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 85, 2444± 2448. Ploux, O. & Marquet, A. (1992). The 8-amino-7-oxopelargonate synthase from Bacillus sphaericus ± puri®cation and preliminary characterization of the cloned enzyme overproduced in Escherichia coli. Biochem. J. 283, 327± 331. Ploux, O. & Marquet, A. (1996). Mechanistic studies on the 8-amino-7-oxopelargonate synthase, a pyridoxal-5H -phosphate-dependent enzyme involved in biotin biosynthesis. Eur. J. Biochem. 236, 301± 308. Read, R. (1986). Improved Fourier coef®cients for maps using phases from partial structures with errors. Acta Crystallog. sect. A, 42, 140± 149. Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F. & Maniatis, F. (1989). Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual, 2nd edit., Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY. Sakurai, N., Akatsuka, H., Kawai, E., Imai, Y. & Komatsubara, S. (1996). Complete sequence and organisation of the Serratia marcescens biotin operon. Microbiology, 142, 3295± 3303. Shaw, J. P., Petsko, G. A. & Ringe, D. (1997). Determination of the structure of alanine racemase from Ê Bacillus stearothermophilus at 1.9 A resolution. Biochemistry, 36, 1329± 1342. Sheldrick, G. M. & Schneider, T. R. (1997). SHELX-97. High resolution re®nement. Methods Enzymol. 277, 319± 343. Shen, B. W., Henning, M., Hohenester, E., Jansonius, J. N. & Schirmer, T. (1998). Crystal structure of human recombinant ornithine aminotransferase. J. Mol Biol. 277, 81 ± 102. Spinelli, S., Ploux, O., Marquet, A., Anguille, C., Jelsch, C., Cambillau, C. & Martinez, C. (1996). Crystallization and preliminary X-ray study of the 8-amino-7oxopelargonate synthase from Bacillus sphaericus. Acta Crystallog. sect D, 62, 866± 868. Studier, F. W., Rosenberg, A. H., Dunn, J. J. & Dubendorff, J. W. (1990). Use of T7 RNA polymer-

Structure of 8-Amino-7-oxononanoate Synthase ase to direct selective high-level expression of cloned genes. Methods Enzymol. 185, 60 ± 89. Sturrock, S. S. & Dryden, D. T. F. (1997). A prediction of the amino acids and structures involved in DNA recognition by type I restriction and modi®cation enzymes. Nucl. Acids Res. 25, 3408± 3414. Sugio, S., Petsko, G. A., Manning, J. M., Soda, K. & Ringe, D. (1995). Crystal structure of a D-amino acid aminotransferase: how the protein controls stereoselectivity. Biochemistry, 34, 9661± 9669. Toney, M. D. & Kirsch, J. F. (1991). Kinetics and equilibria for the reactions of coenzymes with wild type and the Y70F mutant of Escherichia coli aspartate aminotransferase. Biochemistry, 30, 7461± 7466. Toney, M. D., Hohenester, E., Cowan, S. W. & Jansonius, J. N. (1993). Dialkylglycine decarboxylase structure: bifunctional active site and alkali metal sites. Science, 261, 756± 759.

419
Toney, M. D., Hohenester, E., Keller, J. W. & Jansonius, J. N. (1995). Structural and mechanistic analysis of two re®ned crystal structures of the pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzyme dialkylglycine decarboxylase. J. Mol. Biol. 245, 151± 179. Watanabe, N., Sakabe, K., Sakabe, N., Higashi, T., Sasaki, K., Aibara, S., Morita, Y., Yonaha, K., Toyama, S. & Fukutani, H. (1989). Crystal structure analysis of o-amino acid: pyruvate aminotransferase with a newly developed Weissenberg camera and an imaging plate using synchrotron radiation. J. Biochem. 105, 1 ± 3. Wu, C. H., Bao, Y. Y., Shao, C. P. & Shiuan, D. (1997). Molecular cloning and nucleic acid sequencing of the bioF (7-keto-8-amino pelargonic acid synthase), bioC and bioD (dethiobiotin synthase) genes of Erwinia herbicola. Mol. Biol. Int. 41, 311± 315.

Edited by R. Huber (Received 12 March 1998; received in revised form 17 July 1998; accepted 17 July 1998)

