X-Ray crystal structures of animal lectins
James M Rini
University
Several important

of Toronto,

Toronto,

Canada
of animal lectins

advances in the structure

determination

were made in the past year. The X-ray crystal structures of the human and rat mannose-binding time the three-dimensional In addition, interactions. proteins subunit organization

of trimeric

fragments

have defined for the first C-type lectin. complex oligosaccharide

of a multimeric

the structure of a galectin-biantennary Finally,

has provided a model for what might be biochemically carbohydrate-binding sites on basic fibroblast

relevant cross-linking independent

in a novel variation on lectin cross-linking,

growth factor have been found

to recognize opposing faces of a synthetic heparin/heparan sulphate fragment, leading to growth-factor Current Opinion in Structural polymerization. 1995, 5:617-621

Biology

Introduction Lectins have been implicated in mediating a large number of binding and recognition processes in animals. In addition to members of the well-characterized C-type, galectin and P-type animal lectin families [l-5], proteins ranging from signaling receptors [6] to chaperones [7-91 are now known to possess lectin activity. Like their counterparts in lower organisms, animal lectins employ a number of strategies to confer specificity and affinity on their binding interactions. Among these, multivalency is perhaps the most important [lo"]. Within the past year, X-ray crystal structures have been reported for the trimeric mannose-binding protein [ 11 l 12**], a ., galectin-oligosaccharide complex [ 13**], and a basic fibroblast growth factor-heparin oligosaccharide complex [14"]. In each case, the structure provides an example of multivalency and a framework for interpreting their mode of action.

the collectins can activate complement through proteases bound to their collagen tails [16].

serine

Trimeric

mannose-binding

protein

The X-ray crystal structures of trimeric &agments of human [1 lo*] and rat [12"] MBP have now been determined. In both cases, the fragment studied included only the a-helical coiled-coil neck region and the C-terminal CRD. The CRDs are arranged in a three-fold symmetrical fashion (Fig. l), indicating that the N-terminal and collagen-like repeat domains are not required for trimerization. The neck region forms a triple a-helical coiled-coil, and as expected, the `a' and `d' residues of the heptad repeat form the core of the helical array. Although most of the interactions that stabilize the trimer appear to arise Gem neck-neck interactions, neck-CRD and CRD-CRD interactions are also important. Deviation from perfect three-fold symmetry was observed for both the rat and human trimer structures, and considerable variation in the neck/CRD orientation was observed among monomers in the human MBP structures. The second crystal form of human MBP contains two trimers in the asymmetric unit which interact through the coiled-coil domain. Functionally, MBP binds mannose (Man)-containing oligosaccharide structures typical of those found on the surface of pathogenic micro-organisms [ 1,161. Binding studies, aimed at probing the subunit organization of MBP, have shown that it binds most tightly to neoglycoproteins that display widely spaced carbohydrate determinants, such as mannose-conjugated bovine serum albumin (BSA) (for Manzo-BSA, the concentration at which 50% inhibition is achieved, 150 =0.7nM) [ 181. Indeed, natural and synthetic high-mannose-cluster oligosaccharides show no enhancement in affinity over that seen for mannose alone. The X-ray crystal structures reveal that the CRDs are spaced -53 A and -45 A

Mannose-binding protein (MBP) is one of the soluble C-type lectins important in the innate response to foreign pathogens [15-171. These molecules, known as collectins, each comprise: an N-terminal cysteinerich domain followed by a number of collagen-like repeats; a neck region containing heptad repeats typical of a-helical coiled-coil structures; and a C-type domain (CRD). Collectins carbohydrate-recognition form trimers which associate through their triple-helical collagen-like tails to produce assemblies of even higher order containing up to 6 widely spaced trimeric clusters. In form and function these structures are similar to that of complement component Clq, and like Clq

Abbreviations bFGF-basic fibroblast growth factor; BSA-bovine serum albumin; CRD--carbohydrate-recognition HS-heparan sulfate; LacNAc-N-acetyllacfosamine; Man-mannose; MBP-mannose-binding
domain;

protein.

0 Current

Biology Ltd ISSN 0959-440X

617

618

Carbohydrates and glycoconjugates

Fig. 1. Trimeric fragment of the rat MBP. The molecule contains the triple (a) View down the pseudo threefold rotation axis. (b) View perpendicular the Ca2+-binding sites. Reproduced with permission from [1'2';]. apart in the rat and human trimers, respectively. This separation clearly precludes the possibility that a small branched oligosaccharide could span binding sites within the trimer. However, consistent with a role in binding mannose residues presented on a cell surface, the binding sites are found on only one face of the trimer. The observed variability in the neck/CRD orientation also suggests a means of facilitating interaction with these cell-surface determinants.

a-helical coiled-coil neck region and the C-terminal C-type CKD. to the pseudo threefold rotation axis. Spheres 1, 2 and 3 indicate

common to the galactose-binding proteins (Fig. 2). This replacement/insertion was found to immobilize the Trp189 side chain in a way similar to that seen upon galactose binding. Thus, selectivity appears to arise as a result of fixing the tryptophan side chain in an orientation optimal for galactose binding, an orientation which can no longer accommodate mannose.

His

189

C-type

lectin

binding specificity

On the basis of sequence alignments, Drickamer [19] had noted that the residues Glu185 and Asn187 in MBP, residues involved in mannose binding and Ca2+ coordination [20], are invariably replaced with glutamine and aspartate in the galactose-specific C-type lectins (Fig. 2). When glutamine and aspartate are substituted into MBP, it shows weak galactose-binding affinity but little galactose selectivity [19]. Using site-directed mutagenesis and NMR analysis a structural basis for the observed high affinity and selectivity has now been determined [21',22*]. In addition to the glutamine and high-afhnity galactose binding aspartate substitutions, requires substitution of His189 with tryptophan. Based on NMR line-width experiments, galactose binding was found to immobilize the Trpl89 side chain, suggesting that a direct interaction between the carbohydrate moiety and the aromatic side chain is responsible for the enhanced affinity. This suggestion is consistent with the observation that galactose makes a characteristic stacking interaction with an aromatic side chain in the binding sites of a number of unrelated galactose-binding lectins [ 1O"]. Further selectivity required replacement of Gly190 and Serl91 with a seven-amino-acid sequence

Glu

Asn

205

4

Glu 193

Fig. 2. Mannose-binding site of rat MBP. The sphere depicts the Ca2+ ion involved in direct mannose binding. Hydrogen bonds (dotted lines) are shown to side chains that are involved in both Ca2+ coordination and mannose binding. Cl, C3 and C4 denote C atoms of mannose. Figure generated from PDB coordinates (2msb).

Galectin-oligosaccharide

cross-linking

Early X-ray crystal structures of galectins lverc deter-mined in the presence of lactose ]2.3] .rnd .V-ac-etvlprovided lactosamine (LacNAc) [24]. Th ese structures

X-Ray crystal structures of animal lectins Rini

619

a description of the galectin monomer, its association to form dimers, and the ligand interactions responsible for their lactose/LacNAc binding properties. Bovine galectin-1 has now been determined in complex with biantennary oligosaccharides in three different crystal forms [13"]. In these structures, the lectin interacts with the LacNAc units at the non-reducing ends of the oligosaccharide antennae, essentially as seen in the LacNAc complex [24]. Remarkably, the bivalent oligosaccharide cross-links the dimeric lectins to create infinite arrays in all three crystal forms (Fig. 3). The fact that the galectin dimer can cross-link oligosaccharides typical of those found on cell surfaces and extracellular matrix components raises the interesting possibility that such cross-linking serves a functional role in viva. Support for this suggestion has recently been provided by Gupta and Brewer [25*], who have shown that calf spleen galectin-1 can form homogeneous cross-linked arrays with asialofetuin, even in the presence of competing lectins with similar specificities. In light of the fact that multivalent interactions require at least a bivalent lectin, it is interesting that the dimer dissociation constant for hamster galectin-1 is only 7pM [26*]. Given that galect&1 and galectin-2 are somewhat dumbbell-shaped [23,24], narrowing significantly at the dimer interface, it is perhaps not surprising that the monomers interact relatively weakly. Whether or not the monomer-dimer equilibrium serves a functional role is unknown, but, interestingly, monomeric mouse galectin-1 was reported to be an autocrine negative growth factor in the subnanomolar concentration range P71.

more direct role in signal transduction mediated by the FGF family of receptors, [30]. In this case, basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), the FGF receptor, and hepariniheparan sulfate (HS) form a ternary complex [31]. X-ray crystal structures of complexes of bFGF with synthetic di- and trisaccharide fragments of heparin/HS have defined the carbohydrate-binding sites and have provided a novel illustration of multivalent interactions [14"]. The crystal lattice contains two oligosaccharide molecules (Site 1 and Site 2 in Fig. 4) for each bFGF molecule. However, each molecule of bFGF also interacts with the symmetry-equivalent oligosaccharides (Site 1' and Site 2') of its neighboring molecule, leading to four different sites of protein-carbohydrate interaction. Site 1 is also known to bind sulfate ions, and in acidic fibroblast growth factor corresponds to the site of sucrose octasulphate binding [32]. Site 1'. however, makes limited contact with the protein and probably represents a crystal-packing contact, not an independent carbohydrate-binding site. In contrast, the extensive interactions between protein and carbohydrate at Sites 2 and 2' suggest that they are both functional carbohydrate-binding sites. The interactions at these sites are of particular interest as they correspond to the recognition of opposing faces of the same heparin/HS fragment. As a result, the carbohydrate serves as a sort of `double-sided tape', cross-linking bFGF molecules in the crystal lattice. This type of interaction is fundamentally different from that seen in other lectin-carbohydrate interactions, where two equivalent sites on a bivalent oligosaccharide cross-link identical lectin domains. The ability of these synthetic fi-agments to cross-link bFGF is a property shared by heparin/HS. Although the functional significance in vivo of such cross-linking is unknown, receptor cross-linking is one possibility [31].
Conclusions

Basic fibroblast

growth

factor

Although a number of growth factors and cytokines have been shown to possess the carbohydrate-binding properties associated with lectins [28], a functional role for carbohydrate binding has not been well defined. It has been proposed that cell-surface proteoglycans sequester cytokines for interaction with their high-affinity receptors [29]. Carbohydrate binding appears to play a

Structural analysis of lectins isolated from sources ranging from bacteria to mammals has shown that they exhibit

Fig. 3. Oligosaccharide-cross-linked paraginyl oligosaccharide which

bovine cross-links

galectin-1 complex from the hexagonal crystal form. White spheres the dimeric galectin. Reproduced with permission from [l Y*].

depict

the biantennary

as-

620

Carbohydrates and glycoconjugates

volved multiple copies of equivalent lectin domains and bifunctional oligosaccharides, the bFGF-carbohydrate interaction provides a unique example of cross-linking in the absence of symmetry. In this case, both the carbohydrate and the protein elaborate non-equivalent binding sites to generate the bifunctionality required.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the National Cancer Institute of Canada and the Medical Research Council of
Canada.

References and recommended
Papers of particular interest, published review, have been highlighted as: . of special interest .. of outstanding interest

reading
within the annual period of

Site

1 %

1.

Drickamer K, Taylor ME: Biology of animal lectins. Annu Rev Cell Bid 1993, 9:237-264. Drickamer K: Evolution of @+-dependent animal lectins. Prog Nucleic Acid Res MO/ Bio/ 1993, 45:207-232. Barondes SH, Castronovo V, Cooper DNW, Cummings RD, Drickamer K, Feizi T, Gitt MA, Hirabayashi j, Hughes C, Kasai K-l et al.: Calectins: a family of animal galactoside-binding lectins. Cell 1994, 76:597-598. Barondes SH, Cooper DNW, Gitt MA, Leffler H: Calectins. Biol Chem 1994, 269:20807-20810. 1

2.

3. Fig. 4. Complex between bFGF and a heparin/HS derived trisaccharide. Site 1 and Site 2 correspond to the two independent carbohydrates in the unit cell. Site 1' and Site 2' correspond to symmetry equivalent carbohydrates of an adjacent molecule in the

4.

lattice. Courtesy of G Waksman.
5.

a remarkably diverse set of three-dimensional folds [lo**]. Despite these differences, however, most if not all lectin types employ multivalency as a general mechanism for enhancing the affinity and selectivity of their interactions. The MBP structure provides a striking example of how, through multivalent interactions, a high-affinity interaction for widely spaced cell-surface carbohydrate determinants is achieved. The versatility of this mechanism is demonstrated by the fact that, lectin motif, the hepatic using the same C-type glycoprotein receptors trimerize/hexamerize to form a receptor with exquisite specificity for the small branched oligosaccharides typical of a single N-linked glycosylation site [10",33,34]. More recently, it has become clear that multivalency often leads to the formation of two- and three-dimensional cross-linked lattices [13",20,25*,35,36]. It seems clear that the ability to form such lattices is more an inherent property of the cross-linking oligosaccharides than of the lectins themselves. In addition to possessing the determinants of recognition specificity, their considerable flexibility allows them to meet the geometrical constraint of generating an infinite lattice. Invariably, oligosaccharide conformations are minimum-energy found to participate in these lattices; and yet, as shown by the galectin-l-asialofetuin complexes, three different cross-linked crystal forms were obtained. Even more striking is the observation that these arrays can form in the presence of competing lectins of similar specificity. Although all previous examples of cross-linking have in-

Hirabayashi J, Kasai K-l: The family of metazoan metalindependent galatoside-binding lectins: structure, function and molecular evolution. G/ycobio/ogy 1993, 3:297-304. Kelm S, Pelz A, Schauer R, Filbin MT, Tang S, de Bellard M-E, Schnaar RL, Mahoney JA, Hartnell A, Bradfield P, Cracker PR: Sialoadhesin, myelin-associated glycoprotein and CD22 define a new family of sialic acid-dependent adhesion molecules of the immunoglobulin superfamily. Curr ffiol 1994, 4:965-972. Ware FE, Vassilakos A, Peterson PA, Jackson MR, Lehrman MA Williams DB: The molecular chaperone calnexin binds oligosaccharide as an initial step in Clc+iangGlcNAcz recognizing unfolded glycoproteins. / Biol Chem 1995, 270:4697-4704. Hebert DN, Foellmer 8, Helenius A: Glucose trimming and reglucosylation determine glycoprotein association with calnexin in the endoplasmic reticulum. Cell 1995, 81:425-433. Fiedler K, Simons K: The role of N-glycans pathway. Cell 1995, 81:309-312. in the secretory

6.

7.

8.

9.

Rini JM: Lectin Structure. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 1995, 24:551-577. A recent review examining the three-dimensional structures of lectins from a wide variety of sources, including viruses, bacteria, plants and mammals. Particular emphasis is placed on multivalency. The terms subunit and subsite multivalency are defined in describing the binding strategies common to all lectin families. 10 .. Sheriff S, Chang CYY, Ezekowitz RAE: Human mannose-binding protein carbohydrate recognition domain trimerizes through a triple a-helical coiled-coil. Struct t3iol 1994, 1:789-794. The X-ray crystal structures of a trimeric fragment of human MBP in two different crystal forms. Together with the structures reported in [12**1, these structures provide the first indications of the subunit organization of a mujtimeric C-type lectin. The carbohyd:ate-binding sites in the trimer lie 45A apart. Differences in the orientation of the neck relative to the CRD among the monomers suggest that flexibility could facilitate carbohydrate binding. 12. .. Weis WI, Drickamer K: Trimeric structure of a C-type mannosebinding protein. Structure 1994, 2:1227-l 240. 11. ..

X-Ray crystal structures of animal lectins
The X-ray crystal structure of a trimeric fragment of the rat MBP. Together with the structures reported in [ll**l, these structures provide the first indications of the subunit organization of a multimeric C-type lectin. The trimer is stabilized primarily through interaction within the a-helical coiled-coil neck domain. The carbohydrate-binding sites in the trimer are found to be 53 A apart, precluding the possibility of binding small cluster glycosides. 13. .. Bourne Y, Bolgiano 6, Liao DI, Strecker G, Cantau P, Herzberg 0, Feizi T, Cambillau C: Crosslinking of mammalian lectin (galectin-1) by complex biantennary saccharides. SWK-~ Viol 1994, 1:863-870. This crystal structure represents the first example of a galectin in complex with a large branched oligosac-charade.Three crystal lattices, each containing oligosaccharide cross-linked arrays, provide a model for interactions which might be physiologically relevant. 14. .. 24.

Rini

621

Liao DI, Kapadla C, Ahmed H, Vasta CR, Herzberg 0: Structure of S-lectin, a developmentally regulated vertebrate p-galactoside-binding protein. froc Nat/ Acad Sci USA 1994, 91:1428-1432.

25. .

Cupta D, Brewer CF: Homogeneous aggregation of the 14 kDa p-galactoside specific vertebrate lectin complex with asialofetuin in mixed systems. Biochemistry 1994, 33:55265530. Dimeric calf spleen lectin IS shown to form homogeneous cross-linked complexes with asialofetuin even in the presence of other lectins with similar carbohydrate-binding specificities. 26. .

Ornitz DM, Herr AB, Nilsson M, Westman J, Svahn CM, Waksman G: FCF binding and FGF receptor activation by synthetic heparan-derived di- and trisaccharides. Science 1995, 268:432-436. This crystal structure of a bFGF-heparin/heparan sulphate oligosaccharide complex defines the carbohydr,\te-binding sites of bFCF, and provides an example of a novel form of Iectin cross-linking. Remarkably, non-equivalent sites on adjacent molecules of bFCF bind opposing faces of the same di- and trisaccharide molecule, leading to growth-factor polymerization. 15. Sastry K, Ezekowitz RA: Collectins: molecules involved in first line host Immcmol 1993, 5:59-66. pattern defence. recognition Curr Opin

Cho M, Cummings RD: Caleciin-1, a galadoside-binding lectin in Chinese Hamster ovary cells. / Biol Chem 1995, 270:5198-5206. The dimer dissociation constant for CHO galectln-1 is determined to be -7w. Both monomers and dimers are found to be present in the cytosol of CHO cells, and both forms are repotted to be capable of binding carbohydrate. Although the galectin is inactivated in the absence of a redurlng agent, the rate of inactivation is greatly retarded by glycoproteins, such as basement membrane laminin. 27. Wells V, Mallucci L: Identification of an autocrine negative growth factor: mouse galactoside-binding protein is a cytostatic factor and cell growth regulator. Cell 1991, 64:Y l-97. Cummlng DA: Clycosylation tics: control and functional 1:115-130. of recombinant protein therapeuimplications. Clycobiology 1991,

28.

16.

Hoppe HJ, Reid KBM: Collectins: soluble proteins containing collagenous regions and lectin domains - and their roles in innate immunity. Pro&in Sci 1YY4, 3:1143-l158. Hoppe HJ, Reid KBM: Trimeric C-type lectin domains in host defence. Struclure 1994, 2:1129--l 133. Lee RT, lchlkawa Y, Kawasaki T, Drickamer K, Lee YC: Multivalent ligand binding by serum mannose-binding protein. Arch Riochem Biophys 1992, 299:129-l 36. Drickamer K: Engineering galactose-binding activity into a C-type mannose-binding protein. Nature 1992, 360:183-l 86. Weis WI, Drickamer K, Hendrickson WA: Structure of a C-type mannose-binding protein complexed with an oligosaccharide. Narure 1992, 360:127-134.

29.

Tanaka Y, Adams DH, Shaw S: Proteoglycans on endothelial cells present adhesion-inducing cytokines to leukocytes. tmmunol Today 1993, 14:111-115. Yayon A, Klagsbrun M, Esko JO, Leder P, Ormtz DM: Cell surface, heparin-like molecules are required for binding of basic fibroblast growth factor to its high affinity receptor. Cell 1991, 64:841-848. SpIllmann D, Lindahl U: Clycosaminoglycan-protein interactions: a question of specificity. Curr Opin Struct Biol 1994, 41677-682. Zhu X, Hsu BT, Rees DC: Structural studies of the binding of the anti-ulcer drug sucrose octasulfate to acidic fibroblast growth factor. Structure 1993, 1:27-34. Lodish HF: Recognition of complex oligosaccharides by the multisubunit asialoglycoprotein receptor. Trends Biochem SC; 1991, 16:374-377. Lee YC: Biochemistry of carbohydrate-protein FASEE I 1992, 6:3 193-3200. interaction.

17. la.

30.

31.

19. 20.

32.

lobst ST, Wonnald MR, Weis LVI, Dwek RA, Drickamer K: Binding of sugar ligands to Ca*+-dependent animal lectins. 1 Biol Chem 1994, 269: 15505-l 5511. Mutagenesis and bInding studies on rat MBP are used to conhrm and characterize the role played by key residues in the bindlng site. In addition to confirming the central role played by the ligands to Ca*+ 2, the importance of the contact between C-4 of the carbohydrate and the B-carbon of residue 189 is demonstrated. 21. . lobst ST, Drickamer K: Binding of sugar ligands to Ca*+-de22. . pendent animal lectins. J Rio/ Chem 1994, 269:15512-l 5519. Mutagenesis and NMR analysis are used to determine the basis for specificity of galactose-binding members of the C-type lectm family. Conversion from mannose binding to high-affinity galactose binding is shown to depend on the presence of only three amino acid substitutions, whereas selectivity for galactose requires an additional seven-amino-acid replacement/insertion. 23. Lobsanov YD, Citt MA, Leffler H, Barondes SH, Rini JM: X-ray crystal structure of the huma? dimeric S-lac lectin, L-14-11, in complex with lactose at 2.9-A resolution. / Viol Chem 1993, 268:27034-27038.

33.

34. 35.

Wright CS, Jaeger J: Crystallographic refinement and structure analysis of the complex of wheat germ agglutinin with a bivalent sialoglycopeptide from glycophorin A. / MO/ Biol 1993, 232:620-638. Dessen A, Gupta D, Sabesan 5, Brewer CF, Sacchettini JC: X-ray crystal structure of the soybean agglutinin cross-linked with a biantennary analog of the blood group I carbohydrate antigen. Biochemistry 1995, 34:4933-4942.

36.

JM M5S

I<ini, lA8.

IIepartments University

of Molecular of Toronto,

and Medical Toronto,

Genetics

and

Biochemistry,

Ontario,

Canada

