doi:10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00194-8 available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

w B

J. Mol. Biol. (2002) 319, 141­160

Free Energy and Structural Pathways of Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Containing Sequence
Nilesh K. Banavali and Alexander D. MacKerell Jr*
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy University of Maryland Baltimore, 20 North Pine Street Baltimore, MD 21201, USA Structural distortions of DNA are essential for its biological function due to the genetic information of DNA not being physically accessible in the duplex state. Base flipping is one of the simplest structural distortions of DNA and may represent an initial event in strand separation required to access the genetic code. Flipping is also utilized by DNA-modifying and repair enzymes to access specific bases. It is typically thought that base flipping (or base-pair opening) occurs via the major groove whereas minor groove flipping is only possible when mediated by DNA-binding proteins. Here, umbrella sampling with a novel center-of-mass pseudodihedral reaction coordinate was used to calculate the individual potentials of mean force (PMF) for flipping of the Watson ­Crick (WC) paired C and G bases in the CCATGCGCTGAC DNA dodecamer. The novel reaction coordinate allowed explicit investigation of the complete flipping process via both the minor and major groove pathways. The minor and major groove barriers to flipping are similar for C base flipping while the major groove barrier is slightly lower for G base flipping. Minor groove flipping requires distortion of the WC partner while the flipping base pulls away from its partner during major groove flipping. The flipped states are represented by relatively flat free energy surfaces, with a small, local minimum observed for the flipped G base. Conserved patterns of phosphodiester backbone dihedral distortions during flipping indicate their essential role in the flipping process. During flipping, the target base tracks along the respective grooves, leading to hydrogen-bonding interactions with neighboring base-pairs. Such hydrogen-bonding interactions with the neighboring sequence suggest a novel mechanism of sequence dependence in DNA dynamics.
q 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved *Corresponding author

Keywords: base opening; major groove; minor groove; potential of mean force; umbrella sampling

Introduction
Base flipping is a simple and localized structural distortion of DNA.1 Such events may represent an initial stage in DNA duplex opening and strand separation and are essential for DNA modification and repair enzymes to have access to a base or bases normally stacked inside the DNA double
Present address: N.K. Banavali, Department of Biochemistry and Structural Biology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, W-205, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA. Abbreviations used: MD, molecular dynamics; MMFP, miscellaneous mean field potential; PME, particle mesh Ewald; PMF, potential of mean force; WC, Watson­ Crick; WHAM, weighted histogram analysis method. E-mail address of the corresponding author: amackere@rx.umaryland.edu

helix.2 ­ 8 Studies based on imino proton exchange have shown that spontaneous localized base-pair opening occurs in DNA at non-terminal basepairs.9 ­ 15 These opening events occur on a millisecond time-scale and may be involved in physiologically relevant DNA distortions including replication and transcription.16,17 The structural end point of the base flipping process was first observed for a cytosine base in DNA bound to the DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase from Hha I (M.Hha I).1 While data on the final flipped base conformation are available, structural characterization of the conformations sampled during the flipping process itself are typically inaccessible to experimental methods due to their higher energies and resulting short lifetimes. There is, however, experimental evidence suggesting both minor and major groove pathways

0022-2836/02/$ - see front matter q 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved

142

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

of base flipping. A major groove base flipping pathway was suggested based on the crystal structure of uracil DNA glycosylase, which has protein residues interacting with the minor groove of the DNA.5 Crystal structures for M.Hha I, however, show the enzyme bound to the major groove of the DNA, suggesting that flipping of the base occurs via the minor groove.1,18 Thus, the question of the preferred path of base flipping remains unanswered based on crystallographic experimental data. Theoretical methods based on empirical force fields offer a viable alternative to study base flipping.19 Early theoretical studies on base-pair opening in DNA were performed using energy minimization combined with implicit solvation models.20 ­ 22 The first two studies used a Cartesian coordinate representation with a purine N3 to pyrimidine N1 distance constraint to induce base flipping.20,21 The latter study combined an internal coordinate representation of the DNA and enforced the extent of base-pair opening by rotating the base about a vector centered on the attached sugar.22 From this study it was concluded that base-pair opening occurs through the major groove and is coupled with DNA bending. Recent umbrella sampling calculations to estimate the free energy changes for local opening of an A:T base-pair23 used an all-atom representation with explicit solvent, and an angle constraint24 to control the extent of base opening, allowing the free energy surface in the vicinity of the Watson ­Crick (WC) base-paired minimum to be sampled. The resulting free energy profile showed opening of the A base to be asymmetric with respect to the minor and major groove pathways. The minor groove pathway free energy was shown to increase more rapidly than the major groove pathway, consistent with the model that opening occurs primarily via the major groove. For opening of the paired T base, the increase in energy was similar for both pathways, indicating that opening may occur via either the minor or major groove routes. Although the conformational region in the vicinity of the base-paired state was studied, the fully flipped states of the bases were not sampled and, consequently, a well-defined barrier to opening or a relative energy of the flipped versus the base-paired states was not obtained in that study. Other theoretical studies have been carried out to characterize the base flipping process in terms of distortions of a specific torsion angle (zeta).25 Those studies, based on an implicit solvent model from which potential energies were extracted, indicate that spontaneous base flipping can only occur through the major groove and postulated that spontaneous base flipping is involved in the structural mechanism of M.Hha I. In contrast to the Giudice et al. study,23 these studies characterized the complete structural transformation between the base-paired and the flipped states but did so only through the major groove pathway while the

minor groove pathway was concluded to be forbidden. While it is possible that the minor groove path is indeed forbidden, the use of a single zeta torsion angle to define the extent of flipping may lead to artificially high energies in certain regions of the energy surface. Moreover, additional constraints on the glycosyl linkage and the sugar pseudorotation angle used in that study could have impacted the energy surface obtained. While these studies have advanced our understanding of base flipping and base-pair opening, it is evident that potential of mean force (PMF) calculations which use an explicit solvent environment and sample the entire flipping process are still required to fully elucidate the energetic and structural details of base flipping. Here, base flipping is investigated via PMF calculations26 using a Cartesian coordinate representation that includes explicit solvent and counterions. The umbrella sampling method has been successfully applied to oligonucleotides to study base stacking27 ­ 29 and end-to-end extension of DNA unpublished results. Here, a novel centerof-mass (COM) pseudodihedral constraint is used as the umbrella potential in the PMF determination, allowing for base flipping through both the major and minor grooves as well as sampling of the flipped states to be studied explicitly. From these calculations, the free energy profile for base flipping via both the minor and major grooves is obtained for both the C and G bases of a central GC base-pair in a DNA dodecamer that includes the cognate sequence for M.Hha I. While the present results must be tempered due to inherent limitations associated with the applied computational methodologies, extensive analysis of the structural events during flipping provided several unprecedented insights into conserved distortions during the base flipping processes. In addition, the observation of hydrogen bonding interactions between the flipping base and its neighboring base-pairs is hypothesized to be a novel mechanism of sequence dependence in dynamical processes involving DNA.

Results and Discussion
The sequence studied is shown in Scheme 1, where bases undergoing flipping are underlined. These will be referred to as target C and G, with their respective base-pair partners referred to as orphan G or C, respectively. The central GCGC region represents the target sequence for M.Hha I and the total sequence is that used in the M.Hha I­DNA­ S-adenosylhomocysteine ternary complex.30 The choice of this sequence was also

Scheme 1.

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

143

Figure 1. Depiction of the novel center-of-mass (COM) dihedral constraint used to study base flipping for the two adjacent base-pairs involved in the COM dihedral constraint (a). COM dihedral constraint for C flipping, structure for COM dihedral value , 108 (top) and ,1808 (bottom) shown on the left. The four sets of atoms forming the COM dihedral are circled in the 108 orientation, and are (a) the guanine and cytosine bases forming a base-pair 30 to the flipping cytosine, (b) the sugar attached to the 30 guanine base, (c) the sugar attached to the flipping cytosine base, and (d) the flipping cytosine base itself; (b) COM dihedral constraint for G flipping, structure for COM dihedral value , 308 (top) and ,1808 (bottom) shown on the left. The four sets of atoms forming the COM dihedral are circled in the 308 orientation, and are (a) the guanine and cytosine bases forming a base-pair 50 to the flipping guanine, (b) the sugar attached to the 50 cytosine base, (c) the sugar attached to the flipping guanine base, and (d) the flipping guanine base itself. Cartoons of the dihedrals formed by the center of masses and their change are shown on the right.

influenced by imino proton exchange data being available for a similar sequence.31 COM dihedral constraint The presently accepted view about base flipping is that it can occur only through the wider major groove, where the target base can simply pull away from its base-paired partner. Flipping through the narrower minor groove would seem to be forbidden due to a large steric barrier associ-

ated with the base-paired partner (i.e. the orphan base). This is consistent with the pathway of flipping observed by Keepers et al.20,21 and was suggested by Ramstein & Lavery in their study of base-pair separation22 and has been the conventional wisdom since. The problem with this view is that it ignores the ability of the DNA backbone to distort, thereby circumventing the steric barrier that appears to hinder flipping via the minor groove pathways. A novel COM dihedral constraint was, therefore, designed allowing flipping to be treated as periodic 3608 rotation (Figure 1 and Methods). This definition allows sampling of both possible paths leading up to the completely flipped states (Figure 2). Based on the COM dihedral reaction coordinate for C base flipping, the WC base-paired state corresponds to 108 and increasing the COM dihedral from 108 to 1808 represents flipping through the minor groove while decreasing the COM dihedral from 108 to 2 1808 represents flipping through the major groove (Figure 2(a)). The flipped state for the C base observed in the M.Hha I­ DNA ternary complex1 corresponds to a value of , 1838 for the COM dihedral. For G base flipping, the COM dihedral definition is different, causing the relationship between the flipping path and the change in the COM dihedral to be reversed, as shown in Figure 2(b). In this case, the WC basepaired state corresponds to a COM dihedral value of , 308, minor groove flipping involves decreasing the COM dihedral from 308 to 2 1808 and major groove flipping corresponds to increasing the COM dihedral from 308 to 1808. To simplify comparison and presentation of the results, all plots for G flipping that include the COM dihedral description will be reversed, such that the left to right direction shows a decrease in the COM dihedral. This reversal allows consistent presentation of the C and G flipping processes with minor groove flipping always going from the left to right and major groove flipping always going from the right to left in all COM dihedral plots. It is to be noted, however, that the global energy minimum for both surfaces corresponds to the same structure, i.e. the WC base-paired state. In a recent study on an adenine bulge32 the parameter used to define the bulge base orientation used the frame of reference of the flanking base-pairs, similar to the constraint in this study. It should be noted that the free energy is a state function and, therefore, is path-independent in the limit of complete sampling of conformational space.26 Here, the COM dihedral constraint was used to enhance the conformational sampling. The possibility that this constraint may influence the obtained free energy profile, however, cannot be excluded. Base flipping free energy profiles The calculated free energy profiles for base flipping are shown in Figure 3(a) and (b), for the C

144

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

Figure 2. Average structures for the three base-pair region surrounding (a) the target C base and (b) the target G base illustrating the cyclic nature of the flipping transition. Structures were averaged over the final 50 ps of the selected window. The numbers next to each structure show the constrained value of the COM dihedral for that structure. Curved arrows indicate the base flipping pathway on which each of the structures lie.

flipping and G flipping calculations, respectively. Free energy profiles determined from consecutive 20 ps time periods along with the surface from the 40 ­200 ps time range (thick black line) are presented. This analysis shows that for both the C and G flipping processes the initial 0 ­20 ps surface

is poorly converged. This is expected, since the system has not been allowed sufficient time to respond to the structural perturbation associated with the flipped base. The 20­ 40 ps time range surfaces are much better converged and are clustered among the subsequent surfaces. For both surfaces,

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

145

Figure 3. Free energy as a function of the center-ofmass (COM) dihedral for base flipping. Results are shown for the 0 ­ 20 ps (blue, thick), 20 ­40 ps (green, thick), 40 ­ 60 ps (red, thick), 60 ­ 80 ps (yellow, thick), 80 ­ 100 ps (purple, thin), 100­ 120 ps (gold, thin), 120­ 140 ps (blue, thin), 140­ 160 ps (green, thin), 160­ 180 ps (red, thin), 180­ 200 ps (black, thin), and 40 ­200 ps (black, thick) windows. (a) Target C flipping PMF. (b) Target G flipping PMF. Note that the global minimum in both PMF profiles corresponds to the same Watson­ Crick base-paired structure; however, they are at different values of the COM dihedrals due to the way the COM dihedrals are defined (see Figure 1).

the overall shape of the PMF following the initial 20 ps does not change drastically. This indicates that the present PMFs for base flipping are converged to a satisfactory degree. For C base flipping, however, the surfaces sampled over later time ranges have overall lower energies, such that the final 20 ps window from 180 to 200 ps (Figure 3(a), thin black line) is the lowest energy surface, indicating that additional sampling may lower the surface further. As expected, the global minima correspond to the WC base-paired state (88 and 288 for C and G flipping, respectively) and the energy rises rapidly upon moving away from the WC base-pair minima via either the minor or major groove. For both surfaces, the flipped region is relatively flat, though there is a well-defined local minimum at approximately 2408 in the G flipping surface. For both surfaces, the barriers to flipping are also not well defined due to the absence of deep local minima immediately following the flipping "barriers". For G flipping, the barrier heights are 21.3 and 18.7 kcal/mol for the minor and major groove

barriers, respectively, for the 40­ 200 ps surface, while the corresponding values for the 180 ­ 200 ps surface are 20.9 and 17.8 kcal/mol (1 cal ¼ 4.184 J). Thus, the difference in the barrier height between the minor and major groove pathways is approximately 3 kcal/mol. For the local minimum at , 2408 the energies are 15.5 and 15.4 kcal/mol for the 40­ 200 and 180 ­200 ps surfaces, respectively, such that the depth of the local minimum is , 3 kcal/mol relative to the major groove barrier. For C flipping, the barrier height through the minor groove is 15.3 kcal/mol and through the major groove is 17.6 kcal/mol for the 40­ 200 ps surface. For the last 20 ps of the sampling, however, the barrier height values are 14.2 kcal/mol through the minor groove and 14.0 kcal/mol through the major groove. The lowering of the energy barriers for the latter simulations is probably the result of additional convergence upon further sampling. Thus, for C flipping, the two barriers are surprisingly similar, which suggests that the minor groove pathway is not more expensive energetically than the major groove pathway and that C flipping may occur via either groove. These observations are consistent with experimental observations that both pathways are utilized by base flipping enzymes.1,8 It is to be noted that these observations do not contradict the earlier theoretical studies that used simpler models22 or alternate constraint methodologies. The PMF profile of A:T base-pair opening23 using an angle constraint showed the rise of energy to be symmetric for the pyrimidine T base opening and asymmetric for the purine A base opening. This is comparable to the observation in the present study that the barrier heights to flipping are almost equal for the pyrimidine C base and slightly different for the purine G base. The present work extends the previous studies by efficiently sampling the complete flipping surfaces, allowing accurate determination of barrier heights as well as relative energy differences between the base-paired and fully flipped states. In the free energy surfaces, the peaks corresponding to both barriers are distributed over a relatively large region of conformational space (, 308 or more of the COM dihedral). The free energy difference between the barriers and the regions immediately following the barriers is not very large (, 2 kcal/mol for C flipping and , 3 kcal/mol for G flipping). This indicates that once the base moves away from the base-paired minimum it will sample a wide variety of conformations rather than remain trapped in deep local minima. It is to be noted that previous theoretical studies indicated the presence of a well-defined minimum for the flipped state21,22 with its presence being linked to the extent of DNA bending. In a study involving just the separation of the WC paired bases alone in explicit water, this minimum was identified to correspond to a water-mediated hydrogen-bonded state between the two bases.33 The presence of the more complex DNA backbone

146

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

Figure 4. Free energies for the 180­ 200 ps (thin line) and 40 ­ 200 ps (thick line) time ranges, the average C N1 to G N3 distances (filled squares) and the average C to G interaction energies (filled circles) as a function of the center-of-mass (COM) dihedral. The average C to G interaction energies were offset by 223.38 kcal/mol, which is the vacuum interaction energy between the two bases in their Watson­ Crick base-paired orientation in the CHARMM force field. (a) Target C flipping. (b) Target G flipping.

COM dihedral region corresponds to the major groove flipping barrier in the PMF. In the minor groove pathway, the N1 ­N3 distance remains ° close to the base-paired value of , 3 A over a ° wider range and makes a jump of about 5 A over a 58 range at the COM dihedral value of , 458. This jump in the distance between the two bases is accompanied by a dramatic increase in the interaction energy between the two bases as well as a 10 kcal/mol increase in the free energy. This change corresponds to the minor groove barrier of the PMF, indicating that the base-pair is maintained to a greater extent in the minor groove flipping pathway and that disruption of base-pairing occurs at a well-defined point along the COM dihedral reaction coordinate. For G flipping, both pathways involve changes in base-pair interactions similar to those seen for the C flipping minor groove pathway. During the initial increase in the free energy upon moving away from the WC paired state minimum, the base-pair interactions are maintained, followed by abrupt increases in both the N1 ­N3 distances and the base­ base interaction energies. These changes are, however, not as drastic as the change seen in the minor groove pathway of C flipping. The initial increase in free energies for both G flipping pathways and the C flipping minor groove pathway therefore, does not seem to be associated with disruption of base-pairing interactions and may be due to distortions in other degrees of freedom of the double helix or of the surrounding solvent environment. Comparison with experimental results Umbrella sampling with explicit water and counterions along with consideration of longrange electrostatics using the particle mesh Ewald (PME) approach is the most detailed and accurate computational method to study free energies associated with structural transformations.34 It incorporates all the solute ­ solute, solute ­solvent, and solvent ­ solvent interactions that contribute to the overall free energy profile, including the complex shielding of electrostatic interactions between remote regions of the solute and the entropic effects of solvent on base stacking. Inaccuracy in this calculation cannot be ruled out completely, however, because of the practical limitations of finite sampling times and the simplicity of the molecular model. The present calculations were carried out with the CHARMM27 molecular mechanics force field that has been tested most rigorously for the native, undistorted, and low energy experimentally derived conformations of DNA.35 ­ 37 It is difficult to state with certainty that the force field will accurately describe the higher energy states that are sampled here. Therefore, it is necessary to validate these calculations by careful comparison with experimental results. Such a comparison can also serve as a stringent test of the force field itself. The sequence used here allowed

and base stacking influences included here as well as their indirect effect on the surrounding water structure is, however, expected to non-trivially influence the presence of such a well-defined minimum. Relationship of Watson ­ Crick interactions to base flipping The WC base-pair interaction distance, represented by the C N1 to G N3 distance, and the relative C ­G interaction energy for C flipping and G flipping are presented in Figure 4(a) and (b), respectively, as a function of the COM dihedral constraint. Both the 180­ 200 and 40­ 200 ps time range PMFs are included in the Figures for comparison. In all cases, the loss of the base-pair interactions coincides with the increase in free energy. The details of the relationship differ, however, between C flipping and G flipping, and between the minor and major groove pathways. For C flipping through the major groove (Figure 4(a)), the N1 ­N3 distance and the base ­ base interaction energy increase gradually as flipping occurs except around the COM dihedral value of , 3258, where there is a small jump in the distance of ° about 5 A over a 108 COM dihedral range. This

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

147

comparisons with two mutually exclusive experimental approaches: (a) NMR studies that obtain the free energies associated with base-pair opening by characterizing the dynamic and equilibrium differences between the base-paired and non-basepaired states31,38 and (b) X-ray crystallographic studies that characterize the structural aspects of the end-point flipped base structures in protein ­ DNA complexes.1 Comparison with imino proton exchange studies Experimental work, based on guanine imino proton exchange, has investigated both the barrier to flipping and the equilibrium between the basepaired and flipped states. Studies on a sequence similar to that used in the present calculations, that includes a central GCGC tetramer, reported a base flipping equilibrium free energy of 9 kcal/ mol. This energy corresponds to an equilibrium constant of 3.3 £ 1027 with respect to the flipped state.31 These experimental estimates are based on an assumed two-state equilibrium between the base-paired and non-base-paired states; with only the non-base-paired states allowing imino proton exchange. To compare the experimental data with the calculated PMFs (Figure 3), the states along the reaction coordinate that correspond to nonbase-paired states must first be identified. For this purpose, the solvent accessibility of the imino proton on the guanine was calculated for all structures along the reaction coordinate for both C and G flipping. The solvent-accessible states can range from loosely base-paired states to completely flipped states and all these must be considered together to obtain an estimate of the equilibrium constant from the calculated PMF. The average sum of the solvent accessibilities of the N1 and H1 ° atoms were determined using a 1.4 A probe radius for structures in each window of the PMF to identify states in which the imino proton is accessible to solvent. Figure 5(a) and (b) show the average solvent accessibilities of the imino proton and the covalently bound nitrogen atom as a function of the COM dihedral for C and G flipping, respectively. Log values of the Boltzmannweighted probability distributions of the flipped states back-calculated from both the 180­ 200 and 40­ 200 ps time range PMFs are included for comparison. The base-paired states expectedly correspond to the highest probability and the lowest solvent accessibility of the imino proton. For C flipping, the solvent accessibility of the G N1 ­H1 group is approximately an order of magnitude smaller than that for G flipping, due to the guanine base remaining in a stacked orientation. Though this orientation of the base limits the overall solvent accessibility, it is clear from Figure 5(a) that the solvent accessibility is large enough to allow for the proton exchange. For both surfaces, the initial exposure of the imino proton occurs just prior to the major and minor groove energy barriers. For C flipping, the 35­ 3308 region of the

Figure 5. Log probability distributions for the 180­ 200 ps (thin line) and 40 ­ 200 ps (thick line) potential of mean force time ranges from Figure 4 and the average solvent accessibilities (filled squares) as a function of the center-of-mass (COM) dihedral. The solvent accessi° bilities were offset by 210 A2. (a) Target C flipping. (b) Target G flipping.

COM dihedral is classified as the non-base-paired state and the remainder as the base-paired state. For G flipping, the base-paired region was defined to extend from 58 through 458. Table 1 shows the equilibrium constants obtained by integrating the probability distributions over the base-paired and non-base-paired states, for both C flipping and G flipping, along with the relevant experimental equilibrium constant. For the individual base flipping equilibrium constants, the calculated values are an order of magnitude or more lower than the experimental value. The best agreement occurs with the 180 ­ 200 ps time ranges. Alternatively, the flipped states of both the C and G flipping can be considered together, allowing the individual equilibrium constants to be summed. Summing the

Table 1. Comparison of experimental and calculated data for the equilibrium between the flipped and Watson­ Crick base-paired states
System Experimental Calculated 180­200 ps 40­200 ps C flip 4.0 £ 1028 2.8 £ 10210 G flip 4.8 £ 1028 3.0 £ 1028 Equilibrium constants 3.3 £ 1027 Overall sum 8.8 £ 1028 3.0 £ 1028

The time ranges used for determination of the PMF are 180­200 ps and 40­200 ps and Overall sum is the sum of the equilibrium constants from C flipping and G flipping.

148

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

equilibrium constants assumes that the base-paired states are common and the non-base-paired states are unique for the C flipping and G flipping processes. This approach yields a calculated value of 8.8 £ 1028, based on the 180­ 200 ps sampling period, which is lower than the experimental value by a factor of less than 4. Several factors may limit direct comparison of the calculated and experimental equilibrium constants. For the theoretical calculations, the PMF obtained may not be completely converged such that additional sampling would lead to lower energies associated with the flipped state (see above), thereby decreasing the value of the calculated equilibrium constant. This is supported by the 180 ­ 200 ps time range results being in better agreement with experiment for C flipping. Alternatively, limitations in the potential energy function such as the omission of explicit electronic polarization or systematic inaccuracies of the force field may be contributing factors. For the experimental determinations, increased solvent accessibility of the guanine imino proton by motions other than flipping of the C or G base are inherently included in the equilibrium constant. For example, concerted motions of the C and G bases in opposite directions may result in exposure of the guanine imino proton to solvent. Consistent with this possibility are the solvent-accessibility data for the C flip (Figure 5(a)), which shows a small, but finite, accessibility in the 0 and 3558 windows, which are included as part of the WC base-paired state in the present equilibrium calculation. If proton exchange can occur in these alternate orientations, then the experimental estimate of the relative population of the flipped state is expected to be larger than that accounted for in the present calculations. Upon considering these caveats, it is clear that the calculated free energy profiles are in good agreement with the experimental data. This agreement indicates that the applied computational methods hold considerable promise in studying similar transitions that are difficult to access experimentally. Further support for the validity of the present calculated free energy profile comes from comparative analysis of the temperature dependence of the equilibrium constant of base-pair opening and temperature dependence of the lifetime of open states of several base-pairs.39 This analysis, which compares the enthalpy associated with the open states to that associated with the barrier to opening showed that there was very little difference between the two values. This implies that deep local minima beyond the flipping barriers that can correspond to long-lived flipped states are unlikely. This is consistent with the overall flat plateau region in the flipped region of the C flipping PMF profile and the shallow local minimum in the G flipping PMF profile (Figure 3). This is also consistent with experimental evidence for the M.Hha I binary complex with DNA in which the target C is observed to sample a variety of flipped

conformations after binding of the DNA to the protein.38 It must be noted that the reported free energy surfaces are for G:C flipping from a specific DNA sequence. While it is tempting to draw general conclusions from our results, it is known that both the oligonucleotide length and sequence affect the rates of base flipping; i.e. G:C or A:T base-pairs in different sequences31 and in oligonucleotides of different lengths14 have different flipping rates. The flipping energy surface might, therefore, also change depending on the sequence and length of the studied oligonucleotide. Similar studies on other oligonucleotide sequences would further elucidate the relationship of the sequence dependence and length on the changes in free energy profiles of base flipping. Comparison with structural studies As mentioned earlier, additional experimental corroboration of the simulation results can be obtained at the structural level. A number of crystallographic studies have characterized the flipped C base structure of the present DNA sequence in M.Hha I­DNA complexes.1,18 The nature of the distortions in these flipped structures has been summarized in a previous survey of the backbone dihedrals in crystal structures of M.Hha I ­DNA complexes.40 This survey showed that the prominent distortions resulting in the flipped state were present in four dihedrals along the DNA backbone; epsilon of the nucleotide 50 to the target C, gamma and zeta of the target C, and beta of the 30 nucleotide. Figure 6 shows the sampling of the backbone dihedrals as a function of the COM dihedral and the corresponding probability distributions for the strand containing the target cytosine (called the flipping strand) during C flipping. The vertical broken lines in the right-hand column of Figure 6 correspond to modal values of the respective dihedrals from a crystal survey of B-DNA41 and the bold lines indicate the average values of the dihedrals that were significantly distorted in the M.Hha I­ DNA complexes.40 For the four distorted dihedrals (i.e. 50 epsilon, gamma, zeta, and 30 beta), there is significant sampling of the experimental flipped state regions during the PMF determination. The largest discrepancy occurs with gamma, although finite sampling of the nonnative region does occur. In contrast, sampling of backbone dihedral degrees of freedom for the opposite strand does not show any significant deviations from the B-DNA-like values (not shown). The lack of distortions in the opposite strand in the localized flipping region is also consistent with the flipped DNA experimental structures,1,18 which are predominantly B-like beyond the flipped target C. Thus, the computed flipped states are structurally consistent with known experimental data for the present sequence. In contrast to C flipping, which has obvious biological relevance for this sequence, no structural

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

149

Figure 6. The backbone dihedral series and corresponding probability distributions along the COM dihedral reaction coordinate for strand containing the flipping C base. Only the three base-pair region centered around the flipping C showing significant distortions is shown. The analysis includes the entire 200 ps of sampling for each window. For the time series plots, all the time series are concatenated according to the COM dihedral value and the X-axis is adjusted by division by 40 to visualize the series in terms of the COM dihedral. In the probability distributions, vertical bold lines indicate distorted values of the dihedrals seen in a survey of crystallographic structures of DNA bound to M.Hha I1 and vertical broken lines indicate characteristic B-DNA values.41 Vertical bold lines are only shown for specific dihedrals showing significant distortion.

information is available for flipping of the basepaired G. Analysis of the structural changes occurring during G flipping is still useful, since it answers the important question of whether the structural changes are similar to those seen for C flipping. Figure 7 shows the time series and probability distributions of the backbone dihedrals around the target G. As observed in the C flipping process, the backbone distortions are localized on the flipping strand and are similar to those observed in the DNA ­M.Hha I crystal structures for the cytosine base. A good example of the similarity can be observed in the bimodal distributions of the 50 position epsilon and the 30 position beta dihedrals. Since the reaction coordinate umbrella potential used here does not enforce sampling of specific regions of the backbone dihedrals, these common patterns of sampling suggest that these distortions are a natural prerequisite for flipping to occur. Comparison with two independent experimental measures thus shows that the calculated free energies and the structural sampling of final flipped states are in reasonable agreement with

experimental results. A useful feature of the umbrella sampling method is that, once shown to be reasonably accurate, it can provide information beyond what can be obtained by experiment, especially information pertaining to higher-energy intermediate states. As described in the following sections, the precise information on the structural intermediates involved in base flipping obtained here reveals previously unobserved patterns in the dynamic behavior of DNA that may be crucial to understanding its biological function. Additional dihedral distortions During the analysis of the backbone dihedral distortions, no significant distortion was seen in the backbone dihedrals beyond the sugar moieties on the 50 and 30 sides of the flipping bases (not shown). These sugar moieties thus form the limits of the flipping distortion in the flipping strand. Figures 6 and 7, however, show that every backbone dihedral located between these two sugars is undergoing some finite distortion during the flipping processes. The additional distortions, beyond

150

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

Figure 7. The backbone dihedral series and corresponding probability distributions along the COM dihedral reaction coordinate for strands containing the flipping G base. Only the three base-pair region centered around the flipping G showing significant distortions is shown. The analysis includes the entire 200 ps of sampling for each window. For the time series plots, all the time series are concatenated according to the COM dihedral value and the X-axis is adjusted by division by 40 to visualize the series in terms of the COM dihedral. In the probability distributions, vertical bold lines indicate distorted values of the dihedrals seen in a survey of crystallographic structures of DNA bound to M.Hha I1 and vertical broken lines indicate characteristic B-DNA values.41 Vertical bold lines are only shown for specific dihedrals showing significant distortion.

those observed in the DNA ­M.Hha I crystal structures, are not obvious in the flipped DNA experimental structures probably because they occur during the flipping process but not at the fully flipped state. The alpha dihedral of the target C during C flipping, which closely follows the COM restraint, clearly illustrates this behavior (Figure 6). In the fully flipped state (i.e. at a COM dihedral value of 1808) the alpha dihedral alternates between a close-to-native , 3308 state and a non-native , 608 state. Moreover, alternate regions are populated while in the intermediate states of the flipping process (e.g. in the region of COM dihedral ¼ 908 alpha is sampling values in the region of 1808). It is also clear that there are distinct differences between the minor groove and major groove pathways with respect to specific dihedral distortions. In the minor groove pathway, there is a decrease in alpha from , 3308 to , 608 upon going from the WC state to the fully flipped state at a COM dihedral of 1808 for both C and G flipping (compare Figures 6 and 7). This transition is common to both C and G minor groove flipping,

strongly suggesting that it is an essential prerequisite for minor groove flipping regardless of the identity of the flipping base or of the local DNA sequence. For the remaining dihedrals in Figures 6 and 7 such similarities as a function of the COM dihedral are not observed. However, comparison of all the dihedral probability distributions in Figures 6 and 7 shows that systematic similarities exist with respect to the specific dihedrals in successive residues. Moreover, the probability distributions for the specific dihedrals are similar for both the C and G flipping processes. Thus, for all the dihedrals in Figures 6 and 7 the probability distributions during flipping deviate from those associated with B-DNA, with those deviations being similar for a specific type of dihedral. These similarities suggest that the observed distortions are also essential for the flipping process to occur. However, the question remains, what is the cause of these similarities? Previous studies in our laboratory have determined potential energy surfaces for the phosphodiester backbone dihedrals via quantum

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

151

mechanical (QM) calculations.42,43 These calculations were performed on model compounds designed to investigate the intrinsic energetics associated with each backbone dihedral with minimal impact from long-range interactions that occur in oligonucleotides. These surfaces were also used for the optimization of the CHARMM27 force field, with the force field surfaces reproducing the QM surfaces reasonably well.35 Comparison of the QM potential energy surfaces with the probability distributions in Figures 6 and 7 shows interesting parallels. As previously discussed, the intrinsic potential energetics strongly influence the regions of dihedral space sampled by the phosphodiester backbone in B-DNA crystal structures.43,44 However, the probability distributions in Figures 6 and 7 extend beyond those seen in B-DNA crystal structures as well as in simulations of B-DNA using the CHARMM27 force field.35,36 Interestingly, when the distributions from the present work are compared with the previously published dihedral potential energy surfaces it is seen that the presently sampled regions correspond with lowenergy regions of the surface, though generally not with the global energy minima. For example, with alpha and zeta the region in the vicinity of 2 300 to 2 3308 is all that is populated in B-DNA, however, extensive sampling beyond this region occurs during base flipping (Figures 6 and 7). Analysis of the potential energy distribution for the dihedral corresponding to alpha and zeta based on the model compound dimethylphosphate42 reveals the global minimum to occur at 2 300 to 2 3308 with a local minimum in the vicinity of 1808. The 1808 region is significantly sampled in the alpha and zeta distributions in Figures 6 and 7. Another example is epsilon, which has two minima in the potential energy surface at , 180 and , 2708 (see Figure 2(a) of Foloppe & MacKerell41). The region in the vicinity of 1808 is primarily sampled in B-DNA while during flipping, sampling of the region of 2708 is also significant (Figures 6 and 7), corresponding to the second minimum in the potential energy surfaces. Similar relationships are also evident for beta and gamma. Based on these parallels it is suggested that during the flipping process the phosphodiester backbone samples conformational regions that are allowed by the intrinsic energetic properties of the phosphodiester backbone. Based on the similar patterns observed for the specific dihedrals and for both C and G flipping, such sampling of conformations beyond those observed in B-DNA is indicated to be essential for the flipping process to occur. It is pertinent at this point to discuss the significance that such systematic distortions hold for understanding the dynamic properties of DNA. The genetic information of the DNA molecule rests in the WC hydrogen bonding patterns of the bases that constitute particular sequences. In the biological processes such as replication and transcription, this information content can be accessed only by unwinding the DNA, i.e. exposing the

bases to the environment. It is known that subtle backbone modifications in DNA, such as substitution of the O30 atom with an N ­ H moiety as in N30 -phosphoramidate DNA, can significantly affect the biological properties of the DNA and its interactions with proteins.45,46 What is the origin of these drastic changes in biological properties? They can originate from changes in the intrinsic properties of the molecule or changes in the way in which it interacts with the environment. Focusing on the intrinsic properties, it is known that chemical modifications cause changes in the intrinsic dihedral potential energy surfaces of the backbone dihedrals.47,48 The most significant energy differences in these surfaces may not always occur near the global energy minimum states but may occur in high-energy regions of the dihedral surface. It is generally assumed that these intrinsic high-energy regions are unimportant in determining biological properties. The lack of high-energy conformations in crystal structures of individual DNA duplexes strengthens this view although such conformations do occur in protein ­DNA complexes.49,50 The present study indicates that population of these high-energy regions is indeed essential for the structural transformations involved in biological functions. These observations illustrate a very important fact that is often overlooked when empirical models to study DNA structural properties are considered. During structural distortions of DNA required for its normal biological function, intrinsically higher-energy regions of the backbone dihedrals are sampled. These alternate regions are not significantly populated in experimental structures of individual DNA duplexes and therefore it is unlikely that database potentials based entirely on these distributions can accurately describe dynamic properties of DNA. Several recent studies have characterized the intrinsic conformational properties of the backbone dihedrals and sugar flexibility in nucleic acids through detailed ab initio investigations.41,43,44,47,51 Such characterizations have been used in the development of the CHARMM27 force field35,36 used here, which leads us to believe that the structural intermediates seen are likely to be an accurate depiction of the dynamical nature of DNA. Supporting the quality of the CHARMM27 force field for studying noncanonical structures is its successful application in an investigation of an adenine bulge in DNA.32 Pseudorotation and glycosyl torsion motions The two other flexible degrees of freedom in DNA are the sugar pucker and rotation around the glycosyl bond (chi). The variations as a function of the COM dihedral and corresponding probability distributions of the pseudorotation angle, P, and chi for the central three nucleotides including and surrounding the target bases for C flipping and G flipping, respectively, are shown in Figures 1 and 2 of the Supplementary Material.

152

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

Significant deviation from B-DNA-like values did not occur beyond this central region (data not shown). The perturbations in the sugars and chi dihedrals are mainly associated with transitions to A-DNA-like (North) conformations. Significant populations of A-like values during C flipping are seen in the target C and the 30 G in the target strand and the 30 and 50 Cs in the opposite strand. For G flipping, sampling of the A form occurs with the 50 C of the target strand and in the orphan C and 50 G in the opposite strand. Overall, the chi dihedral and P of the individual bases are strongly correlated in exhibiting either the A form or the B form consistent with the presence of such a correlation in crystal structures of the A and B forms of DNA.52 Sampling of A-form conformations is also consistent with QM potential energy surfaces for sugar puckering51 and rotation about chi,41,44 similar to that discussed in the preceding section for the phosphodiester backbone dihedrals. As shown both experimentally53 ­ 56 and in molecular dynamics (MD) simulations,36,57 there is sampling of A form conformations of P and chi even though the duplex structure is primarily of the B form. Thus, a significant amount of repuckering can be observed in DNA simulations without any artificial restraints. Much of the sampling of A-form conformations therefore may not necessarily be directly associated with the flipping processes. However, two significant shifts to A-form conformations are evident. For both C and G flipping, these occur in the same C position: 50 C of the opposite strand in C flipping and 50 C of the target strand in G flipping. For C flipping, significantly more sampling of the A-form conformation is evident, especially in the major groove flipping pathway. For G flipping, the sampling of the A and B-form conformations is equal overall but the A-form conformations are seen mostly in the minor groove pathway. Such significant sampling of A-form conformations in the same position for both flipping processes suggests that these alternate conformations may be prerequisites for the flipping processes. The intrinsic ability of C to sample A-form conformations has been previously reported,43,58 suggesting that the presence of C bases in the vicinity of the flipping base may intrinsically facilitate the flipping process. Sampling of A-form conformations by the 50 C of the opposite strand of C flipping may be biologically important in the methylation of DNA by M.Hha I or other methyltransferases. It is known that methylation of this cytosine position (or hemimethylation of the duplex) can increase binding of the cognate DNA to M.Hha I.59 There is also evidence that cytosine methylation can, in general, increase the probability of transitions to A-like conformations as well as affect flexibility.60,61 Here, the transitions to A-form conformations are seen in the absence of methylation of this cytosine. If A-form conformations are involved in the flipping transition, stabilization of these conformations through methylation may further facilitate the flip-

ping process of the diagonally opposite target C. Studies looking at the impact of such methylation on the dynamic process of base flipping can address these issues. Due to recent advances in synthetic methods of modified oligonucleotides, the role of sugar puckering in flipping can be tested experimentally. Conformationally constrained sugars, such as the bicyclo[3.1.0]hexane carbocyclic sugar analogs,62,63 which can enforce either a North or South conformation, can be introduced at specific positions in the sequence. It may be hypothesized that target C flipping would be hindered by enforcing a South conformation in the 50 C position of the opposite strand, which shows significant sampling of the A-form conformation in both flipping pathways. Alternatively, enforcing a North pucker in that sugar may facilitate flipping. Such changes may be monitored directly via NMR imino proton exchange experiments or indirectly via altered binding of cognate DNA to M.Hha I. Orphan base motions For both flipping processes, the orphan base is left behind in the double helix once flipping has occurred. The motion of the orphan bases during the flipping process may be described by the COM dihedral used to study flipping of the target bases.23 For example, the COM dihedral used to study G flipping may be used to describe the motions of the same G when it is the orphan base during C flipping. The average and root-meansquare (RMS) fluctuations of the COM dihedral for the orphan base over each window of the PMF are shown in Figure 8. In the vicinity of the global minima, the orphan base COM dihedrals are similar to the base-paired state (i.e. 308 for the orphan G during C flipping (Figure 8(a)) and 108 for the orphan C during G flipping (Figure 8(b)). The average values stay in the vicinity of these values for the entire range of both flipping processes, with increased RMS fluctuations away from the base-paired state. However, there is a significant deviation from the average values of the orphan base COM dihedrals at , 408 for C flipping and , 3558 for G flipping. These values coincide with the location of the minor groove barriers to flipping (Figure 3) and with the loss of the base-pair interactions (Figure 4), indicating the need for significant structural distortions in the orphan base for flipping to occur via the minor groove. Visual analysis of the final structures from the windows during the transition period was used to obtain a structural interpretation of the perturbations of the orphan base COM dihedrals (Figure 8). For C flipping, as the target C base initially moves through the minor groove from 10 to 308 there is very little movement of the orphan G. However, once the base-pair interactions are lost upon moving from 30 to 358 (Figure 4(a)), the G base "jumps" back into the major groove, corresponding to the increase in the COM dihedral

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

153

change in base-pair interactions are more abrupt in G flipping in the major groove pathway (Figure 4(b)). These results indicate that the simple models for flipping based on visual inspection of DNA structures and supported by earlier calculations of base-pair flipping and opening are approximately correct. As is clear from Figure 8, for base flipping to occur via the minor groove it is necessary for the orphan base to move with the flipping base. For major groove flipping, such movement of the orphan base is not required as the flipping base can move directly away from the orphan base. Despite these differences the energy barriers for flipping do not differ significantly, being almost identical in the case of C flipping (Figure 3). These similarities suggest that energetic costs associated with perturbing the orphan bases during minor groove flipping are compensated by relaxation of other degrees of freedom, as discussed earlier, maintenance of base-pairing interactions, or a possible role of solvent.

Flipping pathway
Figure 8. Changes in average values and range of fluctuations in the orphan base COM dihedral occurring in conjunction with changes in the target base COM dihedral reaction coordinate. (a) Target C flipping. (b) Target G flipping. The definitions of the COM dihedrals are shown in Figure 1 and discussed in Methods.

seen in Figure 8(a). Ultimately, the orphan G relaxes back to an orientation similar to that assumed during WC base-pairing, even though the target C has now flipped out of the DNA duplex. For G flipping, as the target G flips through the minor groove from 308 to 58 there is again little change in the position of the orphan C. However, as flipping of the target G continues through 08 to 3558 the orphan C undergoes a significant motion into the minor groove, corresponding to the large loss of WC interaction energy (Figure 4(b)). Once the G flips past the 3558 window the orphan C relaxes back to its original WC-type stacked orientation. Thus, for both C and G flipping, significant structural distortion of the orphan base is required for flipping out of the minor groove, though details of those distortions differ. As is also evident from Figure 8, significant distortion of either orphan base does not occur during major groove flipping. Visual inspection of structures along the major groove flipping pathways reveals that the flipping base simply "pulls" away from the orphan base, such that distortion of the orphan base is not required. This is consistent with a gradual increase in the base-pair interaction distance and energy during major groove flipping in C flipping (Figure 4(a)), though the

As a first order approximation, base flipping may be visualized as the base sliding out of the helical stack, analogous to a single card being extracted from a deck of cards by keeping its plane parallel with the rest of the cards. Interestingly, this is not the case for the base flipping process observed here. The flipping base does not slide out of the base-paired state with its base normal oriented roughly along the helical axis. Rather, the base normal is oriented at a sharp angle almost perpendicular to the helical axis (Figure 2), except with states very close to the WC base-paired state. To better visualize the path followed by the bases as they flip out of the helix, the center of mass of the target base coordinates averaged over each window along the flipping reaction coordinate were calculated and are shown in Figure 9 for both C and G flipping. The center of masses are represented by spheres and the helix shown is the average structure for the WC base-paired state window (108 or 308 in the COM dihedral coordinate for C flipping and G flipping, respectively) oriented with respect to the opposite strand. Views from both the minor and major grooves are shown with minor groove flipping represented by blue spheres and major groove flipping by red spheres. The target bases, in the base-paired orientation, are shown in green. For both the minor and major groove pathways, the flipping base follows the direction of the grooves as opposed to a path perpendicular to the helical axis. Thus, the target bases do not move away from the double helix even though breakage of the WC hydrogen bonds has already occurred. They maintain their association with the rest of the double helix during the flipping process by remaining in the grooves of the DNA as long as possible.

154

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

Figure 9. Regions sampled by the flipping target base and the orphan base along the COM dihedral reaction coordinate. Spheres represent the average center of mass of the target base in each window of the PMFs. Blue spheres correspond to the minor groove flipping pathway and red spheres correspond to the major groove flipping pathway. The target base is shown in green spheres in the Watson­ Crick basepaired orientation. The DNA helix shown corresponds to Watson ­ Crick base-paired average structure oriented with respect to the opposite strand that does not show significant distortion during flipping. (a) C flipping seen through the major groove. (b) C flipping seen through the minor groove. (c) G flipping seen through the major groove. (d) G flipping seen through the minor groove.

A proposed mechanism of sequence dependence One consequence of the path followed by the target bases being along the grooves is that they come into close contact with regions of the DNA that they are not adjacent to in the WC base-paired state. This may allow for hydrogen bonding between these remote regions of the DNA and the target base during the flipping process. To probe the possibility of specific hydrogen bonding interactions, distances between donor and acceptor electronegative atoms that could possibly form hydrogen bonds between the target base and adjacent bases were probed for both the C and G flipping processes. Selected average interaction distances and RMS fluctuations for C and G flipping, respectively, along the flipping pathways are shown in Figures 3 and 4 of the Supplementary Material. The distances eventually chosen as indicative of significant hydrogen bond inter° actions had an average of 7 A or less for a minimum of five windows in the PMF. The distance of ° 7 A was selected as a cutoff, since interaction dis° tances of 3.5 A or less correspond to direct hydrogen bonds while water-mediated hydrogen bonds ° occur at distances of 5­ 7 A.64 For C flipping, there are a number of direct and water-mediated hydrogen bonds that occur well

beyond the base-paired state at 108. For example, the 2C6 N4 to 1C8 O2 interaction goes from ° approximately 7 A at the base-paired state to less ° at a COM dihedral value of , 458, the than 4 A region at the top of the energy barrier after the base-pair interactions have been lost (Figure 5(a)). An example of an interaction beyond the barrier regions involves the atoms 2C6 O2 and 2C8 N4 ° in the major groove, where distances below 4 A occur at 3008, with potential water-mediated interactions occurring in the vicinity of the COM dihedral value of 2408. Similar events occur during G flipping (Figure 4 of the Supplementary Material), though they tend to be more localized to the region of the WC base-pairing minimum (COM dihedral value , 308). Strong interactions occur between 1G7 N2 and 1C8 O2 in the minor groove while in the major groove short interaction distances are present for 1G7 N3 ­ 1C6 N4 and 1G7 N2 ­ 2G7 O6 as flipping towards the major groove barrier region occurs. Thus, a variety of direct and potential watermediated hydrogen bonds between the target bases and the adjacent bases occur during flipping. To better visualize the atoms in the minor and major grooves interacting with the target base, those atoms are presented as space-filling spheres in Figure 10 for both C flipping and G flipping.

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

155

Figure 10. Adjacent base-pair electronegative atoms that form possible direct or water-mediated hydrogen bond interactions with the flipping base. Blue spheres correspond to the atoms present in the minor groove of the DNA, red spheres correspond to the atoms present in the major groove of the DNA. The target base is shown in green spheres in the Watson ­Crick base-paired orientation. The DNA helix shown corresponds to Watson­ Crick base-pair average structure oriented with respect to the opposite strand that does not show significant distortion during flipping. (a) View through the major groove for C flipping. (b) View through the minor groove for C flipping. (c) View through the major groove for G flipping. (d) View through the minor groove for G flipping.

Major groove atoms are shown in red in the lefthand column (Figure 10(a) and (c)) and the minor groove atoms are in blue in the right-hand column (Figure 10(b) and (d)). For C flipping, interactions occur up to two base-pairs away from the target base in the major groove (Figure 10(a)) and three base-pairs away in the minor groove (Figure 10(b)). In contrast, the target base during G flipping only interacts with bases directly adjacent to itself. Such hydrogen bonding was also seen to occur between the flipping bases and remote atoms in the DNA backbone (e.g. the O40 atom) though such interactions are not expected to be sequencedependent (data not shown). Previous studies have also documented the presence of hydrogen bonding between the flipping base and neighboring base-pairs.23,24 To the best of our knowledge, the possibility of hydrogen bonds between bases separated by substantial distances along the DNA sequence, as occurring in C flipping (Figure 10(a) and (b)) has not previously been reported. The presence of such hydrogen bonding presents the possibility of a mechanism of sequence dependence of DNA properties. Since the sequence surrounding the base can influence the hydrogen bonding patterns along the base flipping pathways, it can also influence the energetics of the pathway. As mentioned before, it is experimentally known that, for

the same base-pair, the adjacent sequence can influence the rates of base flipping.31 Usually, sequence dependence is explained by the influence of base stacking65 or solvent/ion effects,66,67 but the present study shows that, for the intermediate states in base flipping, direct and water-mediated hydrogen bonding interactions may also be involved. If base flipping is considered to be a localized strand separation process, it is likely that such a mechanism of sequence dependence is also associated with large-scale DNA unwinding processes like replication and transcription. This reiterates why considering the influence of such high-energy intermediate structural states is important in trying to understand the biological properties of DNA at an atomic level. Conclusions A novel center-of-mass dihedral constraint (Figure 1) has been developed and implemented to study the free energy profile of base flipping in DNA. By modeling base flipping as a cyclic process both the minor and major groove pathways can be rigorously compared (Figure 2). This constraint combined with the method of umbrella sampling via explicit solvent MD simulations and periodic boundary conditions yields a robust and theoretically valid method to investigate base flipping in

156

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

DNA. The present methodology is general enough to be used to study base flipping processes for several different types of base-pairs, including mismatched base-pairs and modified bases, base flipping in the presence of proteins, as well as strand separation at a localized level. Based on the calculated free energy profiles it is predicted that flipping via both the minor and major grooves involves barriers of similar magnitudes in the case of C flipping, while the minor groove barrier is approximately 3 kcal/mol higher than the major groove barrier with G flipping (Figure 3). The similarity of the barriers to flipping refutes the currently accepted notion that flipping occurs only through the major groove, based on calculations using less sophisticated approaches.20 ­ 25 The present results are also consistent with suggestions that flipping occurs via the major groove with uracil DNA glycosylase5 and via the minor groove with M.Hha I.1 Details of the free energy profiles beyond the barriers show the presence of a relatively flat surface for the flipped state. For C flipping, there are no welldefined local minima for the flipped state while for G flipping there is a local minimum in the vicinity of the COM dihedral value of , 2408. However, this minimum is only approximately 3 kcal/ mol deep with respect to the major groove barrier, indicating that a flipped G in this minimum would only be transiently stable at room temperature. These calculated results are in good agreement with experiment31,39 when limitations in the computational methods and inherent differences with experimental studies are taken into account. Recent imino proton exchange data on AT basepairs in other sequences has indicated the presence of a metastable open state with a lifetime in the microsecond time range for base-pair opening events.68 This occurs in less than 10% of the events and is associated with an opening rate that is approximately an order of magnitude slower than the dominant opening event. These specific observations can be reconciled with our present results. Comparison of the C and G flipping PMF profiles in Figure 3 shows the C flipping energy surface to have lower energies. It may be speculated therefore that the majority of flipping events would involve the C base and the lack of deep local minima for the flipped state of the cytosine would result in a short lifetime for that state. It may also be speculated that the higher energies for G flipping would result in a lower probability of G flipping but a longer lifetime of the open state would occur due to the presence of the local minimum at a COM dihedral value , 2408. Additional calculations on alternate sequences will, however, be required to confirm whether the long-lived open base-pair state is primarily due to purine base flipping events. Comparison of flipping through the two grooves shows similar energetic barriers, but structurally there are both similarities and differences between the two groove pathways. During minor groove

flipping the orphan base must distort to allow flipping to occur (Figure 8), though the nature of the distortions differs for C versus G flipping, while via the major groove the flipping base can gradually pull away without significantly distorting its base-pair partner. It is also evident that similar regions of conformational space beyond those typically seen in B-DNA are sampled in the phosphodiester backbone during both minor groove and major groove flipping (Figures 6 and 7). This conserved pattern of sampling parallels low potential energy regions of the dihedrals previously obtained via QM calculations on model compounds. This relationship suggests a model where specific distortions of multiple backbone dihedrals are a prerequisite for flipping and these distortions are dictated, to a large extent, by the intrinsic energetic properties of the phosphodiester backbone. It is anticipated that similar prerequisite transitions and distortions of the phosphodiester backbone will be important for other structural distortions of DNA, including DNA strand separation processes involved in replication and transcription. Increased sugar repuckering and glycosyl bond rotation of the target and adjacent bases occurs during base flipping. The behavior of the diagonally opposite cytosine position in C flipping is especially significant in this respect, suggesting a dynamic link between methylation of this position and facilitation of flipping. These observations can also be tested by specific insertion of chemically modified sugars, such as carbocyclic sugar analogs that can enforce either a North or South sugar conformation40 resulting in different impacts on minor versus major groove flipping, which may manifest itself in altered binding to M.Hha I. Overall, DNA bending does not seem to be a prerequisite for base flipping (data not shown), although a correlation between the two processes was not systematically explored here. Analysis of the base flipping pathways shows the base to move along the respective grooves during flipping. A similar motion has been observed in a simulation study of an adenine bulge for the transition of adenine from stacked to extended states.32 This motion allows the base to maintain interactions with the remainder of double helix even after base-pair separation occurs. These interactions possibly involve both direct and water-mediated hydrogen bonds. Such hydrogen bonds are highly dependent on the sequence neighboring the flipping base as it determines the hydrogen bonding groups present in each groove. A mechanism of sequence dependence of base flipping is, therefore, postulated based on the presence of such hydrogen bonding interactions. Although hydrogen bonding with immediately adjacent base-pairs has been observed before,23,24 the present study shows that specific intermediate states in the base flipping process involve direct and water-mediated hydrogen bonding of the flipping base with more remote regions of the neighboring sequence. This mechanism of sequence dependence

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

157

is also likely to influence large-scale DNA unwinding processes if they follow a structural pathway analogous to base flipping. The development of force fields to describe macromolecules generally focuses on the low energy regions of conformational space, an example being the phosphodiester and glycosyl linkage dihedral regions that are populated in DNA crystal structures.69,70 Higher energy and alternate low energy regions of the dihedrals not usually populated in isolated DNA crystal structures, are populated during base flipping observed here. Thus, to properly describe DNA structural transitions, it is necessary for the force field to properly treat local higher-energy regions of the dihedral rotation surfaces as well as the global minimum regions. In the CHARMM27 force field used here and developed in our laboratory, the emphasis on good reproduction of the overall dihedral surfaces calculated by high-level QM calculations ensures reasonable treatment of higherenergy regions of DNA. Finally, the results described here have mostly focused on intrinsic structural changes in the DNA itself. The effects of counterions and water surrounding the DNA molecule have been taken into consideration in the simulations such that the obtained free energies and intrinsic structural changes seen are inclusive of these effects. The non-contiguous separation of sampling over individual windows, however, makes it difficult to recognize patterns in solvent properties exclusively associated with base flipping. Since these properties are likely to be extremely important in the base flipping process, they have to be probed by using extended simulations of sufficient length for specific windows along the base flipping profile. These studies and their results on solvation changes associated with base flipping will be reported elsewhere.

Methods
All molecular mechanics (MM) and MD calculations were performed using the program CHARMM.71,72 The CHARMM27 nucleic acid force field35,36 with the CHARMM modified TIP3P water model,73 and sodium parameters from Beglov & Roux74 were used. The initial system setup involved taking the canonical B-form of the above DNA sequence and overlaying it with a pre° ° ° equilibrated 54 A £ 54 A £ 54 A solvent box consisting of water molecules and sodium ions. This solvent box ° extended at least 8 A beyond the DNA solute along its ° vertical axis and at least 20 A along the horizontal axis. The excess size along the horizontal axis was deemed necessary to maintain solvation of the flipped extrahelical base. Since DNA rotation was not inhibited in the MD simulations, this excess solvent box space also allowed for rotation of the DNA. All solvent molecules ° having a non-hydrogen atom within 1.8 A of the DNA were deleted. The number of sodium ions was adjusted to ensure electrostatic neutrality of the system by adding sodium ions at random positions in the box or deleting the sodium ions farthest from the DNA, as required. The final system consisted of 21,306 atoms including

6842 water molecules and 22 sodium ions. Periodic boundary conditions were used in all subsequent calculations with the images generated using the CRYSTAL module in CHARMM.75 The system was minimized for 500 Adopted Basis Newton ­ Raphson (ABNR) steps with mass-weighted harmonic constraints of 2.0 kcal/ ° mol per A on the non-hydrogen DNA atoms. The minimized system was then subjected to a 20 ps constant volume, isothermal (NVT) ensemble MD simulation keeping the same harmonic constraints in order to equilibrate the solvent around the DNA. The resulting system was minimized for 500 ABNR steps without any constraints. An MD simulation was then performed for 500 ps in the NPT76 ensemble at 300 K with the LeapFrog integrator. All calculations were performed using SHAKE77 to constrain covalent bonds containing hydrogen, using an integration timestep of 0.002 ps, and treating long-range electrostatic interactions using the PME approach.78 PME calculations were performed using real space and Lennard­ Jones (LJ) interaction cutoffs of ° 10 A, with non-bond interaction lists maintained and ° heuristically updated out to 12 A. The fast Fourier ° transform grid densities were set to ca 1 A21 using a fourth-order smoothing spline. The screening parameter (kappa) was set to 0.30. The PMF simulations were started using the final structure from the 500 ps NPT MD equilibration simulation. The reaction coordinate for the PMF profile was the pseudodihedral formed by the COM of the nonhydrogen atoms in four groups of atoms. For C flipping these included (a) the 30 base-paired guanine and cytosine bases, (b) the sugar attached to the 30 guanine base, (c) the sugar attached to the target C base, and (d) the target C base itself, as shown in Figure 1(a). Similarly, for G flipping the atoms were (a) the 50 base-paired cytosine and guanine bases, (b) the sugar attached to the 50 cytosine base, (c) the sugar attached to the target G base, and (d) the target G base itself, as shown in Figure 1(b). COM dihedral and angle harmonic constraints were implemented in the miscellaneous mean field potential (MMFP) module79 of CHARMM. Although MMFP is mainly used to implement solvent boundary potentials, it can also be used to impose harmonic constraints on a particular parameter involving sets of atoms using usual methods devised to distribute specified forces amongst all the constrained atoms to maintain the dihedral or angle parameter at or near the constrained value.80 For the constraining or umbrella potential, wi ðxÞ; a harmonic potential of the form: wi ðxÞ ¼ ki ðx 2 xi Þ2 ð1Þ

was used where ki is the harmonic force constant, x is the value of the reaction coordinate, and xi is the constrained value of the COM dihedral for each window ranging from 08 to 3608 in 5 deg. increments. The initial structures for each window of the PMF were obtained using 0.5 ps simulations for each window and the final structure from these simulations used as the starting structure for the next window. A large force constant of 10,000 kcal/ mol per rad2 and the short duration of the simulations were used to create minimum change in the surrounding DNA and solvent structure for different windows along the flipping profile. Starting structures for all windows from 08 to 3608 in 58 increments were thus obtained. These structures were then subjected to a 5 ps equilibration simulation followed by the 200 ps production MD simulations in each window of the PMF. For the

158

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

equilibration and production run, the harmonic force constant was set to 1000 kcal/mol per rad2. This value allows for sufficient overlap in the sampling of the COM dihedral between adjacent windows in the PMF and is not expected to unduly influence the conformational sampling of sugar puckering and the backbone dihedrals, although such an effect cannot be completely ruled out. The combined simulation time for all windows in each PMF was 14.8 ns. The value of the COM dihedral was recorded every 0.01 ps. The PMF was obtained by removing the bias introduced by the umbrella potential for all the windows sampled.34,81 The unbiased PMF, WðxÞ; is obtained via: WðxÞ ¼ Wi ðxÞ 2 wi ðxÞ þ Fi ð2Þ

where Wi ðxÞ is the biased PMF obtained from the simulation, wi ðxÞ is the umbrella constraint energy from equation (1), and Fi is a constant for window i. The values of Fi, which are the only undetermined part of equation (2), are obtained using the weighted histogram analysis method (WHAM) set of equations82 to calculate a complete base flipping PMF. Since our reaction coordinate is periodic, a modified form of the WHAM equation specifically developed for periodic dihedral coordinates was used.83 WHAM analysis was carried out using a finer window dimension, 0.58, than the umbrella sampling window width of 58, with a convergence criterion of 0.0001 kcal/mol. Analysis of the DNA structural parameters was done using the FREEHELIX program49 modified by us to read DNA MD trajectories generated by CHARMM.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge NIH grant GM51501 for financial support and the NSF PACI program, DOD ASC Major Shared Resource Computing and High Performance Computing, the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center for computational support. We also thank Dr Serge Crouzy for providing the periodic WHAM program and Dr Benoit Roux, Simon Berneche and Wonpil Im for helpful discussions regarding the PMF determination. We also thank Dr Richard Lavery for making available to us, prior to publication, the results of a study of localized base-pair opening using umbrella sampling with a different constraint.

References
1. Klimasauskas, S., Kumar, S., Roberts, R. J. & Cheng, X. (1994). Hha I methyltransferase flips its target base out of the DNA helix. Cell, 76, 357­ 369. 2. Roberts, R. J. (1995). On base flipping. Cell, 82, 9 ­ 12. 3. Roberts, R. J. & Cheng, X. (1998). Base flipping. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67, 181­ 198. 4. Cheng, X. & Blumenthal, R. M. (1996). Finding a basis for flipping bases. Structure, 4, 639­ 645. 5. Slupphaug, G., Mol, C. D., Kavli, B., Arvai, A. S., Krokan, H. E. & Tainer, J. A. (1996). A nucleotideflipping mechanism form the structure of human uracil ­ DNA glycosylase bound to DNA. Nature, 384, 87 ­ 92. 6. Hornby, D. P. & Ford, G. C. (1998). Protein-mediated base flipping. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 9, 354­358.

7. Mol, C. D., Parikh, S. S., Putnam, C. D., Lo, T. P. & Tainer, J. A. (1998). DNA repair mechanisms for the recognition and removal of damaged DNA bases. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 28, 101­ 128. 8. Mol, C. D., Izumi, T., Mitra, S. & Tainer, J. (2000). DNA-bound structures and mutants reveal abasic DNA binding by APE1 DNA repair and coordination. Nature, 403, 451­ 456. 9. Mandal, C., Kallenbach, N. R. & Englander, S. W. (1979). Base-pair opening and closing reactions in the double helix: a stopped-flow hydrogen exchange study in poly(rA)·poly(rU). J. Mol. Biol. 135, 391­ 411. 10. Nakanishi, M., Mitane, Y. & Tsuboi, M. (1984). A hydrogen exchange study of the open segment in a DNA double helix. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 798, 46 ­52. 11. Takashima, H., Nakanishi, M. & Tsuboi, M. (1985). Determination of the kinetics of deuteration of DNA·RNA hybrids by ultraviolet spectroscopy. Biochemistry, 24, 4823­ 4825. ´ 12. Gueron, M., Kochoyan, M. & Leroy, J.-L. (1987). A single mode of DNA base-pair opening drives imino proton exchange. Nature, 328, 89 ­ 92. 13. Kochoyan, M., Lancelot, G. & Leroy, J. L. (1988). Study of structure, base-pair opening kinetics and proton exchange mechanism of the d-(AATTGCAATT) self-complementary oligodeoxynucleotide in solution. Nucl. Acids Res. 16, 7685­ 7702. 14. Leijon, M. & Graslund, A. (1992). Effects of sequence and length on imino proton exchange and base pair opening kinetics in DNA oligonucleotide duplexes. Nucl. Acids Res. 20, 5339­ 5343. 15. Leroy, J. L., Kochoyan, M., Huynh-Dinh, T. & Gueron, M. (1988). Characterization of base-pair opening in deoxynucleotide duplexes using catalysed exchange of the imino proton. J. Mol. Biol. 200, 223­ 238. 16. Schneider, T. D. (2001). Strong minor groove base conservation in sequence logos implies DNA distortion or base flipping during replication and transcription initiation. Nucl. Acids Res. 29, 4881­ 4891. 17. Lyakhov, I. G., Hengen, P. N., Rubens, D. & Schneider, T. D. (2001). The P1 phase replication protein RepA contacts an otherwise inaccessible thymine N3 protein the DNA distortion or base flipping. Nucl. Acids Res. 29, 4892­4900. 18. O'Gara, M., Horton, J. R., Roberts, R. J. & Cheng, X. (1998). Structures of Hha I methyltransferase complexed with substrates containing mismatches at the target base. Nature Struct. Biol. 5, 872­ 877. 19. Becker, O. M., MacKerell, H. A. D., Jr., Roux, B. & Watanabe, M., eds. (2001). Computational Biochemistry and Biophysics, Marcel Dekker, New York. 20. Keepers, J. W., Kollman, P. A., Weiner, P. K. & James, T. L. (1982). Molecular mechanical studies of DNA flexibility: coupled backbone torsion angles and base-pair openings. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 79, 5537­ 5541. 21. Keepers, J., Kollman, P. A. & James, T. L. (1984). Molecular mechanical studies of base-pair opening in d(CGCGC):d(GCGCGC), dG5·dC5, d(TATAT): d(ATATA), and dA5·dT5 in the B and Z forms of DNA. Biopolymers, 23, 2499­ 2511. 22. Ramstein, J. & Lavery, R. (1988). Energetic coupling between DNA bending and base pair opening. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 85, 7231­ 7235. ´ 23. Giudice, E., Varnai, P. & Lavery, R. (2001). Energetic and conformational aspects of A:T base pair opening

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

159

24. 25.

26. 27.

28. 29. 30.

31. 32.

33. 34.

35.

36.

37. 38.

39.

40.

41.

within the DNA double helix. Chem. Phys. Chem., 673­677. Bernet, J., Zakrzewska, K. & Lavery, R. (1997). Modelling base pair opening: the role of helical twist. J. Mol. Struct. (Theochem.), 398, 473­ 482. Chen, Y. Z., Mohan, V. & Griffey, R. H. (2000). Spontaneous base flipping in DNA and its possible role in methyltransferase binding. Phys. Rev. sect. E, 62, 1133­ 1137. McQuarrie, D. A. (1976). Statistical Mechanics, Harper & Row, New York. Norberg, J. & Nilsson, L. (1995). Potential of mean force calculations of the stacking ­ unstacking process in single-stranded deoxyribodinucleoside monophosphates. Biophys. J. 69, 2277­ 2285. Norberg, J. & Nilsson, L. (1996). Conformational free energy landscape of ApApAp from molecular dynamics simulations. J. Phys. Chem. 100, 2550­ 2554. Norberg, J. & Nilsson, L. (1998). Solvent influence on base stacking. Biophys. J. 74, 394­ 402. Sheikhnejad, G., Brank, A., Christman, J. K., Goddard, A., Alvarez, E., Ford, H., Jr. et al. (1999). Mechanism of inhibition of DNA (cytosine C5) methyltransferases by oilgodeoxyribonucleotides containing 5,6-dihydro-5-azacytosine. J. Mol. Biol. 285, 2021­ 2034. Dornberger, U., Leijon, M. & Fritzsche, H. (1999). High base pair opening rates in tracts of GC base pairs. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 6957­ 6962. Feig, M., Zacharias, M. & Pettitt, B. M. (2001). Conformations of an adenine bulge in a DNA octamer and its influence on DNA structure from molecular dynamics simulations. Biophys. J. 81, 353­370. Stofer, E., Chipot, C. & Lavery, R. (1999). Free energy calculations of Watson­ Crick base pairing in aqueous solution. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121, 9503­ 9508. Northrup, S. H., Pear, M. R., Lee, C.-Y., McCammon, J. A. & Karplus, M. (1982). Dynamical theory of activated processes in globular proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 79, 4035­ 4039. Foloppe, N. & MacKerell, A. D., Jr (2000). All-atom empirical force field for nucleic acids. 1. Parameter optimization based on small molecule and condensed phase macromolecular target data. J. Comput. Chem. 21, 86 ­104. MacKerell, A. D., Jr & Banavali, N. (2000). All-atom empirical force field for nucleic acids. 2. Application to molecular dynamics simulations of DNA and RNA in solution. J. Comput. Chem. 21, 105­ 120. Cheatham, T. E., III & Young, M. A. (2001). Molecular dynamics simulation of nucleic acids: successes, limitations, and promise. Biopolymers, 56, 232­ 256. Klimasauskas, S., Szyperski, T., Serva, S. & Wuthrich, K. (1998). Dynamic modes of the flipped-out cytosine during Hha I methyltransferase ­ DNA interactions in solution. EMBO J. 17, 317­ 324. Moe, J. G. & Russu, I. M. (1992). Kinetics and energetics of base-pair opening in 50 d(CGCGAATTCGCG)-30 and a substituted dodecamer containing G­T mismatches. Biochemistry, 31, 8421­ 8428. Wang, P., Nicklaus, M. C., Marquez, V. E., Brank, A. S., Christman, J., Banavali, N. K. & MacKerell, A. D., Jr. (2000). Use of oligodeoxyribonucleotides with conformationally constrained abasic sugar targets to probe the mechanism of base flipping by Hha I DNA (cytosine C5) ­ methyltransferase. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122, 12422­ 12434. Foloppe, N. & MacKerell, A. D., Jr (1999). Contribution of the phosphodiester backbone and glycosyl

42.

43.

44.

45.

46. 47.

48.

49. 50.

51.

52. 53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

linkage intrinsic torsional energetics to DNA structure and dynamics. J. Phys. Chem. sect. B, 103, 10955 ­ 10964. MacKerell, A. D., Jr (1997). Influence of water and sodium on the energetics of dimethylphosphate and its implications for DNA structure. J. Chim. Phys. 94, 1436 ­1447. Foloppe, N. & MacKerell, A. D., Jr (1999). Intrinsic conformational properties of deoxyribonucleosides: implicated role for cytosine in the equilibrium between the A, B and Z forms of DNA. Biophys. J. 76, 3206­ 3218. Foloppe, N., Nilsson, L. & MacKerell, A. D., Jr (2002). Ab initio conformational analysis of nucleic acid components: intrinsic energetic contributions to nucleic acid structure and dynamics. Biopolymers (Nucl. Acid Sci.), 61, 61 ­ 76. Gryaznov, S. M., Lloyd, D. H., Chen, J.-K., Schultz, R. G., DeDionisio, L. A., Ratmeyer, L. & Wilson, W. D. (1995). Oligonucleotide N30 ­ P50 phosphoramidates. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 92, 5798­ 5802. Gryaznov, S. M. & Winter, H. (1998). RNA mimetics: oligonucleotide N30 ­ P50 phosphoramidates. Nucl. Acids Res. 26, 4160­ 4167. Banavali, N. K. & MacKerell, A. D., Jr (2001). Reevaluation of stereoelectric contributions to the conformational properties of the phosphodiester and N30 -phosphoramidate moieties of nucleic acids. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128, 6747­ 6755. Banavali, N. K. & MacKerell, A. D., Jr (2001). Reexamination of the intrinsic, dynamic, and hydration properties of phosphoramidate DNA. Nucl. Acids Res. 29, 3219­ 3230. Dickerson, R. E. (1998). DNA bending: the prevalence of kinkiness and the virtues of normality. Nucl. Acids Res. 26, 1906­ 1926. Olson, W. K., Gorin, A. A., Lu, X.-J., Hock, L. M. & Zhurkin, V. B. (1998). DNA sequence-dependent deformability deduced from protein ­ DNA crystal complexes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 11163­ 11168. Foloppe, N. & MacKerell, A. D., Jr (1998). Conformational properties of the deoxyribose and ribose moieties of nucleic acids: a quantum mechanical study. J. Phys. Chem. sect. B, 102, 6669­ 6678. Saenger, W. (1984). Principles of Nucleic Acid Structure, Springer, New York. Weisz, K., Shafer, R. H., Egan, W. & James, T. L. (1992). The octamer motif in immunoglobulin genes: extraction of structural constraints from twodimensional NMR studies. Biochemistry, 31, 7477 ­7487. Wahl, M. C., Rao, S. T. & Sundaralingam, M. (1996). Crystal structure of the B-DNA Hexamer d(CTCGAG): model for an A-to-B transition. Biophys. J. 70, 2857­ 2866. Grzeskowiak, K., Yanagi, K., Prive, G. G. & Dickerson, R. E. (1991). The structure of B-helical CGATCGATCG and comparison with CCAACGTTGG. The effect of base pair reversals. J. Biol. Chem. 266, 8861­ 8883. Langlois D'Estaintot, B., Dautant, A., Courseille, C. & Precigoux, G. (1993). Orthorhombic crystal structure of the A-DNA octamer d(GTACGTAC). Comparison with the tetragonal structure. Eur. J. Biochem. 213, 673 ­682. Swaminathan, S., Ravishanker, G. & Beveridge, D. L. (1991). Molecular dynamics of B-DNA including water and counterions: a 140-ps trajectory for

160

Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Sequence

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65. 66.

67. 68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

d(CGCGAATTCGCG) based on the GROMOS force field. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 113, 5027­ 5040. Hocquet, A. & Ghomi, M. (2000). The peculiar role of cytosine in nucleoside conformational behaviour: hydrogen bond donor capacity of nucleic bases. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2, 5351­ 5353. O'Gara, M., Roberts, R. J. & Cheng, X. (1996). A structural basis for the preferential binding of hemimethylated DNA by Hha I DNA methyltransferase. J. Mol. Biol. 263, 597­ 606. Vargason, J. M., Eichman, B. F. & Ho, P. S. (2000). The extended and eccentric E-DNA structure induced by cytosine methylation or bromination. Nature Struct. Biol. 7, 758­ 761. Derreumaux, S., Chaoui, M., Tevanian, G. & Fermandjian, S. (2001). Impact of CpG methylation on structure, dynamics and solvation of cAMP DNA responsive element. Nucl. Acids Res. 29, 2314­ 2326. Marquez, V. E., Russ, P., Alonso, R., Siddiqui, M. A., Hernandez, S., George, C. et al (1999). Synthesis of conformationally restricted carbocyclic nucleosides: the role of the O(4') atom in the key hydration step of adenosine deaminase. Helv. Chim. Acta, 82, 2119 ­2129. Marquez, V. E., Wang, P., Nicklaus, M. C., Maier, M., Manoharan, M., Christman, J. K., Banavali, N. K. & MacKerell, A. D., Jr (2001). Inhibition of (cytosine C5)-methyltransferase by oligonucleotides containing flexible (cyclopentane) and conformationally constrained (bicyclo[3.1.0]hexane) abasic sites. Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucl. Acids, 20, 451­ 459. Castrignano, T., Chillemi, G. & Desideri, A. (2000). Structure and hydration of Bam HI DNA recognition site: a molecular dynamics investigation. Biophys. J. 79, 1263­ 1272. Neugeberova, S. & Kypr, J. (2000). Invariant and variable base stacking geometries in B-DNA and A-DNA. J. Biomol. Struct. Dynam. 18, 73 ­ 81. Jacobson, A., Leupin, W., Liepinsh, E. & Otting, F. (1996). Minor groove hydration of DNA in aqueous solution: sequence-dependent next neighbor effect of the hydration lifetimes in d(TTAA)2 segments measured by NMR spectroscopy. Nucl. Acids Res. 24, 2911 ­2918. Feig, M. & Pettitt, B. M. (1999). Sodium and chlorine ions as part of the DNA solvation shell. Biophys. J. 77, 1769­ 1781. ¨ ¨ Warmlander, S., Sen, A. & Leijon, M. (2000). Imino proton exchange in DNA catalyzed by ammonia and trimethylamine: evidence for a secondary longlived open state of the base pair. Biochemistry, 39, 607­ 615. Clowney, L., Jain, S. C., Srinivasan, A. R., Westbrook, J., Olson, W. K. & Berman, H. M. (1996). Geometric parameters in nucleic acids: nitrogenous bases. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 118, 509­ 518. Gelbin, A., Schneider, B., Clowney, L., Hsieh, S.-H., Olsen, W. K. & Berman, H. M. (1996). Geometric parameters in nucleic acids: sugar and phosphate constituents. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 118, 519­ 529. Brooks, B. R., Bruccoleri, R. E., Olafson, B. D., States, D. J., Swaminathan, S. & Karplus, M. (1983). CHARMM: a program for macromolecular energy, minimization, and dynamics calculations. J. Comput. Chem. 4, 187­ 217. MacKerell, A. D. Jr, Brooks, B., Brooks, C. L. III, Nilsson, L., Roux, B., Won, Y. & Karplus, M. (1998). CHARMM: the energy function and its paramerization with an overview of the program. In Encyclo-

73.

74.

75. 76.

77.

78.

79. 80. 81. 82.

83.

pedia of Computational Chemistry (Schleyer, P. R., Allinger, N., Clark, T., Gasteiger, J., Kollman, P. A., Schaefer, H. F. III & Schreiner, P. R., eds), vol. 1, pp. 271­ 277, Wiley, Chichester. Jorgensen, W. L., Chandrasekhar, J., Madura, J. D., Impey, R. W. & Klein, M. L. (1983). Comparison of simple potential functions for simulating liquid water. J. Chem. Phys. 79, 926­ 935. Beglov, D. & Roux, B. (1994). Finite representation of an infinite bulk system: solvent boundary potential for computer simulations. J. Chem. Phys. 100, 9050­ 9063. Field, M. J. & Karplus, M. (1992). CRYSTAL: Program for Crystal Calculations in CHARMM, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA. Feller, S. E., Zhang, Y., Pastor, R. W. & Brooks, R. W. (1995). Constant pressure molecular dynamics simulation: the Langevin piston method. J. Chem. Phys. 103, 4613­ 4621. Ryckaert, J. P., Ciccotti, G. & Berendsen, H. J. C. (1977). Numerical integration of the cartesian equations of motion of a system with constraints: molecular dynamics of n-alkanes. J. Comput. Phys. 23, 327­ 341. Darden, T. A., York, D. & Pedersen, L. G. (1993). Particle mesh Ewald: an N log(N ) method for Ewald sums in large systems. J. Chem. Phys. 98, 10089­ 10092. Beglov, D. & Roux, B. (1997). An integral equation to describe the solvation of polar molecules in liquid water. J. Phys. Chem. 101, 7821­ 7826. Rapaport (1995). The Art of Molecular Dynamics Simulation, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge McCammon, J. A. & Karplus, M. (1979). Dynamics of activated processes in globular proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 76, 3585­ 3589. Kumar, S., Bouzida, D., Swendsen, R. H., Kollman, P. A. & Rosenberg, J. M. (1992). The weighted histogram analysis method for free-energy calculations on biomolecules. I. The method. J. Comput. Chem. 13, 1011­ 1021. Crouzy, S., Baudry, J., Smith, J. C. & Roux, B. (1999). Efficient calculation of two-dimensional adiabatic and free energy maps: application to the isomerization of the C13yC14 and C15yN16 bonds in the retinal of bacteriorhodopsin. J. Comput. Chem. 20, 1644­ 1658.

Edited by I. Tinoco (Received 5 December 2001; received in revised form 24 February 2002; accepted 28 February 2002)

http://www.academicpress.com/jmb Supplementary Material for this paper comprising four Figures is available on IDEAL.

