Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1778 (2008) 1839­1850

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Biochimica et Biophysica Acta
j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w. e l s ev i e r. c o m / l o c a t e / b b a m e m

Review

Towards a systems biology approach to study type II/IV secretion systems
Bart Hazes a, Laura Frost b,
a b

Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t
Many gram-negative bacteria produce thin protein filaments, named pili, which extend beyond the confines of the outer membrane. The importance of these pili is illustrated by the fact that highly complex, multi-protein pilus-assembly machines have evolved, not once, but several times. Their many functions include motility, adhesion, secretion, and DNA transfer, all of which can contribute to the virulence of bacterial pathogens or to the spread of virulence factors by horizontal gene transfer. The medical importance has stimulated extensive biochemical and genetic studies but the assembly and function of pili remains an enigma. It is clear that progress in this field requires a more holistic approach where the entire molecular apparatus that forms the pilus is studied as a system. In recent years systems biology approaches have started to complement classical studies of pili and their assembly. Moreover, continued progress in structural biology is building a picture of the components that make up the assembly machine. However, the complexity and multiple-membrane spanning nature of these secretion systems pose formidable technical challenges, and it will require a concerted effort before we can create comprehensive and predictive models of these remarkable molecular machines. © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Article history: Received 27 July 2007 Received in revised form 22 February 2008 Accepted 17 March 2008 Available online 21 March 2008 Keywords: Conjugation Type IV secretion Type II secretion Type IV pili Conjugative pili

Contents Pili and secretion systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Conjugation and type IV secretion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.1. Classical bacterial genetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2. Comparative plasmid genomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.3. Substrate recruitment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.4. The molecular motor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3. Transenvelope complex. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.1. Mating pair stabilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.2. The conjugative pilus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4. Type II secretion­type IV pili . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.1. The pseudopilins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.2. Energizing (pseudo)pilus extension and retraction. . . . . 4.3. The inner membrane pilus assembly complex . . . . . . . 4.4. Substrate specificity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.5. The secretin outer membrane pore . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.6. Symmetry-switching model for IM­OM complex formation 4.7. Static versus dynamic secreton formation . . . . . . . . . 4.8. The type IV pilus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.9. Towards a systems biology approach . . . . . . . . . . . Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1. 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1841 1841 1842 1842 1842 1842 1842 1843 1843 1844 1844 1845 1845 1846 1846 1846 1846 1847 1847 1848 1848

 Corresponding author. E-mail address: laura.frost@ualberta.ca (L. Frost). 0005-2736/$ ­ see front matter © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.bbamem.2008.03.011

1840

B. Hazes, L. Frost / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1778 (2008) 1839­1850

In the past, reductionism has been the common approach to study complex biological systems, such as the workings of a living cell. This has been extremely successful in obtaining detailed insight into narrowly focused aspects of cellular function but is less suited to create comprehensive models for cell function at higher levels, where complex interactions between many components determine the behavior of the system. The systems biology goal is to reach this level of understanding by determining all components that form a system and quantifying the physical and chemical interactions between them [1]. However, defining a system is non-trivial since biological processes rarely form a truly closed system. Consequently, boundary conditions that model the interactions between the system

and the external context need to be included. For bacteria, the natural boundary is the bacterial envelope and important boundary conditions are the mechanical and chemical interactions with the external milieu, including motility and adhesion, secretion and uptake of compounds, and even communication within a bacterial population [2]. Bacterial pili play roles in all these aspects. The protein machines that drive the assembly and motion of these filamentous appendices should also be seen as mini-systems in their own right, because the properties of the individual proteins explain only a fraction of the properties of the entire assembly complex. Accordingly, a considerable effort has been made to establish protein­protein interaction networks using proteomics approaches and, more recently, details of these interactions have

B. Hazes, L. Frost / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1778 (2008) 1839­1850

1841

been revealed by crystallographic studies of homomultimeric [3­8] and now also heteromultimeric protein complexes [9­11]. However, the study of complex molecular machines that span the gram negative bacterial envelope presents unique technical challenges that preclude the use of many high-throughput methods. Instead, creative ways must be found to piece together the results of individual studies into a coherent picture that explains how proteins in the cytoplasm, inner membrane, periplasm, outer membrane, and extracellular space, act together to drive pilus assembly, protein secretion, and DNA transfer. 1. Pili and secretion systems In 1975 Ottow [12] classified pili into six groups with Group 1 (type 1) pili being the adhesive fimbriae characterized by the related properties of hemagglutination and mannose sensitivity. Group 2 pili were the conjugative pili whereas group 4 (type IV) pili were associated with twitching motility and adhesion. This nomenclature turned out to be rather robust and has remained in usage to this day. What was unappreciated in 1975 was the presence of the complex secretion systems that were responsible for the assembly and function of these pili with Type 2 secretion systems (T2ss) assembling Type IV pili (T4P) and Type 4 secretion systems (T4ss) assembling conjugative or group 2 pili, reviewed in [13]. The recent sequencing of hundreds of microbial genomes and plasmids has revealed that T2/4ss gene products are nearly ubiquitous and their roles have expanded beyond pilus formation and DNA transfer to include protein and nucleoprotein secretion, DNA excretion and uptake [14] in both Gram-negative and -positive organisms, and flagellar motility in archaebacteria [15,16]. A key characteristic of T2/4ss is their property of pilus retraction leading to the phenotypes of pilus-specific phage sensitivity, mating pair stabilization for conjugative pili, twitching motility for type IV pili, as well as uptake or extrusion of naked DNA and natural transformation. Sequence comparisons show that T2ss and T4ss evolved independently, for the most part, to solve a similar task. The resulting similarities and differences in both function and the underlying protein machinery, provide an interesting look into the general task of macromolecular secretion across the double-membrane system of gram-negative bacteria. Both secretion systems can be viewed as being composed of modules that contribute particular traits to the transenvelope apparatus. This is illustrated in Fig. 1A,B, which illustrates how the ancestral ATPases are at the core of these secretion systems and that modules for DNA transport, protein secretion, cell surface interactions etc add to the flexibility or specificity of the system. Systems biology will be useful in predicting the function of newly discovered secretion systems by recognizing these modules and then predicting their function. Here we review and compare the T2ss and T4ss systems. For recent reviews on the individual systems we refer the reader to [17,18] for T2ss and [19,20] for T4ss. With the large number of excellent studies in the area we could not include all and apologize to those whose work has been omitted.

2. Conjugation and type IV secretion Conjugation in Escherichia coli and the role of the F plasmid in this process was discovered over 50 years ago and conjugation is still best described for the F plasmid. The process starts when the F-pilus tip of a donor cell recognizes the cell surface of a recipient cell, possibly by interacting with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or, based on the promiscuity of conjugative transfer systems, a generalized negative charge on the cell surface [21]. Binding is believed to be mediated by the structural protein that forms the pilus because, unlike Pap pili [22], there is no evidence for a specific tip-associated adhesin in F-like pili. However, in IncI plasmid systems, which have both T4P and conjugative pili, the T4P pilin is involved in binding and this pilin can even change its sequence using a gene exchange mechanism, which allows it to recognize distinct LPS sequences [23]. After binding, the F-pilus retracts and a process of mating pair stabilization (Mps) results in a stable association between donor and recipient cells. Mps appears to involve the translocation of a structure containing TraG into the recipient cell periplasm where the energized inner membrane is sensed and a signal is transmitted back to the donor cell that conjugative DNA transport and replication should commence [24]. The best evidence for this translocation is the role of TraGF in entry exclusion (Eex) whereby F+ recipient cells carrying the Eex protein TraSF recognize TraGF produced by F+ donor cells, which blocks both the signal for conjugative DNA replication and transport [25,26]. This process also involves the highly structured outer membrane protein, TraNF, which binds OmpA in the recipient cell and stabilizes the junction between the mating cells [27]. Mps has not been demonstrated in VirB-like systems and appears to be a module specific to F-like systems. Plasmid transfer initiates after an as yet unknown event signals the readiness of the secretion system. As a result a nucleoprotein complex at the origin of transfer of the F-plasmid, the relaxosome, another module, is recruited to the T4ss through interactions with the coupling protein. Once the relaxosome contacts the coupling protein, one of the ancestral ATPases, the DNA, which is covalently linked to a tyrosine residue in the relaxase, is transported through the T4ss to the recipient cell. Thus, conjugative DNA transfer appears to be a protein secretion system that happens to also transport DNA. The signal for transport appears to be a cluster of basic amino acids near the C-terminus of the relaxase, which is conserved in other transported proteins such as a primase (Pri or Sog) and a singlestranded DNA binding protein (VirE2) [28]. The T-DNA transport system of the Ti plasmid differs from most conjugative T4ss in that vir gene expression is induced by signaling compounds in the exudates from plant wounds [29]. Using GFP (green fluorescent protein) fusions, the VirD4 coupling protein has been shown to be targeted to the poles of the cell where the T-pilus, assembled from the VirB proteins, is also located [30,31]. Polar localization is also a characteristic of many type IV pili, although neither the mechanism for

Fig. 1. A synopsis of the adaptations of T2/4ss, correlating function to the macromolecular make-up of modules that contribute to the complex. A) The basic T4ss is described by the VirB2-11 proteins of the Ti plasmid: VirB2, ­3, ­5 describe pilus subunits; VirB7, ­9, ­10 describe a transenvelope signal transduction system; VirB6, ­8 are components of the channel whose formation is aided by VirB1. The ancestral ATPases VirB4 and VirB11 energize pilus assembly and substrate transport. VirB1 is a widely distributed nonessential (brackets) homolog of soluble lytic transglycosylases (SLT) that increases the functionality of the T4ss. Homologs of subsets of these proteins are found in protein secretion (e.g. Bordetella pertussis toxin) and natural transformation (Helicobacter pylori) systems. The elaboration of a T4ss in conjunction with pilin processing proteins allows formation of a pilus such as the T-pilus of the Ti plasmid or the P-pilus of RP4 that is a receptor for phage (e.g. Pf1, PRD1). The presence of a third ancestral ATPase called the coupling protein (CP, e.g., VirD4) confers the ability to mobilize plasmids such as RSF1010 that can interact with many T4ss­CP complexes. The addition of the relaxosome, a nucleoprotein complex at the origin of transfer, permits conjugative DNA transfer to take place. The F-like conjugative systems are essentially similar to the P-like systems (including the Ti plasmid) but lack the VirB11 ATPase and VirB6 and ­8 (dashed arrow indicates subtraction) although the latter two proteins resemble the N- and C-terminal regions of TraGF. The addition of TraFF, ­GF (N-terminal region), ­HF and ­WF as well as TrbBF, ­CF, ­IF results in the F-pilus that is capable of pilus retraction and phage infection (f1, Q). The mating pair stabilization proteins TraGF (entire protein), TraNF and ­UF appear to complete the pore. Homologs of the F-like pore proteins allow DNA excretion in Neisseria gonorrhoeae. The addition of a coupling protein such as TraDF allows mobilization of plasmids such as ColE1 and infection by phage such as R17 that require the CP. Further modification of the system by the addition of the relaxosome complex permits conjugation. Not shown are the gene products for pilin processing such as the cyclase in P- (T-) systems and the acetylase in F-like systems; or surface and entry exclusion that are specific to conjugative systems. B) The core module of T2ss-like systems was likely formed by combining the (pseudo)pilins (GspGT­KX), the prepilin leaderpeptidase (GspOA), and the polytopic inner membrane protein (GspFS) with a hexameric HerA-like ATPase. This basic module is complemented in archeabacteria by FlaH and likely other factors to form the archeal flagellar system. In gram-positives, the disulfide forming BdbBC protein pair and several Com proteins allow for horizontal gene transfer by natural transformation. In gram-negatives, the secretin (GspDQ) is added to form a conduit through the outer membrane, which in some systems is stabilized by the pilotin (GspS) lipoprotein. The addition of the PilT/PilU pair creates a multi-functional energized retractile pilus, whereas the combination with GspCP/GspLY/GspMZ led to the formation of T2ss.

1842

B. Hazes, L. Frost / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1778 (2008) 1839­1850

targeting proteins to the poles nor the reason for polar localization are well understood [32,33]. Other conjugative systems in Gram-negative bacteria appear to be randomly distributed over the cell surface although a connection to the skeletal filaments, recently identified in bacteria as factors that control DNA segregation [34], has not been ruled out. The fluidity of the conjugative pore constituent proteins was demonstrated using a GFP fusion to TrhC, a VirB4 ortholog of the IncHI1 plasmid R27, which encodes a F-type T4ss. R27 has a temperature-sensitive phenotype such that mating occurs maximally at 20 °C but is barely detectable at 37 °C. The R27 T4ss forms TrhC-GFPassociated foci (about 30 per cell) at the permissive temperature but dispersed when the temperature was raised. Mutations throughout the R27 transfer region were shown to affect this phenotype suggesting that the foci were formed in response to interaction of the T4ss proteins [35]. In contrast to the randomly distributed T4ss foci, plasmids related to F and RP4 have defined locations in the cell during vegetative replication [36]. This begs the question of how the conjugative pore signals to the relaxosome that the plasmid DNA should be transported to it, in preparation for transfer. 2.1. Classical bacterial genetics The discovery of the F plasmid conjugation system over 50 years ago pre-dated modern genetic techniques and, indeed, the F plasmid played an important role in the development of classical bacterial genetics [37]. As a result it took decades of painstaking patch mating and complementation assays to characterize the F transfer region, which encodes the genes required to transfer DNA, to assemble pili, to form stable mating aggregates, and to prevent redundant mating between F+ bacteria by surface and entry exclusion. "Con-" mutations were mapped in the recipient to the genes for lipopolysaccharide synthesis [38] and OmpA [39], whereas in the donor mutations mapped to genes involved in catabolite repression [40], SfrA, -B and Cpx [41]. In spite of the many technical challenges, great progress was achieved in understanding the biology of conjugation especially the characterization of the conjugative pilus, the steps in mating pair formation, and DNA transfer and establishment in the recipient cell [24,42­45]. Probing the role of genes and regulatory mechanisms got a boost in the 1980s with the development of methodologies for introducing mutations using recombination or crossover techniques that introduced antibiotic resistance cassettes, foreign promoters or other sequences into the gene of interest. This has been greatly accelerated recently by the development of recombineering using lambda Red methodologies [46]. 2.2. Comparative plasmid genomics In 1985 a comparison of the sequences of F-like pilins, derived from the DNA sequence, was published [47] that ushered in the era of bioinformatics and functional genomics. In 1994, the sequences of the F and RP4 plasmids' transfer regions were published [48,49], and the power of multiple alignment algorithms was increasingly appreciated by bacterial geneticists and biochemists. T4ss systems have now been described in many gram-negative bacteria, which provide a powerful resource for comparative systems biology where evolutionary relatedness between systems allows predictions of structure and function, based on homology, to be made. Although each sequenced T4ss contributes to our understanding of type IV secretion in general, the well-characterized F plasmid, and its specialized F transfer region, remains an important model system [20]. A second important model system is the virB operon (VirB1­11), located in the T-DNA transfer system of the Ti plasmid, which is required for virulence by the plant pathogen Agrobacterium tumefaciens. The virB operon encodes a module of contiguous genes, that defines a T4ss apparatus involved in tumorigenesis in plants [19]. The VirB gene products (VirB1­11) have become the standard to which orthologs of other systems are compared as they are completely conserved in many gram-negative transfer systems.

2.3. Substrate recruitment One of the hallmark ancestral proteins of the T4ss is the coupling protein (VirD4/TraDF), which initiates secretion by recruiting cytoplasmic substrates, proteins or nucleoprotein complexes, to the T4ss. The one exception is the T4ss of Bordetella pertussis, which lacks a VirD4 ortholog but this T4ss is unique in that it secretes a periplasmic substrate, the pertussis toxin, and therefore does not require a cytoplasmic recruiting factor [50]. In other organisms, complexes between VirD4 and secreted proteins or the nucleoprotein complex that is transferred during conjugation have been detected, reviewed in [51]. VirD4 is an inner membrane protein with a short N-terminal membrane anchor that is involved in nucleotide binding specificity [52] and a large cytoplasmic domain that interacts with singlestranded DNA or proteins. DNA-dependent ATP hydrolysis has been observed in vitro [53] and ATPase activity is necessary for conjugation [54]. The crystal structure of a coupling protein lacking the N-terminal membrane anchor has been solved for TrwB from the IncW plasmid R388 [4]. Interestingly, the TrwB structure forms a hexamer with a central channel and an overall structural similarity to F(1)-ATPase and several hexameric ATPases known to be involved in DNA processing, including helicases, RecA, viral RNA and DNA packaging motors, and chromosome segregation proteins FtsK and HerA [55]. The similarity is greatest with the FtsK/HerA proteins and it has been suggested that the coupling protein acts as a DNA pump that pushes DNA through its central channel. However, T4ss encode two other hexameric ATPases, see below, and the primary role of the coupling protein could be just to insert the substrate into the T4ss, with the others driving secretion. Like the B. pertussis T4ss, T2ss secrete periplasmic substrates and they do not encode a VirD4 ortholog. However, for type III secretion systems (T3ss), recruitment of secreted effector proteins to the T3ss has been reported to involve binding of the effector to an ATPase, an interaction that is mediated by a chaperone [56]. This is likely a case of convergent evolution between these two otherwise unrelated secretion systems. 2.4. The molecular motor Sequence comparison shows that two other ancestral T4ss proteins share similarity with ATPases and define the type of T4ss. VirB4 (TraCF) contains a C-terminal P-loop ATPase domain that is part of the HerA/FtsK/VirD4 clade [55] and a computer model for VirB4 has been built based on the TrwB structure [57]. VirB11, is another P-loop ATPase and the crystal structure for the ortholog of the Helicobacter pylori T4ss, HP0525, has been solved [3]. The structure confirmed that VirB11 also forms a hexameric ring with similarity to the family of hexameric DNA-processing ATPases. Interestingly, VirB11 shows sequence and structural homology with the GspER/PilB ATPases of T2ss, making it the only component in both systems that is clearly related by common ancestry [58]. The homology to GspER/PilB could point to a central role of VirB11 in driving secretion, however, a VirB11 ortholog is missing in F-like transfer regions suggesting that there are basic differences between the Vir and F systems. At this moment it is not clear what individual roles VirD4, VirB4, and VirB11 play in T4ss and whether they act in concert or if each drives distinct processes in substrate secretion and pilus formation. 3. Transenvelope complex T4ss contain a set of gene products that form a transenvelope channel that is conserved among all gram-negative bacteria and many gram-positive and archeal species (Fig. 2). Excellent reviews on the characteristics of these proteins as well as the methods used to delineate their interactions have recently appeared [19,51] and will be summarized briefly here. One highly conserved interaction group consists of the outer membrane lipoprotein VirB7 (TraVF) that interacts with the outer membrane protein VirB9 (TraKF) and an inner membrane protein with

B. Hazes, L. Frost / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1778 (2008) 1839­1850

1843

Fig. 2. A diagram of the location and interactions among key proteins in T4ss. Solid gray are orthologs common to all T4ss; white/grey dots are F-specific; grey/white dots are Ti/P-specific and shaded refers to TraG, an F-specific proteins whose 2 domains (N and C) are similar to VirB6 and ­B8. Heavy dashes refer to interactions detected by Y2H whereas lines indicate interactions detected genetically. For simplicity, the extended pilus is not shown. In the Ti system, VirB5 is a minor component of the pilus. In the F system, TraL localizes TraC to the inner membrane but, along with TraE, has not been found in the pilus. The designation of the Vir(Ti)/Tra (F) orthologs are indicated. Small case letters are Trb gene products. Data taken from Harris and Silverman, 2004 [64]; Christie et al., 2005 [19] and unpublished observations.

an extended periplasmic domain, VirB10 (TraBF) [11,59]. VirB9-like proteins have a domain that resembles secretins in T2ss suggesting that it forms a multimeric pore in the outer membrane although the quaternary structure is not as resistant to chaotropic agents as in the case of true secretins. The lower stability may have contributed to the failure to purify the putative VirB9 pore complex, or perhaps the pore forms only transiently, after the remainder of the T4ss has come together. VirB10 has the ability to transmit signals between the outer and inner membranes in a manner reminiscent of TonB and TolA [60] and has been shown to interact with the three ATPases, the coupling protein (VirD4) [61,62], VirB4 and VirB11, as well as VirB1 and VirB8 [63]. The VirB7, ­9, ­10 complex probably has a role in monitoring the state of the ATPases and thereby controlling the pore activity of VirB9. Conversely, VirB7/VirB9 could sense the external environment and transmit a signal to the cytoplasm that allows DNA or protein translocation to begin. This complex is complemented by two other proteins VirB6, an inner membrane protein that could control the formation of the secretion channel, and VirB8, an inner membrane protein with a large periplasmic domain that interacts with VirB10 and VirB9 to complete the channel, reviewed in [51]. This suggests that VirB8 and VirB6 may form a non-covalent complex that contributes to the signaling of the VirB7/VirB9/VirB10 module. 3.1. Mating pair stabilization F-like systems encode a very characteristic module of highly conserved proteins involved in mating pair stabilization (TraG, ­N and possibly ­U) and pilus assembly and retraction (TraF, ­G, ­H, ­W, TrbB, ­C, ­I). The polytopic N-terminal portion of TraGF resembles VirB6 whereas the C-terminal region contains a large periplasmic domain reminiscent of VirB8. This latter region is required for mating pair stabilization, a process that can be described as completion of the channel for substrate translocation [20]. TraF, ­H, ­U, ­W and TrbB, ­I form an interaction group that is localized in the periplasm and outer membrane [64], with TrbC and TraW fused in the R27 system, suggesting the individual proteins may form non-covalent complexes in the other systems. These proteins have been implicated in pilus assembly and retraction and are thought to account for the ability of F+ bacteria to mate in liquid and on solid media equally well. Three of these proteins, TraH, ­N, and ­U, have a high cysteine content that requires the disulfide oxidoreductase DsbA and related proteins (e.g. DsbC, an isomerase) for stability and presumably correct folding and conformation in the periplasm and outer membrane of the cell. The presence of the genes encoding these proteins, as well as homologs of DsbC (TrbBF, TraFF or DsbC itself) containing a thioredoxin-fold, are hallmarks of the F-like T4ss [65](unpublished observations).

3.2. The conjugative pilus The conjugative pilus has been studied in detail for only a few systems including F-like and RP4 pili and the T-pilus of the Ti plasmid. Conjugative pili were classified as flexible or rigid and were found to often have a "knob" at the base of the pilus and a pointed tip, especially the rigid pili [44]. The structure of F-pili and the related pED208 pili were studied using a variety of biophysical techniques and found to have a mass per unit length of 3000 Da/nm, a diameter of 8­8.5 nm and a central channel of approximately 2 nm [66]. Circular dichroism estimated the alpha-helical content to be approximately 70% [67]. The length of the F-pilus is not fixed but can vary greatly from less than 1 to 20 m or more. Fiber diffraction revealed that the F-like pilus was composed of repeating subunits arranged with a five-fold rotational symmetry around a helical axis with 25 U in 2 turns of the helix, a pitch of 16 nm and a repeat of 32 nm. F-pilin (70 aa), the subunit of F-pili, is initially expressed as propilin (121 aa) with an unusually long leader sequence of 51 aa [66]. The length of the leader sequence does not appear to be important since other, more typical leader sequences, can be substituted for it with little effect on pilus assembly or function [68]. The leader sequence is cleaved by the host leader peptidase LepB after insertion of propilin in the inner membrane. It is then acetylated at its N-terminus by TraX [69] and forms an inner membrane pool of nearly 100,000 copies with both the N- and C-termini exposed to the periplasm [70]. Pilin acetylation is not well understood since a traX mutant appears normal for pilus assembly and conjugative ability although overexpression of traX leads to pili with a kinked appearance suggesting that acetylation has a function in ensuring the correct assembly of the filament [71]. F-pilin appears to have a compact structure near its N-terminus with an alpha-helical C-terminal domain. The acetylated N-terminus is buried within the filament whereas the C-terminal residue is exposed on the sides of the pilus. Mutations within the pilin gene traA were found to affect RNA phage attachment and eclipse, pilus tip formation at the cell surface, pilus assembly and retraction as measured by filamentous phage infection, and DNA transfer [72], suggesting that the pilus has a greater role in T4ss than attachment to a target recipient cell. This has been confirmed by the elegant TrIP experiments of Cascales and Christie [73] that demonstrated the DNA contacted pilin (VirB2) on its path through the conjugative pore. However, the diameter of the central channel in the conjugative pilus is too small to act as a conduit for secretion substrates, unlike flagella and T3ss systems that use a protein filament with a much wider bore. The P-like pilus, exemplified by RP4, and the T-pilus are composed of repeating subunits of circular pilin with the N- and C-termini joined together [74]. RP4 propilin undergoes three processing reactions

1844

B. Hazes, L. Frost / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1778 (2008) 1839­1850

Table 1 Nomenclature used for Gsp and Xcp T2ss, Pseudomonas Pil T4P, archaebacterial Fla flagellar system, and the gram-posivity competence Com genes Gsp Xcp Pil Flaa Com Comment A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O S ­ ­ ­ ­ P Q R S T U V W X Y Z ­ A ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ Q B C A E V W X ­ ­ ­ D P T U ­ ­ ­ ­ I J B1 B2 F G ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ K ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ GA GB GC GD GE GF GG ­ ­ ­ C ­ ­ ­ The secreted substrate in T2ss IM. Unknown function. Not essential IM. In complex with GspC/E/F/L/M. Binds GspD OM. Secretin, conduit for pili and substrates Cytoplasmic. Hexameric ATPase, energizes transport IM. In complex with GspC/E/F/L/M IM/pilus. Structural component of (pseudo)pilus IM. Pseudopilin. Not essential IM. Pseudopilin. Essential for secretion and pilus assembly IM. Pseudopilin. Essential for secretion, not pilus assembly IM. Pseudopilin. Inhibits pilus extension. Lacks Glu5 IM. In complex with GspC/E/F/L/M. Recruits GspE IM. In complex with GspC/E/F/L/M IM. Unknown function. Not essential IM. Leaderpeptidase OM. Pilotin, binds and stabilizes GspD Cytoplasmic. Hexameric ATPase, energizes retraction Cytoplasmic. Hexameric ATPase, energizes retraction

a The number of pseudopilins is variable in different archaebacterial species. The names used here are for Methanococcus voltae.

whereby LepB cleaves off the leader sequence and an unknown peptidase cleaves within the C-terminal region. The RP4 TraF cyclase, related to transpeptidases, cleaves off 4 newly exposed C-terminal amino acids and cyclizes the N- and C-termini. Although there is no known ortholog for TraF responsible for T-pilus cyclization, many putative transfer systems have a TraF-like gene product that appears to be diagnostic for rigid pili with cyclized pilin subunits. RP4 also has an ortholog of TraXF, the pilin acetylase [20] although its substrates have not been identified. The existence of the pilus can be inferred by the presence of homologs of TraXF or TraFRP4 since it is difficult to identify the gene encoding pilin because of the lack of sequence homology among these small hydrophobic peptides. 4. Type II secretion­type IV pili Whereas conjugative pili and T4ss typically inject proteins or nucleoproteins from the cytoplasm of the donor into the cytoplasm of a

recipient cell, occasionally they resemble T2ss in that they secrete into the media, as in the case of pertussis toxin in B. pertussis [50,75]. Moreover, the ability of T4P in some organisms to take up DNA by natural transformation [14,76,77] has been functionally duplicated using an atypical T4ss-based DNA-uptake system in H. pylori [78]. Finally, both T2ss and T4ss form entry points for bacteriophage infection [79,80]. Accordingly, even though T2ss and T4ss have distinct differences in their molecular make-up and typical functions, they also share surprising functional similarities that appear to arise from the presence of an envelope-spanning retractile pilus-assembly machine. In this section we will review current knowledge of T2ss/T4P with a focus on the pilus and its assembly machinery. To assist with the confusing nomenclature of T2ss/T4P proteins, Table 1 cross-references the designations used for most T2ss (GspA-O plus GspS), the Pseudomonas T2ss (XcpP-Z plus XcpA), and corresponding Pseudomonas aeruginosa pilin genes (PilA-E, PilQ, PilV-X, FimT, FimU) plus two genes unique to T4P assembly (PilT and PilU). The table also lists orthologs that are found in gram-positives (Com proteins) and archaebacteria (Fla proteins) that contribute to competence and the formation of flagella in these organisms, respectively. Finally, the cellular localization, and a brief comment on function are given. In the text we will use the Gsp nomenclature for T2ss with the Xcp equivalent given as a subscript. For T4P we will use the Pseudomonas nomenclature. A schematic figure of the T2ss components and their arrangement in the membrane is presented in Fig. 3A. 4.1. The pseudopilins The hallmark of T2ss/T4P is the presence of five related inner membrane proteins that have a highly variable globular periplasmic domain, an N-terminal transmembrane helix with high sequence conservation, and a Type III leaderpeptide that is cleaved on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane by a dedicated leaderpeptidase (GspOA/PilD) [81]. For T4P, one of these proteins, the pilin (PilA), homopolymerizes to form the pilus fiber, whereas the others, the pseudopilins (PilE, PilV-X and FimT-U [82]), contribute to pilus assembly in ways that are still poorly understood [83]. T2ss have five pseudopilins (GspGT-KX) and although no external pili are associated with secretion, overexpression of GspGT, but not the other pseudopilins [84], leads to the formation of pseudopili [33,85­87]. This suggests that pilus

Fig. 3. A diagram of the location and interactions among key proteins in T2ss and a model for substrate-induced docking of the secretin onto the translocon. For a detailed description, see the main text. Subunits are labeled using the Gsp nomenclature and for GspC the HR domain is also labeled. For clarity only a cross-section is shown although in reality the secreton forms a symmetric ring-like structure. The ATPase (E) is a hexamer and the remainder of the IM complex likely matches this hexameric symmetry, with the exception of GspC, which we postulate to bind as a hexamer of dimers. The secretin is reported to contain 12 to 14 subunits, here we assume a dodecameric state based on symmetry considerations. The order of subunits GspF-M-L-C in the IM is not necessarily as shown and the pseudopilus (G) consists predominantly of GspG subunits although other pseudopilins may be incorporated. A) Proposed model for the substrate-free state. The secretin (D) is in a closed state and, although drawn right over the translocon, it may be free to move laterally. The C-terminal periplasmic domains of GspC are shown to interact and restrain the orientation of the HR domains. The ATPase (E) may be in an inactive state. B) Proposed model for the substrate bound state. Substrate (black) binding to the peptide-binding groove of the C-terminal domain of GspC releases the steric restraints on the HR domain allowing them to interact with, and thus recruit, the secretin. This is postulated to trigger the secretin to open and it places the substrate inside the translocon channel. Each GspC dimer can bind two secretin monomers, but in cross-section only one is shown. The secretin­HR­GspM-L interaction symbolizes the formation of a sealed translocon channel although the exact components and interactions in the channel are unknown. The structural rearrangements may activate the ATPase through a conformational switch, leading to pseudopilus extension and substrate secretion.

B. Hazes, L. Frost / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1778 (2008) 1839­1850

1845

formation is a central theme for both T4P and T2ss, with the latter having a short periplasmic pilus that may drive secretion by repeated extension and retraction [33]. The distinction between T2ss and T4P has been further blurred by reports that T4P can mediate secretion in some systems [88]. Although there are five (pseudo)pilins, only two appear to be required for formation of a pseudopilus in T2ss, GspIV and the pilusforming GspGT [33,84,85]. Two more pseudopilins, GspJW and GspKX, are required for secretion of pullulanase whereas no direct role for GspHU was found in the pullulanase-secretion system of Klebsiella oxytoca [85]. The differential roles of pseudopilins in pilus formation and secretion may relate to different effects on pilus dynamics. Overexpression of GspKX was found to lead to shorter pseudopili, whereas knockouts of this gene led to hyperpiliation [84]. Accordingly, GspKX appears to inhibit pilus elongation, perhaps because it lacks the glutamate at position 5 that is strictly conserved in all other (pseudo)pilins and which has been proposed to neutralize the positive charge of the N-terminus of a neighboring pilin in the fiber [89]. A role of pseudopilins in pilus assembly dynamics was also suggested for the T4P of Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Gene knockouts for each of the 5 pseudopilins showed that all were required for wild-type levels of piliation. However, the pseudopilins are not required for pilus assembly per se, because normal piliation was restored in the retraction-deficient pilT mutant [83]. 4.2. Energizing (pseudo)pilus extension and retraction The mechanism by which pilin is extracted from the inner membrane and added to the base of the growing pilus remains an enigma, but an inner-membrane protein complex coupled to a cytoplasmic ATPase forms the machinery that accomplishes this feat [90]. In all systems, pilus extension is energized by a single essential cytoplasmic protein (GspER/PilB), which forms a hexameric ATPase that is recruited to the translocation apparatus (the secreton). GspER/ PilB, like VirB11 in T4ss, are members of a broadly distributed family of hexameric ATPases that drive translocation of DNA/RNA and other molecules [55]. Some members of this family are bidirectional and for T2ss, for which GspER is the only ATPase, GspER may be driving both extension and retraction. Alternatively, retraction could be spontaneous, driven by the energy released upon reinsertion of the hydrophobic N-terminal helix of the pilin into the inner membrane. The situation is more complex for T4P where two additional ATPases (PilT and PilU) play a role in pilus retraction, and inactivation of either gene results in a hyperpiliated phenotype [91]. PilT is essential for twitching motility, phage infection, and natural transformation, whereas the effects of PilU inactivation are more subtle and depend on the species [91­93]. The coupling of ATP hydrolysis to retraction in T4P is probably required to generate the considerable forces needed for twitching motility, with forces of 100­110 pN observed in laser-tweezer experiments [94]. The energy required to retract the pilus by 4.2 nm, corresponding to five monomers in one turn of the helical fiber, against a 100 pN force is 10- 10 × 4.2×10- 9 = 4.2×10- 19 J. This corresponds to 8 ATP assuming a G of 32.5 kJ/mol for ATP hydrolysis. Depending on the efficiency of the ATPase and the amount of energy released by reinserting pilins into the inner membrane, pilus retraction is likely to cost at least five ATP per turn of the pilus, probably more. Many important questions remain concerning the mode by which hexameric ATPases drive translocation. Do PilB, PilT, and PilU bind the secreton simultaneously, or do they compete for a single binding site, with retraction requiring displacement of PilB by PilT or PilU? Do PilB and PilT/U interact with different subsets of pseudopilins? Why do PilT and PilU, which are both related to PilB, disassemble pili in contrast to the role in assembly of PilB? Some of these questions may start to be answered by recent structural studies. Crystal structures for PilT from Aquifex aeolicus [8], the GspE ortholog of Vibrio cholerae (EpsE) [95], a FlaI ortholog of Archaeoglobus fulgidus (afGspE) [6] and

the VirB11 ortholog of a H. pylori T4ss (HP0525) [3] have now been solved, as well as numerous more distantly related hexameric ATPases [55]. However, the coupling of ATP hydrolysis to mechanical work may not use the same mechanism in all systems [96]. For instance, the structurally related hexameric F1 ATPase is known to represent a rotary motor [97] whereas a push­pull mechanism has been proposed for afGspE [6]. Considerable progress has also been made in the direct observation and quantification of pilus extension and retraction using laser tweezers [94,98­100] and total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy [101]. This revealed extension and retraction rates of 0.5 m/s at 29 °C and retraction up to 1.2 m/s at 37 °C, with forces up to 110 pN [99]. The combination of these quantitative studies with the structural studies of hexameric ATPases will hopefully resolve the translocation mechanism of T2/T4ss and their corresponding pili. 4.3. The inner membrane pilus assembly complex In T2ss GspLY is the main player in recruiting the ATPase GspER, while GspFS binds GspER but only in the presence of GspLY [90]. A crystal structure of the complex between the N-terminal domains of GspER and GspLY from V. cholerae provided more detailed insight into these interactions [9]. The structure showed that an -helix of GspER inserts into a long hydrophobic groove of GspLY. The authors noted that the GspER -helix only occupies part of the groove, allowing a second protein, possibly GspFS, to bind into the other half after the GspLY­ GspER complex has formed [9]. GspLY was also found to protect GspER from degradation, suggesting an interaction between them [102]. Similarly, GspLY was degraded itself in the absence of GspMZ or GspCP, suggesting that these proteins also interact with GspLY [102]. The presence of a stable GspER/GspLY/GspCP/GspMZ complex was further supported by coimmunoprecipitation in K. oxytoca [102], whereas copurification, coimmunoprecipitation and yeast two-hybrid studies demonstrated a GspE R /GspLY /GspF S /GspM Z complex [90,103]. Although the latter study did not observe GspCP as part of the complex, they did observe that the GspLY/GspMZ complex is much more stable in vivo in the presence of GspCP. This matches an in vitro study where the GspLY/GspCP/GspMZ ternary complex was found to better resist dissociation than the individual binary complexes [104]. Finally, interaction studies using truncated proteins showed that GspMZ binds GspLY through interactions between their C-terminal periplasmic domains [90] and GspCP associates with the complex through interactions made by its N-terminal domain, including the transmembrane helix [105,106]. The N-terminal 46 residues of GspCP were also sufficient to protect GspLY and GspMZ from degradation [105]. The interaction domain of the polytopic GspFS protein is less clear and both the N-terminal cytoplasmic domain [90] and a more C-terminal cytoplasmic domain [107] have been proposed to be involved. There is also disagreement concerning the membrane topology of GspFS with bioinformatics and experimental studies suggesting that there may be either three [107] or four [108] trans membrane helices. It is clear from the above studies that the inner membrane platform of T2ss is both complex and large with the hexameric GspER likely interacting with at least six GspLY, GspFS, GspCP and GspMZ (Fig. 3A,B). The complex may be even larger because GspCP has been reported to form a homodimer [106], and GspLY [109,110] and GspMZ [90] have been reported to form homomultimers. In contrast, T4P use a much simpler system consisting of just the GspFS ortholog PilC, which directly recruits the GspER ortholog PilB [111]. The absence of a GspMZ ortholog in T4P systems is not unexpected because genetic studies have shown that GspMZ is required for secretion but not for pseudopilus formation [84]. The same applies to GspCP, which is also not essential although it does enhance pseudopilus formation [84], perhaps by stabilizing GspLY [102,105] or by facilitating interactions between the pseudopilus and the outer membrane pore formed by GspDQ [112]. Finally, GspLY is essential for pseudopilus formation yet it has no ortholog in T4P. Since in T2ss GspLY and GspFS both bind the

1846

B. Hazes, L. Frost / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1778 (2008) 1839­1850

ATPase GspER,, with GspLY making an essential contribution to GspER recruitment, it is possible that in T4P the GspFS ortholog PilC has strengthened its interaction with the ATPase PilB, making the ATPaserecruiting role of GspLY redundant in T4P systems. 4.4. Substrate specificity The absence of GspLY, GspMZ and GspCP in T4P indicates a specific role of these components in secretion. For GspLY and GspMZ their exact roles remain unclear but GspCP appears to pair with the outer membrane protein GspDQ to determine substrate specificity [113]. However, the actual mechanism for substrate recognition remains a puzzle as one T2ss can secrete multiple proteins with no obvious common secretion motifs. One reason may be that various substrates are recognized in different manners, interacting with either GspCP, GspDQ, or both for specificity [113]. Interestingly, several GspCP have a C-terminal PDZ domain, whereas in Pseudomonas species the PDZ domain is replaced by a coiled-coil domain [114], which, like the PDZ domain, is often involved in protein­protein interactions. However, not all substrates depend on these putative protein-binding domains because deletion of the C-terminal PDZ domain of Erwinia chrysanthemi GspCP compromised the secretion of some, but not all, substrates in this organism [113]. In addition to possible interactions with the substrate, GspCP is known to bind the outer membrane protein PilDQ [112]. In a recent study it was shown that a more highly conserved domain (the homology region or HR domain) that precedes the PDZ domain is required for binding to PilDQ in the Vibrio Eps secreton [115]. GspCP thus links the inner and outer membrane components of the T2ss/T4P into an envelope-spanning structure (Fig. 3B). This interaction tends to be species specific and, unlike all other components of the system, GspCP and GspDQ cannot complement their orthologs in another species unless both genes are exchanged as a pair [116,117]. The ability of GspCP to form an envelope-spanning complex with GspDQ would also appear to be important for T4P, yet T4P have no GspCP ortholog. One intriguing possibility is suggested by a recent study that found that T4P assembly depended on TonB3 [118] and the earlier notion that TonB, which uses the cell's proton motive force to energize transport across an outer membrane receptor, shares key characteristics with GspCP [114]. Accordingly, T4P could rely on a cellular TonB homolog instead of GspCP. This resembles the TonB-like role proposed for VirB10 in T4ss [60]. 4.5. The secretin outer membrane pore The unique role of the T2ss is to carry substrates across the outer membrane, yet only one protein of the system is an integral OM protein (GspDQ/PilQ, secretin). Secretins consist of an N-terminal variable domain that resides in the periplasm and a conserved C-terminal domain that inserts in the OM where it forms a 12­14-meric ringshaped conduit for pili or secreted proteins. Secretin multimers are typically extremely stable and can be boiled in SDS without dissociating [119]. Nevertheless, in some systems the secretin must interact with a small lipoprotein (GspS, pilotin) for stable insertion into the OM [120,121]. The diameter of secretin pores in P. aeruginosa is estimated to range from 5.3 nm for PilQ to 9.5 nm for XcpQ (GspD) [119], large enough to accommodate fully folded T2ss protein substrates and electron microscopy images have actually shown T4P inserted into the secretin [122]. To maintain the integrity of the OM secretins need to be gated pores. One possibility is that the N-terminal periplasmic domain plugs the pore of the secretin in the resting state, with opening triggered by interaction with GspCP and perhaps the pseudopilus and/or substrate. At this moment it is not clear if the OM and IM components of the secreton are constitutively associated or if they assemble in a dynamic fashion. The former appears to be kinetically more efficient and the observation that GspCP is unstable in a gspDQ mutant [114] could point

to a stable association. However, it raises the question as to how substrates gain entry to the lumen of the putative secreton channel. In addition, the inability to purify the entire secreton and the observation that the pseudopilus subunit GspGT of Xanthomonas campestris stabilizes the association between GspCP and GspDQ [112] suggests that the interaction between these two components is weak or transient. Dynamic docking of the secretin onto a substrate-loaded secreton could also trigger a gating mechanism and it would explain how substrates enter the translocation channel. 4.6. Symmetry-switching model for IM­OM complex formation To complete the secreton, the hexameric GspER and the associated GspCP­GspFS­GspLY­GspMZ complex needs to be coupled to GspDQ. As described above, GspCP is the prime candidate to mediate this interaction. If we assume that the secretin is a dodecamer consisting of a ring of 12 monomers then the symmetry of the interacting partners suggests an intriguing mechanism where the dimeric GspCP acts as an adapter that bridges the symmetry mismatch between the secretin dodecamer (C12 point group symmetry) and the hexameric ATPase­ GspFS­GspLY­GspMZ complex (C6 point group symmetry). In this role, 12 GspCP molecules bind as six dimers to the hexameric IM complex whereas they bind as 12 monomers to the secretin dodecamer. Interestingly, the N-terminal 46 residues of GspCP are sufficient to both dimerize and interact with GspLY/GspMZ [105] whereas the C-terminal domains that bind to GspDQ display no or only weak dimeric interactions (see below) and a proline-rich and presumable disordered linker region [115] would provide the conformational freedom for the C-terminal domains to orient themselves independently form the N-terminal domains. Accordingly, the N-terminal region of GspCP is expected to interact with the IM complex as a hexamer of dimers, while structural and functional observations support a model where the C-terminal domains interact as a dodecamer of monomers with GspDQ. 4.7. Static versus dynamic secreton formation Purified GspCP lacking the N-terminal dimerization domain is mostly monomeric in solution [115] but there are indications from bacterial two-hybrid studies that there may be a weak interaction between the C-terminal domains in vivo [106]. This putative interaction will be stronger for full-length GspCP where the entropic penalty of binding is reduced after dimerization of the N-terminal 46 residues. Interestingly, the crystal structure of the PDZ domain of EpsC, the putative C-terminal substrate-binding domain of the GspCP ortholog in V. cholerae, shows a crystal contact where -helix A from one PDZ domain binds in the peptide-binding groove of a symmetryrelated PDZ domain [115]. Although this could be a non-physiological crystal contact, the authors note that the buried surface area is as large or larger than that found in other peptide-PDZ domain complexes and the key residues in the interaction are well conserved in the EpsC family. It is worthwhile to consider this interaction in light of our secreton formation model (Fig. 3A,B) where a PDZ­PDZ interaction restricts the ability of the HR domain to reorient itself for interaction with GspDQ. Because the observed PDZ­PDZ interaction involves the peptide-binding groove of the PDZ domain, substrate binding to the peptide-binding groove would displace helix A and release the conformational restraint on the HR domain (Fig. 3B). Accordingly, the PDZ domain could mediate substrate-dependent recruitment of the secretin and due to multi-valent binding between GspCP and GspDQ only one or a few substrate molecules may need to bind to trigger docking of the secretin. A multi-valent cooperative nature of secretin recruitment can also contribute to proper gating by transitioning rapidly between uncoupled and docked states. The central aspect of the proposed dynamic docking model is that substrate binding increases the affinity between GspDQ and GspCP,

B. Hazes, L. Frost / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1778 (2008) 1839­1850

1847

and different organisms and substrates may use alternate mechanisms to achieve this. For instance, in P. aeruginosa a coiled-coil domain replaces the PDZ domain in its GspCP ortholog, XcpP, and it remains to be seen if a protein­protein interaction that is broken upon substrate binding exists between these domains. Several studies also indicate that some but not all substrates depend on a GspCP substrate-binding domain for secretion. For instance, deletion of the GspCP PDZ domain in X. campestris does not affect secretion, while in E. chrysanthemi secretion is retained for some but not all substrates [105,113]. One possibility is that some substrates directly bind GspDQ and in doing so increase the affinity for GspCP in a PDZ-independent manner. That would also explain why GspDQ contributes to specificity for some substrates. Finally, the observation that deletion of the coiled-coil domain in the P. aeruginosa GspCP ortholog led to an increased secretion rate [114] fits a model where the coiled-coil domain, like the PDZ domain, inhibits recruitment of secretin. 4.8. The type IV pilus Although the (pseudo)pilus is clearly an essential component of both T4P and T2ss, questions remain concerning the structure of the fiber and even whether all pili adopt the same fiber structure or not [89,123­127]. Early electron microscopy images revealed that T4P form thin filaments about 6 nm wide and up to several ms in length. More detailed information from fiber diffraction studies on pili from P. aeruginosa showed a pattern consistent with a helical fiber containing 5 monomers per turn with a repeat distance of 4.2 nm [128]. Using these assembly parameters, observations from antibody binding, and the structure of the N. gonorrhoeae pilin monomer, a first detailed T4P fiber model was proposed [89]. In this model, the pilin monomers are assembled as a one-start right-handed helix with five monomers per turn and a pitch of 4.1 nm. The hydrophobic helix forms the central spine of the fiber with an anti-parallel beta-sheet forming a hydrophilic sheet around it. The PAK pilin crystal structure [129] was found to be compatible with this fiber model and the asialo-GM1 receptor-binding sites were exposed at only one end of the pilus, in agreement with functional studies indicating that receptor binding is a tip-associated event [130]. However, the ring of exposed asialo-GM1 receptor-binding sites was found to surround the bundle of N-terminal hydrophobic helices that project from the hydrophobic end of the T4P. The authors used this observation to suggest that the hydrophobic pilus end may not be buried in the bacterial membrane as had been expected, but instead be exposed at the tip where it can contribute to the ability of T4P to bind to a wide variety of biotic and inorganic substrates [129]. This model requires pilins to invert their orientation during pilus assembly, from an inner membrane orientation where the hydrophobic helix points inward, to a pilus orientation where the helix points outward. Although not impossible, this complication makes the model less attractive. The determination of the P. aeruginosa strain K122-4 pilin NMR structure has led to a competing fiber model that is similar in overall assembly parameters but has a left-handed instead of a right-handed helical arrangement [131]. In this model spirals of positively charged areas are present along the pilus surface which were proposed to contribute to DNA binding, a known property of several T4P [132]. Another left-handed helical model, this time with 17 monomers per four turns was proposed based on the PulG pseudopilin crystal structure and electron microscopy images of a PulG pseudopilus [123]. Finally, a considerably more deviating fiber model has been proposed for toxin-coregulated pili (TCP) from V. cholerae [124]. In this model the fiber core is still formed by the hydrophobic helices with a hydrophilic sheath consisting of beta-sheets, however, the monomers assemble as a 3-start helix with six monomers per turn. The model is based on the 3-start helical crystal packing observed for this pilin and Fourier transforms calculated from linear pilus sections observed by electron microscopy [124]. Even though TCP form a distinct subclass of

T4P (Type IVb pili) it is at first sight surprising that the conserved pilus assembly machinery could allow the assembly of pili with different symmetries. A potential solution is suggested by recent observations for the T4P-related archeabacterial flagella where different symmetries, including a 3-start helical assembly, were observed [133]. The authors suggested that the filament can undergo symmetry switching by cooperative and reversible changes in the flagellin monomer, as has been observed for eubacterial flagella [134]. Yet another perspective is given by the related "competence pseudopilus" that is formed by gram-positive bacteria. Here a conversion of an intramolecular disulfide into an intermolecular disulfide upon fiber formation has been found, which would have considerable implications for the (de) assembly kinetics and symmetry switching [135]. Further research is needed to definitively define the structure of the T4P. 4.9. Towards a systems biology approach In spite of the tremendous progress in our knowledge of T2/4ss function it is becoming clear that a higher level of integration of that knowledge is needed to understand how the many components of the system work together to yield a functional molecular machine. This has proven to be very difficult and just like at the start of the F-plasmid research, we are faced with questions that challenge current methodologies and require creativity, significant effort, and new technologies. A first step is to combine the functional data with protein structures, an area that has seen considerable activity in the past years and which is now moving to larger heteromultimeric complexes. These structural studies, combined with molecular protein­protein interaction data, start to raise the schematic block diagrams of the secreton to an atomic level. However, given the size and complexity of this multisubunit assembly, many components of which are integral membrane proteins, resolving the atomic structure of the secreton will likely require additional technologies to piece structural fragments together. Electron microscopy is making a large contribution in this sense to the flagella and type 3 secretion systems (T3ss) field [136], where the secreton "needle structure" can be isolated intact and visualized. Electron microscopy is also starting to reveal the structure of the type IV pilus but, unfortunately, neither T2ss nor T4ss secreton structures have been successfully isolated and more gentle isolation procedures or means to stabilize the secreton need to be found. In addition to chemical means of stabilizing, new functional insights may also help identify biological factors or conditions that favour protein­protein interactions. For instance, if parts of the secreton come together in a transient manner, insight into the signals that drive association may be used to engineer a constitutive complex. Beyond a mechanism-based understanding of secretion system function many other aspects need to be seen in the context of bacterial cell physiology and its interaction with the surrounding environment. T2/4ss respond to external factors, for example, in A. tumefaciens the Vir system is activated by chemicals released by plants [29], for the R27 plasmid conjugation is temperature regulated [35], the Brucella suis T4ss is upregulated after being phagocytosed by macrophages [137], for the F-plasmid conjugation rates depend on the growth phase of the culture, and twitching motility by T4P is regulated by multiple signal transduction systems [17,138]. T2/4ss have also been found to generate signals themselves, including signals leading to entry exclusion and initiation of plasmid replication during conjugation, and in Myxococcus xanthus T4P are proposed to act as a sensor that regulates exopolysaccharide production by signalling through the Dif chemosensory pathway [139]. Moreover, since secretion systems and pili are in direct contact with the external milieu, their impact on and interactions with the outside world need to be considered in systems biology projects that aim to model bacterial physiology on a cellular level. Finally, progress in sequencing technologies has greatly accelerated the sequencing of whole bacterial genomes and plasmids. In many cases, new T2/4ss systems are discovered and it would be

1848

B. Hazes, L. Frost / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1778 (2008) 1839­1850 [16] S.L. Bardy, S.Y. Ng, K.F. Jarrell, Recent advances in the structure and assembly of the archaeal flagellum, J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 7 (2004) 41­51. [17] J.S. Mattick, Type IV pili and twitching motility, Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 56 (2002) 289­314. [18] L.L. Burrows, Weapons of mass retraction, Mol. Microbiol. 57 (2005) 878­888. [19] P.J. Christie, K. Atmakuri, V. Krishnamoorthy, S. Jakubowski, E. Cascales, Biogenesis, architecture, and function of bacterial type IV secretion systems, Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 59 (2005) 451­485. [20] T.D. Lawley, W.A. Klimke, M.J. Gubbins, L.S. Frost, F factor conjugation is a true type IV secretion system, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 224 (2003) 1­15. [21] K.G. Anthony, C. Sherburne, R. Sherburne, L.S. Frost, The role of the pilus in recipient cell recognition during bacterial conjugation mediated by F-like plasmids, Mol. Microbiol. 13 (1994) 939­953. [22] F. Lindberg, B. Lund, L. Johansson, S. Normark, Localization of the receptorbinding protein adhesin at the tip of the bacterial pilus, Nature 328 (1987) 84­87. [23] A. Gyohda, N. Furuya, A. Ishiwa, S. Zhu, T. Komano, Structure and function of the shufflon in plasmid R64, Adv. Biophys. 38 (2004) 183­213. [24] A. Kingsman, N. Willetts, The requirements for conjugal DNA synthesis in the donor strain during flac transfer, J. Mol. Biol. 122 (1978) 287­300. [25] G.F. Audette, J. Manchak, P. Beatty, W.A. Klimke, L.S. Frost, Entry exclusion in F-like plasmids requires intact TraG in the donor that recognizes its cognate TraS in the recipient, Microbiology 153 (2007) 442­451. [26] J. Marrero, M.K. Waldor, Interactions between inner membrane proteins in donor and recipient cells limit conjugal DNA transfer, Dev. Cell 8 (2005) 963­970. [27] W.A. Klimke, C.D. Rypien, B. Klinger, R.A. Kennedy, J.M. Rodriguez-Maillard, L.S. Frost, The mating pair stabilization protein, TraN, of the F plasmid is an outermembrane protein with two regions that are important for its function in conjugation, Microbiology 151 (2005) 3527­3540. [28] A.C. Vergunst, M.C. van Lier, A. den Dulk-Ras, T.A. Stuve, A. Ouwehand, P.J. Hooykaas, Positive charge is an important feature of the C-terminal transport signal of the VirB/D4-translocated proteins of Agrobacterium, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102 (2005) 832­837. [29] S.E. Stachel, E.W. Nester, P.C. Zambryski, A plant cell factor induces Agrobacterium tumefaciens vir gene expression, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 83 (1986) 379­383. [30] R.B. Kumar, A. Das, Polar location and functional domains of the Agrobacterium tumefaciens DNA transfer protein VirD4, Mol. Microbiol. 43 (2002) 1523­1532. [31] P.K. Judd, R.B. Kumar, A. Das, The type IV secretion apparatus protein VirB6 of Agrobacterium tumefaciens localizes to a cell pole, Mol. Microbiol. 55 (2005) 115­124. [32] L. Shapiro, H.H. McAdams, R. Losick, Generating and exploiting polarity in bacteria, Science 298 (2002) 1942­1946. [33] G. Vignon, R. Kohler, E. Larquet, S. Giroux, M.C. Prevost, P. Roux, A.P. Pugsley, Type IV-like pili formed by the type II secreton: specificity, composition, bundling, polar localization, and surface presentation of peptides, J. Bacteriol. 185 (2003) 3416­3428. [34] P.L. Graumann, Cytoskeletal elements in bacteria, Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 61 (2007) 589­618. [35] M.W. Gilmour, T.D. Lawley, M.M. Rooker, P.J. Newnham, D.E. Taylor, Cellular location and temperature-dependent assembly of IncHI1 plasmid R27-encoded TrhC-associated conjugative transfer protein complexes, Mol. Microbiol. 42 (2001) 705­715. [36] T.D. Lawley, G.S. Gordon, A. Wright, D.E. Taylor, Bacterial conjugative transfer: visualization of successful mating pairs and plasmid establishment in live Escherichia coli, Mol. Microbiol. 44 (2002) 947­956. [37] M. Achtman, N. Willetts, A.J. Clark, Beginning a genetic analysis of conjugational transfer determined by the F factor in Escherichia coli by isolation and characterization of transfer-deficient mutants, J. Bacteriol. 106 (1971) 529­538. [38] W.P. Hoekstra, A.M. Havekes, On the role of the recipient cell during conjugation in Escherichia coli, Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 45 (1979) 13­18. [39] C. Manoil, A genetic approach to defining the sites of interaction of a membrane protein with different external agents, J. Mol. Biol. 169 (1983) 507­519. [40] C.R. Harwood, E. Meynell, Cyclic AMP and the production of sex pili by E. coli K-12 carrying derepressed sex factors, Nature 254 (1975) 628­660. [41] J. McEwen, P. Silverman, Chromosomal mutations of Escherichia coli that alter expression of conjugative plasmid functions, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 77 (1980) 513­517. [42] M. Achtman, Mating aggregates in Escherichia coli conjugation, J. Bacteriol. 123 (1975) 505­515. [43] M. Achtman, N. Kennedy, R. Skurray, Cell­cell interactions in conjugating Escherichia coli: role of traT protein in surface exclusion, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 74 (1977) 5104­5108. [44] W. Paranchych, L.S. Frost, The physiology and biochemistry of pili, Adv. Microb. Physiol. 29 (1988) 53­114. [45] N. Willetts, R. Skurray, The conjugation system of F-like plasmids, Annu. Rev. Genet. 14 (1980) 41­76. [46] J.A. Sawitzke, L.C. Thomason, N. Costantino, M. Bubunenko, S. Datta, D.L. Court, Recombineering: in vivo genetic engineering in E. coli, S. enterica, and beyond, Methods Enzymol. 421 (2007) 171­199. [47] L.S. Frost, B.B. Finlay, A. Opgenorth, W. Paranchych, J.S. Lee, Characterization and sequence analysis of pilin from F-like plasmids, J. Bacteriol. 164 (1985) 1238­1247. [48] L.S. Frost, K. Ippen-Ihler, R.A. Skurray, Analysis of the sequence and gene products of the transfer region of the F sex factor, Microbiol. Rev. 58 (1994) 162­210. [49] W. Pansegrau, E. Lanka, P.T. Barth, D.H. Figurski, D.G. Guiney, D. Haas, D.R. Helinski, H. Schwab, V.A. Stanisich, C.M. Thomas, Complete nucleotide sequence of Birmingham IncP alpha plasmids. Compilation and comparative analysis, J. Mol. Biol. 239 (1994) 623­663.

extremely valuable to develop computational means that can predict the function of these systems, and identify likely secretion substrates. Based on our current understanding of several T2/4ss model systems we can already define several "gene modules" that are associated with particular functions (Fig. 1A,B). Thus a challenge for systems biology is to predict the function of a particular T2/4ss and assess its risk. Is the system predicted to increase virulence? Could it transport DNA or protein out of or into a cell? Could it contribute to horizontal gene transfer (HGT)? If so, what is its most likely recipient and could the path of transmission among microbes be predicted and modeled? The aftermath of HGT is evident in the rise of antibiotic resistance in bacteria to form the "resistome" [140]. It is also clear that antibiotic resistance arises in microbes in the natural environment and is then refined and amplified in the clinical setting. Modern sequencing techniques are going to allow us to approach asymptotically the number of possible combinations of genes within secretion systems that could contribute to HGT. Coupled with a linkage map of antibiotic resistance markers and their occurrence in microbes, we should be able to predict which microbes are the most likely candidates to donate DNA and which ones to accept it. Perhaps we will be able to prevent the catastrophic loss of modern antibiotics to the problem of resistance by computational analysis of the chance of a pathogen acquiring resistance to a new drug. Acknowledgements BH acknowledges funding from the Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research; LSF acknowledges funding from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Council of Canada. References
[1] H. Mori, From the sequence to cell modeling: comprehensive functional genomics in Escherichia coli, J. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 37 (2004) 83­92. [2] N.J. Holden, D.L. Gally, Switches, cross-talk and memory in Escherichia coli adherence, J. Med. Microbiol. 53 (2004) 585­593. [3] H.J. Yeo, S.N. Savvides, A.B. Herr, E. Lanka, G. Waksman, Crystal structure of the hexameric traffic ATPase of the Helicobacter pylori type IV secretion system, Mol. Cell 6 (2000) 1461­1472. [4] F.X. Gomis-Ruth, G. Moncalian, R. Perez-Luque, A. Gonzalez, E. Cabezon, F. de la Cruz, M. Coll, The bacterial conjugation protein TrwB resembles ring helicases and F1-ATPase, Nature 409 (2001) 637­641. [5] J. Abendroth, A.E. Rice, K. McLuskey, M. Bagdasarian, W.G. Hol, The crystal structure of the periplasmic domain of the type II secretion system protein EpsM from Vibrio cholerae: the simplest version of the ferredoxin fold, J. Mol. Biol. 338 (2004) 585­596. [6] A. Yamagata, J.A. Tainer, Hexameric structures of the archaeal secretion ATPase GspE and implications for a universal secretion mechanism, Embo J 26 (2007) 878­890. [7] L. Terradot, R. Bayliss, C. Oomen, G.A. Leonard, C. Baron, G. Waksman, Structures of two core subunits of the bacterial type IV secretion system, VirB8 from Brucella suis and ComB10 from Helicobacter pylori, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102 (2005) 4596­4601. [8] K.A. Satyshur, G.A. Worzalla, L.S. Meyer, E.K. Heiniger, K.G. Aukema, A.M. Misic, K.T. Forest, Crystal structures of the pilus retraction motor PilT suggest large domain movements and subunit cooperation drive motility, Structure 15 (2007) 363­376. [9] J. Abendroth, P. Murphy, M. Sandkvist, M. Bagdasarian, W.G. Hol, The X-ray structure of the type II secretion system complex formed by the N-terminal domain of EpsE and the cytoplasmic domain of EpsL of Vibrio cholerae, J. Mol. Biol. 348 (2005) 845­855. [10] T.L. Johnson, J. Abendroth, W.G. Hol, M. Sandkvist, Type II secretion: from structure to function, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 255 (2006) 175­186. [11] R. Bayliss, R. Harris, L. Coutte, A. Monier, R. Fronzes, P.J. Christie, P.C. Driscoll, G. Waksman, NMR structure of a complex between the VirB9/VirB7 interaction domains of the pKM101 type IV secretion system, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104 (2007) 1673­1678. [12] J.C. Ottow, Ecology, physiology, and genetics of fimbriae and pili, Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 29 (1975) 79­108. [13] M.H. Saier Jr., Protein secretion and membrane insertion systems in gramnegative bacteria, J. Membr. Biol. 214 (2006) 75­90. [14] I. Chen, P.J. Christie, D. Dubnau, The ins and outs of DNA transfer in bacteria, Science 310 (2005) 1456­1460. [15] C.R. Peabody, Y.J. Chung, M.R. Yen, D. Vidal-Ingigliardi, A.P. Pugsley, M.H. Saier Jr., Type II protein secretion and its relationship to bacterial type IV pili and archaeal flagella, Microbiology 149 (2003) 3051­3072.

B. Hazes, L. Frost / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1778 (2008) 1839­1850 [50] A. Verma, D.L. Burns, Requirements for assembly of PtlH with the pertussis toxin transporter apparatus of Bordetella pertussis, Infect. Immun. 75 (2007) 2297­2306. [51] G. Schroder, E. Lanka, The mating pair formation system of conjugative plasmidsA versatile secretion machinery for transfer of proteins and DNA, Plasmid 54 (2005) 1­25. [52] I. Hormaeche, R.L. Segura, A.J. Vecino, F.M. Goni, F. de la Cruz, I. Alkorta, The transmembrane domain provides nucleotide binding specificity to the bacterial conjugation protein TrwB, FEBS Lett. 580 (2006) 3075­3082. [53] I. Tato, S. Zunzunegui, F. de la Cruz, E. Cabezon, TrwB, the coupling protein involved in DNA transport during bacterial conjugation, is a DNA-dependent ATPase, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102 (2005) 8156­8161. [54] G. Moncalian, E. Cabezon, I. Alkorta, M. Valle, F. Moro, J.M. Valpuesta, F.M. Goni, F. de La Cruz, Characterization of ATP and DNA binding activities of TrwB, the coupling protein essential in plasmid R388 conjugation, J. Biol. Chem. 274 (1999) 36117­36124. [55] L.M. Iyer, K.S. Makarova, E.V. Koonin, L. Aravind, Comparative genomics of the FtsK-HerA superfamily of pumping ATPases: implications for the origins of chromosome segregation, cell division and viral capsid packaging, Nucleic Acids Res. 32 (2004) 5260­5279. [56] N.A. Thomas, W. Deng, J.L. Puente, E.A. Frey, C.K. Yip, N.C. Strynadka, B.B. Finlay, CesT is a multi-effector chaperone and recruitment factor required for the efficient type III secretion of both LEE- and non-LEE-encoded effectors of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli, Mol. Microbiol. 57 (2005) 1762­1779. [57] R. Middleton, K. Sjolander, N. Krishnamurthy, J. Foley, P. Zambryski, Predicted hexameric structure of the Agrobacterium VirB4 C terminus suggests VirB4 acts as a docking site during type IV secretion, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102 (2005) 1685­1690. [58] P.J. Planet, S.C. Kachlany, R. DeSalle, D.H. Figurski, Phylogeny of genes for secretion NTPases: identification of the widespread tadA subfamily and development of a diagnostic key for gene classification, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 98 (2001) 2503­2508. [59] R.L. Harris, V. Hombs, P.M. Silverman, Evidence that F-plasmid proteins TraV, TraK and TraB assemble into an envelope-spanning structure in Escherichia coli, Mol. Microbiol. 42 (2001) 757­766. [60] E. Cascales, P.J. Christie, Agrobacterium VirB10, an ATP energy sensor required for type IV secretion, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101 (2004) 17228­17233. [61] M.W. Gilmour, J.E. Gunton, T.D. Lawley, D.E. Taylor, Interaction between the IncHI1 plasmid R27 coupling protein and type IV secretion system: TraG associates with the coiled-coil mating pair formation protein TrhB, Mol. Microbiol. 49 (2003) 105­116. [62] M. Llosa, S. Zunzunegui, F. de la Cruz, Conjugative coupling proteins interact with cognate and heterologous VirB10-like proteins while exhibiting specificity for cognate relaxosomes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100 (2003) 10465­10470. [63] D.V. Ward, O. Draper, J.R. Zupan, P.C. Zambryski, Peptide linkage mapping of the Agrobacterium tumefaciens vir-encoded type IV secretion system reveals protein subassemblies, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99 (2002) 11493­11500. [64] R.L. Harris, P.M. Silverman, Tra proteins characteristic of F-like type IV secretion systems constitute an interaction group by yeast two-hybrid analysis, J. Bacteriol. 186 (2004) 5480­5485. [65] T.C. Elton, S.J. Holland, L.S. Frost, B. Hazes, F-like type IV secretion systems encode proteins with thioredoxin folds that are putative DsbC homologues, J. Bacteriol. 187 (2005) 8267­8277. [66] D.A. Marvin, W. Folkhard, Structure of F-pili: reassessment of the symmetry, J. Mol. Biol. 191 (1986) 299­300. [67] M. Tomoeda, M. Inuzuka, T. Date, Bacterial sex pili, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 30 (1975) 23­56. [68] N. Majdalani, D. Moore, S. Maneewannakul, K. Ippen-Ihler, Role of the propilin leader peptide in the maturation of F pilin, J. Bacteriol. 178 (1996) 3748­3754. [69] D. Moore, C.M. Hamilton, K. Maneewannakul, Y. Mintz, L.S. Frost, K. Ippen-Ihler, The Escherichia coli K-12 F plasmid gene traX is required for acetylation of F pilin, J. Bacteriol. 175 (1993) 1375­1383. [70] P.M. Silverman, Towards a structural biology of bacterial conjugation, Mol. Microbiol. 23 (1997) 423­429. [71] K.G. Anthony, W.A. Klimke, J. Manchak, L.S. Frost, Comparison of proteins involved in pilus synthesis and mating pair stabilization from the related plasmids F and R100-1: insights into the mechanism of conjugation, J. Bacteriol. 181 (1999) 5149­5159. [72] J. Manchak, K.G. Anthony, L.S. Frost, Mutational analysis of F-pilin reveals domains for pilus assembly, phage infection and DNA transfer, Mol. Microbiol. 43 (2002) 195­205. [73] E. Cascales, P.J. Christie, Definition of a bacterial type IV secretion pathway for a DNA substrate, Science 304 (2004) 1170­1173. [74] M. Kalkum, R. Eisenbrandt, E. Lanka, Protein circlets as sex pilus subunits, Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 5 (2004) 417­424. [75] S.C. Winans, D.L. Burns, P.J. Christie, Adaptation of a conjugal transfer system for the export of pathogenic macromolecules, Trends Microbiol. 4 (1996) 64­68. [76] D. Dubnau, DNA uptake in bacteria, Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 53 (1999) 217­244. [77] B. Averhoff, A. Friedrich, Type IV pili-related natural transformation systems: DNA transport in mesophilic and thermophilic bacteria, Arch. Microbiol. 180 (2003) 385­393. [78] I. Chen, D. Dubnau, DNA transport during transformation, Front. Biosci. 8 (2003) s544­s556. [79] S.J. Holland, C. Sanz, R.N. Perham, Identification and specificity of pilus adsorption proteins of filamentous bacteriophages infecting Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Virology 345 (2006) 540­548. [80] A. Jacobson, Role of F pili in the penetration of bacteriophage fl, J. Virol. 10 (1972) 835­843.

1849

[81] S. Lory, M.S. Strom, Structure­function relationship of type-IV prepilin peptidase of Pseudomonas aeruginosa--a review, Gene 192 (1997) 117­121. [82] R.A. Alm, J.P. Hallinan, A.A. Watson, J.S. Mattick, Fimbrial biogenesis genes of Pseudomonas aeruginosa: pilW and pilX increase the similarity of type 4 fimbriae to the GSP protein-secretion systems and pilY1 encodes a gonococcal PilC homologue, Mol. Microbiol. 22 (1996) 161­173. [83] H.C. Winther-Larsen, M. Wolfgang, S. Dunham, J.P. van Putten, D. Dorward, C. Lovold, F.E. Aas, M. Koomey, A conserved set of pilin-like molecules controls type IV pilus dynamics and organelle-associated functions in Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Mol. Microbiol. 56 (2005) 903­917. [84] E. Durand, G. Michel, R. Voulhoux, J. Kurner, A. Bernadac, A. Filloux, XcpX controls biogenesis of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa XcpT-containing pseudopilus, J. Biol. Chem. 280 (2005) 31378­31389. [85] N. Sauvonnet, G. Vignon, A.P. Pugsley, P. Gounon, Pilus formation and protein secretion by the same machinery in Escherichia coli, EMBO J. 19 (2000) 2221­2228. [86] N.T. Hu, W.M. Leu, M.S. Lee, A. Chen, S.C. Chen, Y.L. Song, L.Y. Chen, XpsG, the major pseudopilin in Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris, forms a pilus-like structure between cytoplasmic and outer membranes, Biochem. J. 365 (2002) 205­211. [87] E. Durand, A. Bernadac, G. Ball, A. Lazdunski, J.N. Sturgis, A. Filloux, Type II protein secretion in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: the pseudopilus is a multifibrillar and adhesive structure, J. Bacteriol. 185 (2003) 2749­2758. [88] T.J. Kirn, N. Bose, R.K. Taylor, Secretion of a soluble colonization factor by the TCP type 4 pilus biogenesis pathway in Vibrio cholerae, Mol. Microbiol. 49 (2003) 81­92. [89] H.E. Parge, K.T. Forest, M.J. Hickey, D.A. Christensen, E.D. Getzoff, J.A. Tainer, Structure of the fibre-forming protein pilin at 2.6 A resolution, Nature 378 (1995) 32­38. [90] B. Py, L. Loiseau, F. Barras, An inner membrane platform in the type II secretion machinery of gram-negative bacteria, EMBO Rep. 2 (2001) 244­248. [91] C.B. Whitchurch, J.S. Mattick, Characterization of a gene, pilU, required for twitching motility but not phage sensitivity in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Mol. Microbiol. 13 (1994) 1079­1091. [92] M. Wolfgang, J.P. van Putten, S.F. Hayes, D. Dorward, M. Koomey, Components and dynamics of fiber formation define a ubiquitous biogenesis pathway for bacterial pili, EMBO J. 19 (2000) 6408­6418. [93] S. Graupner, N. Weger, M. Sohni, W. Wackernagel, Requirement of novel competence genes pilT and pilU of Pseudomonas stutzeri for natural transformation and suppression of pilT deficiency by a hexahistidine tag on the type IV pilus protein PilAI, J. Bacteriol. 183 (2001) 4694­4701. [94] B. Maier, L. Potter, M. So, C.D. Long, H.S. Seifert, M.P. Sheetz, Single pilus motor forces exceed 100 pN, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99 (2002) 16012­16017. [95] M.A. Robien, B.E. Krumm, M. Sandkvist, W.G. Hol, Crystal structure of the extracellular protein secretion NTPase EpsE of Vibrio cholerae, J. Mol. Biol. 333 (2003) 657­674. [96] D.E. Kainov, R. Tuma, E.J. Mancini, Hexameric molecular motors: P4 packaging ATPase unravels the mechanism, Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 63 (2006) 1095­1105. [97] K. Kinosita Jr., R. Yasuda, H. Noji, S. Ishiwata, M. Yoshida, F1-ATPase: a rotary motor made of a single molecule, Cell 93 (1998) 21­24. [98] A.J. Merz, M. So, M.P. Sheetz, Pilus retraction powers bacterial twitching motility, Nature 407 (2000) 98­102. [99] B. Maier, M. Koomey, M.P. Sheetz, A force-dependent switch reverses type IV pilus retraction, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101 (2004) 10961­10966. [100] B. Maier, Using laser tweezers to measure twitching motility in Neisseria, Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 8 (2005) 344­349. [101] J.M. Skerker, H.C. Berg, Direct observation of extension and retraction of type IV pili, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 98 (2001) 6901­6904. [102] O.M. Possot, G. Vignon, N. Bomchil, F. Ebel, A.P. Pugsley, Multiple interactions between pullulanase secreton components involved in stabilization and cytoplasmic membrane association of PulE, J. Bacteriol. 182 (2000) 2142­2152. [103] V. Robert, A. Filloux, G.P. Michel, Subcomplexes from the Xcp secretion system of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 252 (2005) 43­50. [104] R.T. Tsai, W.M. Leu, L.Y. Chen, N.T. Hu, A reversibly dissociable ternary complex formed by XpsL, XpsM and XpsN of the Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris type II secretion apparatus, Biochem. J. 367 (2002) 865­871. [105] H.M. Lee, J.R. Chen, H.L. Lee, W.M. Leu, L.Y. Chen, N.T. Hu, Functional dissection of the XpsN (GspC) protein of the Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris type II secretion machinery, J. Bacteriol. 186 (2004) 2946­2955. [106] F.H. Login, V.E. Shevchik, The single transmembrane segment drives selfassembly of OutC and the formation of a functional type II secretion system in Erwinia chrysanthemi, J. Biol. Chem. 281 (2006) 33152­33162. [107] J. Arts, A. de Groot, G. Ball, E. Durand, M. El Khattabi, A. Filloux, J. Tommassen, M. Koster, Interaction domains in the Pseudomonas aeruginosa type II secretory apparatus component XcpS (GspF), Microbiology 153 (2007) 1582­1592. [108] T.E. Blank, M.S. Donnenberg, Novel topology of BfpE, a cytoplasmic membrane protein required for type IV fimbrial biogenesis in enteropathogenic Escherichia coli, J. Bacteriol. 183 (2001) 4435­4450. [109] B. Py, L. Loiseau, F. Barras, Assembly of the type II secretion machinery of Erwinia chrysanthemi: direct interaction and associated conformational change between OutE, the putative ATP-binding component and the membrane protein OutL, J. Mol. Biol. 289 (1999) 659­670. [110] V. Douet, L. Loiseau, F. Barras, B. Py, Systematic analysis, by the yeast two-hybrid, of protein interaction between components of the type II secretory machinery of Erwinia chrysanthemi, Res. Microbiol. 155 (2004) 71­75. [111] P. Chiang, M. Habash, L.L. Burrows, Disparate subcellular localization patterns of Pseudomonas aeruginosa Type IV pilus ATPases involved in twitching motility, J. Bacteriol. 187 (2005) 829­839.

1850

B. Hazes, L. Frost / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1778 (2008) 1839­1850 [126] L. Craig, N. Volkmann, A.S. Arvai, M.E. Pique, M. Yeager, E.H. Egelman, J.A. Tainer, Type IV pilus structure by cryo-electron microscopy and crystallography: implications for pilus assembly and functions, Mol. Cell 23 (2006) 651­662. [127] J.K. Hansen, K.T. Forest, Type IV pilin structures: insights on shared architecture, fiber assembly, receptor binding and type II secretion, J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 11 (2006) 192­207. [128] W. Folkhard, D.A. Marvin, T.H. Watts, W. Paranchych, Structure of polar pili from Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains K and O, J. Mol. Biol. 149 (1981) 79­93. [129] B. Hazes, P.A. Sastry, K. Hayakawa, R.J. Read, R.T. Irvin, Crystal structure of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAK pilin suggests a main-chain-dominated mode of receptor binding, J. Mol. Biol. 299 (2000) 1005­1017. [130] K.K. Lee, H.B. Sheth, W.Y. Wong, R. Sherburne, W. Paranchych, R.S. Hodges, C.A. Lingwood, H. Krivan, R.T. Irvin, The binding of Pseudomonas aeruginosa pili to glycosphingolipids is a tip-associated event involving the C-terminal region of the structural pilin subunit, Mol. Microbiol. 11 (1994) 705­713. [131] D.W. Keizer, C.M. Slupsky, M. Kalisiak, A.P. Campbell, M.P. Crump, P.A. Sastry, B. Hazes, R.T. Irvin, B.D. Sykes, Structure of a pilin monomer from Pseudomonas aeruginosa: implications for the assembly of pili, J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 24186­24193. [132] E.J. van Schaik, C.L. Giltner, G.F. Audette, D.W. Keizer, D.L. Bautista, C.M. Slupsky, B.D. Sykes, R.T. Irvin, DNA binding: a novel function of Pseudomonas aeruginosa type IV pili, J. Bacteriol. 187 (2005) 1455­1464. [133] S. Trachtenberg, V.E. Galkin, E.H. Egelman, Refining the structure of the Halobacterium salinarum flagellar filament using the iterative helical real space reconstruction method: insights into polymorphism, J. Mol. Biol. 346 (2005) 665­676. [134] F.A. Samatey, K. Imada, S. Nagashima, F. Vonderviszt, T. Kumasaka, M. Yamamoto, K. Namba, Structure of the bacterial flagellar protofilament and implications for a switch for supercoiling, Nature 410 (2001) 331­337. [135] I. Chen, R. Provvedi, D. Dubnau, A macromolecular complex formed by a pilin-like protein in competent Bacillus subtilis, J. Biol. Chem. 281 (2006) 21720­21727. [136] A. Blocker, K. Komoriya, S. Aizawa, Type III secretion systems and bacterial flagella: insights into their function from structural similarities, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100 (2003) 3027­3030. [137] M.L. Boschiroli, S. Ouahrani-Bettache, V. Foulongne, S. Michaux-Charachon, G. Bourg, A. Allardet-Servent, C. Cazevieille, J.P. Liautard, M. Ramuz, D. O'Callaghan, The Brucella suis virB operon is induced intracellularly in macrophages, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99 (2002) 1544­1549. [138] C.B. Whitchurch, A.J. Leech, M.D. Young, D. Kennedy, J.L. Sargent, J.J. Bertrand, A.B. Semmler, A.S. Mellick, P.R. Martin, R.A. Alm, M. Hobbs, S.A. Beatson, B. Huang, L. Nguyen, J.C. Commolli, J.N. Engel, A. Darzins, J.S. Mattick, Characterization of a complex chemosensory signal transduction system which controls twitching motility in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Mol. Microbiol. 52 (2004) 873­893. [139] W.P. Black, Q. Xu, Z. Yang, Type IV pili function upstream of the Dif chemotaxis pathway in Myxococcus xanthus EPS regulation, Mol. Microbiol. 61 (2006) 447­456. [140] G.D. Wright, The antibiotic resistome: the nexus of chemical and genetic diversity, Nat. Rev., Microbiol. 5 (2007) 175­186.

[112] M.S. Lee, L.Y. Chen, W.M. Leu, R.J. Shiau, N.T. Hu, Associations of the major pseudopilin XpsG with XpsN (GspC) and secretin XpsD of Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris type II secretion apparatus revealed by cross-linking analysis, J. Biol. Chem. 280 (2005) 4585­4591. [113] J. Bouley, G. Condemine, V.E. Shevchik, The PDZ domain of OutC and the N-terminal region of OutD determine the secretion specificity of the type II out pathway of Erwinia chrysanthemi, J. Mol. Biol. 308 (2001) 205­219. [114] S. Bleves, M. Gerard-Vincent, A. Lazdunski, A. Filloux, Structure­function analysis of XcpP, a component involved in general secretory pathway-dependent protein secretion in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, J. Bacteriol. 181 (1999) 4012­4019. [115] K.V. Korotkov, B. Krumm, M. Bagdasarian, W.G. Hol, Structural and functional studies of EpsC, a crucial component of the type 2 secretion system from Vibrio cholerae, J. Mol. Biol. 363 (2006) 311­321. [116] M. Lindeberg, G.P. Salmond, A. Collmer, Complementation of deletion mutations in a cloned functional cluster of Erwinia chrysanthemi out genes with Erwinia carotovora out homologues reveals OutC and OutD as candidate gatekeepers of species-specific secretion of proteins via the type II pathway, Mol. Microbiol. 20 (1996) 175­190. [117] A. de Groot, M. Koster, M. Gerard-Vincent, G. Gerritse, A. Lazdunski, J. Tommassen, A. Filloux, Exchange of Xcp (Gsp) secretion machineries between Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Pseudomonas alcaligenes: species specificity unrelated to substrate recognition, J. Bacteriol. 183 (2001) 959­967. [118] B. Huang, K. Ru, Z. Yuan, C.B. Whitchurch, J.S. Mattick, tonB3 is required for normal twitching motility and extracellular assembly of type IV pili, J. Bacteriol. 186 (2004) 4387­4389. [119] W. Bitter, M. Koster, M. Latijnhouwers, H. de Cock, J. Tommassen, Formation of oligomeric rings by XcpQ and PilQ, which are involved in protein transport across the outer membrane of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Mol. Microbiol. 27 (1998) 209­219. [120] I. Guilvout, M. Chami, A. Engel, A.P. Pugsley, N. Bayan, Bacterial outer membrane secretin PulD assembles and inserts into the inner membrane in the absence of its pilotin, EMBO J. 25 (2006) 5241­5249. [121] V.E. Shevchik, G. Condemine, Functional characterization of the Erwinia chrysanthemi OutS protein, an element of a type II secretion system, Microbiology 144 (Pt 11) (1998) 3219­3228. [122] R.F. Collins, S.A. Frye, S. Balasingham, R.C. Ford, T. Tonjum, J.P. Derrick, Interaction with type IV pili induces structural changes in the bacterial outer membrane secretin PilQ, J. Biol. Chem. 280 (2005) 18923­18930. [123] R. Kohler, K. Schafer, S. Muller, G. Vignon, K. Diederichs, A. Philippsen, P. Ringler, A.P. Pugsley, A. Engel, W. Welte, Structure and assembly of the pseudopilin PulG, Mol. Microbiol. 54 (2004) 647­664. [124] L. Craig, R.K. Taylor, M.E. Pique, B.D. Adair, A.S. Arvai, M. Singh, S.J. Lloyd, D.S. Shin, E.D. Getzoff, M. Yeager, K.T. Forest, J.A. Tainer, Type IV pilin structure and assembly: X-ray and EM analyses of Vibrio cholerae toxin-coregulated pilus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAK pilin, Mol. Cell 11 (2003) 1139­1150. [125] L. Craig, M.E. Pique, J.A. Tainer, Type IV pilus structure and bacterial pathogenicity, Nat. Rev., Microbiol. 2 (2004) 363­378.

