doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2003.08.023

J. Mol. Biol. (2003) 333, 425­441

Identification of a Residue Critical for Maintaining the Functional Conformation of BPTI
W. Miachel Hanson1, Scott A. Beeser1, Terrence G. Oas2 and David P. Goldenberg1*
1 Department of Biology University of Utah, 257 South 1400 East, Salt Lake City, UT 84112-0840, USA

Department of Biochemistry Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710 USA

2

The effects of amino acid replacements on the backbone dynamics of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) were examined using 15N NMR relaxation experiments. Previous studies have shown that backbone amide groups within the trypsin-binding region of the wild-type protein undergo conformational exchange processes on the ms time scale, and that replacement of Tyr35 with Gly greatly increases the number of backbone atoms involved in such motions. In order to determine whether these mutational effects are specific to the replacement of this residue with Gly, six additional replacements were examined in the present study. In two of these, Tyr35 was replaced with either Ala or Leu, and the other four were single replacements of Tyr23, Phe33, Asn43 or Asn44, all of which are highly buried in the native structure and conserved in homologous proteins. The Y35A and Y35L mutants displayed dynamic properties very similar to those of the Y35G mutant, with the backbone segments including residues 10­19 and 32­44 undergoing motions revealed by enhanced 15N transverse relaxation rates. On the other hand, the Y23L, N43G and N44A substitutions caused almost no detectable changes in backbone dynamics, on either the ns­ps or ms­ms time scales, even though each of these replacements significantly destabilizes the native conformation. Replacement of Phe33 with Leu caused intermediate effects, with several residues that have previously been implicated in motions in the wild-type protein displaying enhanced transverse relaxation rates. These results demonstrate that destabilizing amino acid replacements can be accommodated in a native protein with dramatically different effects on conformational dynamics and that Tyr35 plays a particularly important role in defining the conformation of the trypsin-binding site of BPTI.
q 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

*Corresponding author

Keywords: protease inhibitor; backbone dynamics; NMR relaxation; spectral density functions; Lipari-Szabo mapping

Introduction
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found at doi: 10.1016/S0022-2836(03)01054-4 Present address: S. A. Beeser, Smart & Biggar, 438 University Avenue, Suite 1500, Box 111, Toronto, Canada M5G 2K8. Abbreviations used: BPTI, bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor, amino acid replacements are indicated by the wild-type residue type (using the one letter code for the 20 standard amino acid residues), followed by the residue number and the mutant residue type; NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance; NOE, nuclear Overhauser effect; NOESY, nuclear Overhauser effect spectroscopy; TOCSY, total coherence spectroscopy; HSQC, heteronuclear single quantum coherence. E-mail address of the corresponding author: goldenberg@biology.utah.edu

The "standard mechanism" protein inhibitors of serine proteases offer an intriguing and long standing problem in structural biology.1 ­ 4 Comprising at least 18 convergently evolved families, these inhibitors interact with their target proteases via an exposed binding loop that has a similar backbone conformation in each of the inhibitors, even though the other regions of the proteins display great architectural diversity. Numerous atomic resolution structures and thermodynamic analyses reveal that the binding loops are exquisitely tailored for very tight binding to the active site of the cognate proteases. Though the proteases bind inhibitors more tightly than most substrates (with

0022-2836/$ - see front matter q 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

426

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

dissociation constants in the range of 10213 ­ 1027 M), and the catalytic serine is well positioned for nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl carbon of the inhibitor's scissile bond, hydrolysis is extremely slow. The mechanism by which these proteins evade hydrolysis and the structural features that convey inhibitory function remain poorly understood, though several hypotheses have been proposed.5 ­ 8 It is widely believed that the rigidity of the binding loop is one the important determinants of inhibitor function, since chemical or genetic modifications that lead to increased flexibility in the free inhibitor are often associated with increased hydrolysis rates.6,9 ­ 13 This rigidity is presumably maintained by the network of intramolecular interactions between the atoms of the binding loop and the atoms within the protein core. Along with the overall architecture of the cores themselves, the intramolecular interactions that serve to anchor the binding loops to their respective cores differ among the families of inhibitors. Bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) is the most thoroughly characterized member of one prominent family of inhibitors, the PTI-Kunitz family.14 Figure 1 shows a ribbon diagram representation of the structure of BPTI bound to trypsin. The native structure of the inhibitor is stabilized by three disulfide bonds, and its structural core includes an a-helix packed against a three-stranded b-sheet. Two loop segments, connected by a disulfide bond between Cys residues 14 and 38, comprise the trypsin-binding site, with the outer loop containing the reactive peptide

Figure 1. Structure of wild-type BPTI bound to bovine trypsin. The backbone representations of the inhibitor and enzyme are colored gray and blue, respectively. The sites of the amino acid replacements characterized in this study are shown as ball-and-stick representations, as are the disulfide-bonded Cys residues of BPTI. The ribbon representation was drawn from the atomic coordinates of the crystal structure determined by Huber et al.15 (entry 2PTC in the Protein Data Bank) using the program MOLSCRIPT.56

bond located between residues Lys15 and Ala16. Comparisons of the structures of the inhibitor and enzyme in the complex with those of the free molecules indicate that there is little or no structural change upon binding.15,16 The high degree of complementarity between the two free molecules almost certainly contributes to the very high stability of the complex, which has a dissociation constant of approximately 10213 M.17,18 Among the large number of known standard mechanism inhibitors, BPTI is hydrolyzed the most slowly, with a turnover rate of approximately 1029 s21 (0.03 yr21).19 In previous papers, we have described a BPTI mutant, with Tyr35 replaced with Gly, that displays particularly dramatic changes in stability, dynamics and functional properties. This substitution destabilizes the native protein by approximately 5 kcal/mol (1 cal ¼ 4.184 J) , with nearly all of this effect expressed in the final step of the disulfide-coupled folding pathway, the formation of the 14-38 disulfide in the otherwise native protein.20 15N NMR relaxation studies of the Y35G variant reveal that the loops making up the trypsin-binding region undergo relatively slow intramolecular motions, with time constants of approximately 5­ 20 ms.21 The two polypeptide segments that undergo motions in solution represent approximately one-third of the molecule, and the same segments were found to have an altered, but well defined, conformation in a crystal structure of the mutant protein.22 The substitution increases the dissociation constant for the BPTI ­ trypsin complex by approximately 250-fold, very likely because of an increased entropic penalty for binding. The native mutant protein is an effective protease inhibitor, but reducing the 14-38 disulfide renders it susceptible to rapid hydrolysis by trypsin, with a turnover time of less than a minute.12,20 Reducing the disulfide in the Y35G protein also appears to result in motions with a wider range of frequencies than observed in the native protein, suggesting that motions of the backbone atoms are more independent in the absence of the disulfide.12 In order to determine whether the dramatic changes in backbone dynamics caused by the Y35G replacement are unique, we have now extended the 15N relaxation studies to six additional mutant proteins. The substitutions are located at five positions distributed throughout the protein, and all were previously shown to destabilize the native structure, by 3 ­8 kcal/mol. We have also examined the effects on backbone dynamics caused by a change in solution conditions by carrying out relaxation experiments on the wild-type protein at pH 2, where the native conformation is 2.4 kcal/mol less stable than under the conditions used for the other experiments (pH 4.7).23 Collectively, the results of these studies indicate that Tyr35 plays a distinctively important role in defining the functional conformation of the trypsin-binding region.

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

427

Results
The six variants studied here each contained a single amino acid replacement at one of five sites, all of which are buried in the native structure of the wild-type protein. As illustrated in Figure 1, these residues are located throughout the central core of the native protein and form an extensive network of interactions. Located near the end of the first b-strand, the side-chain of Tyr23 participates in the packing of the C-terminal a-helix against the central b-sheet. The side-chain of Asn43, in turn, forms two hydrogen bonds with the backbone atoms of Tyr23, as well as a hydrogen bond with the carbonyl oxygen of Glu7. The sidechain of the residue that follows Asn43 in the sequence, Asn44, forms a p-hydrogen bond interaction with the side-chain of Tyr35. The side-chains of both Asn44 and Tyr35 also interact with that of Phe33. Previous studies have shown that replacements of each of these residues cause substantial destabilization of the native protein, as well as differing effects on the protein's disulfide-coupled folding pathway.24 ­ 26 In addition to the two replacements of Tyr35 described here (Y35L and Y35A), the earlier results for the Y35G variant are reproduced for comparison. As a complementary method of perturbing the stability of the native protein, we also examined the dynamics of the wild-type protein at pH 2. The N and C termini of the polypeptide form a salt bridge in the folded conformation, an interaction that is disrupted upon lowering the pH from approximately 4.7 to 2.27 Titration of the four other carboxyl groups in the protein, the sidechains of Asp3, Glu7, Glu49 and Asp50, may also destabilize the native protein. Effects of core substitutions on native BPTI chemical shifts
1 H and 15N resonance frequency assignments were made using the standard sequential assignment strategy aided by 3D-TOCSY experiments. Assignments were obtained for all backbone amides except those of residues 41 and 42 in the Y35A protein and residues 14 and 35 ­ 44 in the Y35L variant. For the Y35L mutant, resonances corresponding to likely spin systems for residues Gly36, Gly37 and Cys38 were identified but could not be unambiguously assigned due to the lack of NOE signals. Signals from the other residues in this region were apparently broadened beyond detection. Figure 2 shows the chemical shifts of the BPTI variants and the wild-type protein at pH 2 plotted as the absolute values of the differences from those of the wild-type protein at pH 4.7. In each plot, the site of the altered residue is indicated by an asterisk. The 1H and 15N chemical shift differences observed in the Y23L, F33L, and N44A proteins were less than 1 ppm and 5 ppm, respect-

ively. The N43G replacement caused slightly larger effects, but only at the site of the altered residue. A crystal structure of this variant reveals only small atomic rearrangements immediately surrounding the cavity created by the missing side-chain.28 The chemical shifts for the wild-type protein were only slightly altered by lowering the solution pH from 4.7 to 2. In contrast to the small effects described above, the Tyr35 substitutions resulted in large and widespread chemical shift differences. The Y35G and Y35A replacements both caused major changes in the chain segments including residues 10­ 20 and and 34 ­44. As noted above, many of the expected resonances from these segments of the Y35L protein could not be detected, most likely because of extreme exchange broadening. Thus, each of the Tyr35 substitutions caused perturbations in virtually the same portion of the polypeptide backbone, a region that includes the trypsin-binding loops. Although some of these changes in chemical shifts may be due to the loss of ring-current effects upon removing the Tyr35 side-chain, it is striking that the Tyr35 replacements caused much larger changes than the replacements of Tyr23 or Phe33. The N-terminal segment, central b-sheet and C-terminal a-helix regions of these proteins showed only small chemical shift differences, indicating that the overall fold of the chain remained intact, consistent with the crystal structure of the Y35G variant.22 Effects of substitutions on relaxation parameters
15

N

To characterize the backbone dynamics of the BPTI variants, longitudinal (R1) and transverse (R2) relaxation rates and the steady-state 1H ­ 15N NOE were measured using the pulse sequences of Farrow et al.29 The values obtained for the wildtype protein at pH 4.7 are plotted versus residue number in the top panels of Figures 3 and 4. As described previously, the values for R1 and the NOE were quite uniform across the amino acid sequence, with only the C-terminal two residues displaying reduced values for these parameters, as expected for disordered segments in a protein of this size. The R2 values for the wild-type protein displayed a similar pattern, except for the amides of residues 14, 15, and 39, which had markedly higher transverse relaxation rates. These elevated R2 values have been observed previously and shown to be the result of slow conformational exchange on the ms ­ms time scale.21,30 ­ 34 The relaxation parameters for the BPTI variants and the wild-type protein at pH 2 are plotted in the lower panels of Figures 3 and 4, where they are shown as differences from the corresponding values for the wild-type protein. The R1 and NOE values were generally quite insensitive to either the amino acid replacements or the lowered pH (Figure 3). The experimental uncertainty in R1 is estimated to be about 5%, and the differences

428

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

Figure 2. 1H and 15N chemical shift differences caused by destabilizing amino acid replacements and lowered pH in native BPTI. The bars represent the absolute values of the differences between the chemical shift for the indicated amide group in the wild-type and mutant proteins or, for the topmost panels, the difference between the chemical shift for wild-type BPTI at pH 4.7 and pH 2. The asterisks mark the locations of the replacement sites. Gaps in the plots correspond to either Pro residues or, for the Y35A and Y35L variants, sites for which resonances could not be positively identified.

observed among the values for the different proteins were nearly all within this range. The NOE values for each of the variants, as well as for the wild-type protein at pH 2, were systematically about 10% lower than observed for the wild-type protein at pH 4.7. Of the three relaxation parameters, the heteronuclear NOE is generally the least precisely determined, and the uniformly high values of the wild-type protein suggest experimen-

tal error in the data for this protein, rather than a global dynamic effect in all of the variants. A few sites in the Y35G, Y35A, and N43G proteins did show decreases in R1 and the NOE, suggestive of increased motions on the ns­ ps time scale. In contrast to the small effects on R1 and the NOE, Figure 4 shows that the R2 values were quite sensitive to substitutions in a manner dependent upon the location of the replacement. As observed

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

429

Figure 3. 15N longitudinal relaxation rates (R1) and 1H ­ 15N nuclear Overhauser effects for wild-type BPTI and variants. Values for the wild-type protein at pH 4 and 25 8C are plotted in the upper panels. The bars in the lower panels represent the differences between the values measured for the indicated variant (or wild-type protein at pH 2) and that measured for wild-type BPTI at pH 4.7. DR1 ¼ Rmutant 2 Rwt and DNOE ¼ NOEmutant 2 NOEwt : Asterisks 1 1 mark the replacement sites.

previously with the Y35G mutant, replacement of Tyr35 with Ala led to increased R2 values for residues representing approximately one-third of the backbone. For the Y35L variant, rates for residues 35­ 44 could not be obtained, but those for the residues adjacent to this segment showed the same pattern of elevated R2 values, as did the amide groups in the segment made up of residues 10­ 19. Of the substitutions at sites other than Tyr35, only the F33L replacement increased the number of residues with enhanced R2 values. Similarly, the pattern of R2 values was unaffected by a change in pH. Even for the F33L replacement, the number of residues affected was much smaller than caused by removal of the Tyr35 ring. Like the Tyr35 mutants, however, the affected residues lie within

the two loop segments that form the trypsin-binding site. Analysis of mutational effects on backbone dynamics by spectral density mapping and Lipari-Szabo order parameters Studies of protein dynamics by 15N relaxation have generally utilized one of two approaches for analyzing and interpreting the experimental relaxation parameters, spectral density mapping35 ­ 37 and the Lipari-Szabo "model-free" analysis.38,39 Both approaches are based on analysis of the spectral density function, which describes the frequency spectrum of motions of the 15N ­ 1H bond. For an internally rigid molecule, these motions are determined only by the overall tumbling of

430

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

Figure 4. 15N transverse relaxation rates (R2) for wildtype BPTI and variants. Values for the wild-type protein at pH 4.7 and 25 8C are plotted in the upper panel. The bars in the lower panels represent the differences between the values measured for the indicated variant (or wild-type protein at pH 2) and that measured for wild-type BPTI at pH 4.7. DR2 ¼ Rmutant 2 Rwt : Asterisks 2 1 mark the replacement sites.

density function. In the spectral density mapping procedure, the experimental relaxation parameters are used to estimate directly the values of JðvÞ at selected frequencies. The frequencies for which JðvÞ can be determined depend on the nature of the relaxation processes measured and the Larmor frequencies of the 15N and 1H nuclei. Generally, each additional relaxation measurement allows JðvÞ to be determined at one more frequency. The model-free approach, on the other hand, assumes a relatively simple functional form for JðvÞ; and the experimental data are used to estimate the parameters that define this function, which can then be evaluated at any frequency. For our comparative study of the dynamics of BPTI variants, we have adopted a combination of these two approaches, inspired by a recent analysis by Andrec et al.40 and outlined in the following paragraphs. Using the three standard relaxation parameters, R1, R2 and the heteronuclear NOE, the spectral density function can be evaluated directly for three values of v: 0 Hz, the 15N Larmor frequency and 0.87 times the 1H frequency. These values are designated here as J0, JN and J0.87H. The value of J0 represents the integral of the autocorrelation function over all time values and thus reflects motions of all frequencies. Experimentally, J0.87H and JN are determined by measurements of R1 and the heteronuclear NOE, while the value of J0 is determined by these measurements and, additionally, R2. As a consequence, slower exchange processes that contribute specifically to R2 cause large apparent values of J0. For a molecule the size of BPTI, fast internal motions are detectable as decreased values of both J0 and JN. A major limitation of the spectral density mapping procedure is that the values of JðvÞ have a rather abstract meaning and are not directly interpretable in terms of the molecular motions that give rise to relaxation. This difficulty is addressed by the Lipari-Szabo model-free treatment, which assumes that the spectral density function can be described as a sum of two Lorentzian terms, corresponding to overall tumbling and internal motions:   2 S2 tm ð1 2 S2 Þt þ ð2Þ JðvÞ ¼ 5 1 þ v2 t2 1 þ v2 t2 m In this expression, S 2 is an order parameter reflecting the spatial constraints placed on fast internal motions of the N ­ H bond vector, and t ¼ 1=ðt21 þ e t21 Þ; where te is the correlation time for the m internal motions. Typically, an iterative fitting procedure is used to estimate a global value for tm and individual values of S2 and te for each N ­ H bond vector. Because R1 and the NOE are determined only by the molecular tumbling rate and the faster motions, their values can usually be accounted for by adjusting the three Lipari-Szabo parameters. Often in fact, the data can be accounted for by adjusting only S 2 and assuming that te is zero, i.e. much smaller than tm. In the Lipari-Szabo treatment, the exchange

the molecule, and the spectral density is described by a Lorentzian function of the form: JðvÞ ¼ 2tm 5ð1 þ v2 t2 Þ m ð1Þ

where tm is the correlation time for tumbling and v is the frequency of interest. Internal motions faster than tumbling result in a more complex spectral

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

431

contribution to R2 is not accounted for explicitly, but instead emerges as a residual, designated Rex, that represents the component of R2 that cannot be accounted for by overall tumbling and fast internal motions given the constraints imposed on tm, S 2 and te by the other experimental parameters. Because the number of adjustable parameters can exceed the number of observables, the fitting procedure is usually carried out in an iterative fashion, with non-zero values of te and Rex introduced as necessary for individual nuclei for which the observed relaxation parameters cannot otherwise be accounted. Although statistical criteria can be used to identify the nuclei for which Rex is introduced, the decision as to whether a slightly larger than average R2 value is due to exchange is inevitably arbitrary. This determination, in turn, influences the values of the other parameters for the affected nuclei, especially S 2. We have found that this is a particular difficulty in our studies, where we are comparing protein variants in which a large number of nuclei are influenced by exchange processes. Andrec et al. have recently discussed in detail the relationship between the spectral density mapping and model-free analyses and have introduced a simple graphical method to aid in the interpretation of relaxation data.40 The analysis suggested by these authors is based on the comparison of experimentally determined values of J0.87H and JN with those calculated for a rigidly tumbling molecule. Figure 5(a) shows the general form of a "Lipari-Szabo map", in which the continuous curve represents values of J0.87H plotted versus JN for different values of tm, as calculated from equation (1) or, equivalently, from equation (2) assuming S2 ¼ 1: If an N ­ H bond vector undergoes internal motions that are faster than overall tumbling, i.e. S2 , 1; then the J0.87H ­ JN point will be shifted away from the point on the rigid-tumbling curve corresponding to tm. In the extreme case where S2 ¼ 0; the values of J0.87H and JN will lie on another point on the curve, where the effective tumbling time is t ¼ 1=ðt21 þ t21 Þ: For intermediate values e m of S 2, and a given value of te ; the J0.87H ­ JN point will lie along the line between the two points on the curve corresponding to tm and t. The relative position of the point along this line is proportional to S 2. In Figure 5(a), the continuous lines are drawn to represent cases where tm ¼ 3 ns, and t equals either 0 ns (lower line) or 0.1 ns (upper line). Provided that t is less than 0.1 ns, the J0.87H ­JN points will lie within the triangle defined by the two lines and the leftmost portion of the rigid-tumbling curve. The nearly vertical broken lines in the Figure correspond to J0.87H ­ JN values when t , 0:1 ns and S 2 equals 0.25, 0.5 or 0.75, as indicated. For points lying within this region of the graph, S 2 is highly correlated with JN, as discussed further below. The J0.87H and JN values for wild-type BPTI at pH 4.7 are plotted in Figure 5(b), along with the rigid-

tumbling curve. As can be seen in the graph, all but two of the points (those for Gly57 and Ala58) are clustered together and lie close to a line that could be drawn between the origin and a point on the rigid-tumbling curve corresponding to a value of tm between 3 ns and 5 ns, consistent with our previous model-free analysis that indicated tm ¼ 3:5 ns.21 To estimate tm independently of the model-free analysis, the relationship: rffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi 1 6R2 27 ð3Þ tm ¼ vN R1 was used, where vN is the 15N Larmor frequency.41 This relationship is valid only when te , 0:1 ns, S2 . 0:5 and there is no exchange contribution to R2. The values of J0 were used to identify those amide groups for which these criteria were satisfied, as follows. For cases where te is close to 0 and there is no exchange contribution, equation (2) can be approximated to evaluate J0 as: J0 ¼ 2 2 S tm 5 ð4Þ

Assuming that the value of tm is less than 4 ns, the value of J0 should not exceed 1.6 ns. Conversely, if tm is greater than 3 ns, and S 2 is greater than 0.5, J0 should be greater than 0.6 ns. Accordingly, only those amide groups for which J0 was between 0.6 ns and 1.6 ns were used to estimate tm according to equation (3), resulting in an average value of 3.44 ns for the wild-type protein, very similar to that obtained from the model-free analysis. If the tumbling motion of a macromolecule is not isotropic, the effective correlation times for different bond vectors may depend on the orientation of these vectors with respect to the axes of rotational diffusion, so that it is not appropriate to assume a single value of tm for all of the amide groups. To test the possible influence of motional anisotropy on 15N relaxation in wild-type BPTI, we used the programs TENSOR242 and Quadric Diffusion,43 both of which use the structure of a native protein to calculate the potential contribution of this effect to the experimental relaxation data. The analysis by both programs indicated that the experimental data could be as well fit by an isotropic tumbling model as by a more complicated motional model. All of the subsequent analysis was therefore based on a single value of tm for each protein. The two broken lines in Figure 5(b) are drawn between the point on the rigid-tumbling curve corresponding to 3.44 ns and those corresponding to t ¼ 0 ns (lower line) and t ¼ 0:1 ns (upper line). As shown, all of the points lie well within the triangular area bordered by these lines, and most lie close to the t ¼ 0 line. The Lipari-Szabo map thereby illustrates the important features of the fast internal dynamics of wild-type BPTI: nearly all of the amide groups are highly constrained, with S 2 values greater than about 0.75, and the

432

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

Figure 5. Representative LipariSzabo maps for the analysis of BPTI backbone dynamics, as described by Andrec et al.40 (a) The general form of a Lipari-Szabo map, in which the spectral density evaluated at 0.87 times the 1H Larmor frequency (designated J0.87H) is plotted versus J evaluated at the 15N Larmor frequency, JN. The continuous curve represents values of J0.87H and JN expected for rigidly tumbling molecules with different correlation times for tumbling, tm, as indicated by the open circles for specific values ranging from 0.02 ns to 10 ns. Internal motions with rates faster than that of overall tumbling give rise to JN, J0.87H points that lie on the interior of the triangular space defined by the rigid-tumbling curve. The two continuous line segments represent possible JN, J0.87H points for a molecule for which tm ¼ 3 ns and the Lipari-Szabo parameter t ¼ 1=ðt21 þ t21 Þ is either 0 ns (lower e m curve) or 0.1 ns (upper curve). The relative position along these lines is determined by the value of the Lipari-Szabo order parameter, S 2, and the nearly vertical broken line segments indicate the expected values of J0.87H and JN for S 2 ¼ 0.25, 0.5 and 0.75 for values of t between 0 ns and 0.1 ns. (b) Experimental Lipari-Szabo map for wild-type BPTI at pH 4.7. The filled circles represent the values of J0.87H and JN for individual amide 15N nuclei calculated from the experimental R1 and 1 H­ 15N NOE data, using equations (9) and (10) in the text. The broken lines represent expected JN, J0.87H points for tm ¼ 3.44 ns and t ¼ 0 or 0.1 ns. (c) Experimental Lipari-Szabo map for the F33L variant, as described for (b), but with tm ¼ 3.39 ns. (d) Experimental map for the Y35A variant, with tm ¼ 3.87 ns.

correlation times for all but two are considerably less than 0.1 ns. Representative Lipari-Szabo maps for the F33L and Y35A mutant proteins are shown in Figure 5(c) and (d), respectively. As described above for the wild-type protein, the value of tm for each protein was estimated from equation (3), using only the data for amide groups for which J0 lay between 0.6 ns and 1.6 ns. For all of the mutant proteins examined, as well the wild-type protein at pH 2, the estimates lay between 3.2 ns and 3.9 ns, with an average of 3.45 ns. The broken t ¼ 0 ns and t ¼ 0:1 ns lines in Figure 5(c) and (d) are drawn to pass through the tm point for the indicated proteins. As observed for the wild-type protein, the JN ­ J0.87H points corresponding to Gly57 and Ala58 for the mutants were located at positions corresponding to relatively low S 2 values and te values of about 0.07 ns. For some of the mutants, such as the Y35A variant (Figure 5(d)), there were additional residues with JN ­ J0.87H points indicative of lower S 2 and slightly higher te values. These included residues 11 and 14 in the Y35A variant, and residues 11, 14, and 16­ 18 in the Y35G variant. Otherwise, however, the Lipari-Szabo maps were very similar to that for the wild-type protein.

To compare the fast internal dynamics of the various proteins on a residue-by-residue basis, S 2 values were derived from the spectral density function. As illustrated in Figure 5(a), S 2 is closely correlated with JN, provided that tm is about 3 ns, and t is less than about 0.1 ns, conditions that appear to be satisfied for the amide groups in all of the BPTI variants we have examined. Under these conditions, equation (2) can be approximated as: JðvÞ ¼ 2S2 tm 5ð1 þ v2 t2 Þ m ð5Þ

and S 2 can be calculated directly from JN according to: S2 ¼ 5JN ð1 þ v2 t2 Þ N m 2tm ð6Þ

In contrast to the conventional model-free fitting procedure, this method for estimating S 2 utilizes only the R1 and NOE data and is not influenced by exchange contributions to R2. On the other hand, its validity depends on a small value of t, and as this parameter increases, there is a tendency to overestimate S 2. In principle, this error can be minimized by also incorporating the value of J0.87H

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

433

in the calculation of S 2. This requires an iterative fitting procedure, however, and, in the present case, the resulting values of S 2 are affected by only a few percent using the approximation in equation (6). The values of S 2 calculated in this way are plotted in Figure 6. In each panel, the gray continuous line connects the S 2 values for the wild-type protein at pH 4.7. In the upper left panel, the filled circles represent the values for the wild-type protein at pH 2. As indicated, there are no significant differences in the order parameters determined under the two different conditions, even though the conformational stability of the native protein is about 2.4 kcal/mol lower at pH 2.23 Similarly, the S 2 values for the seven mutants examined were very similar to those for the wild-type protein. The major exceptions were the Y35G and Y35A mutants, for which some amide groups in the segment including residues 10 ­20 displayed somewhat lower order parameters. In addition, the amide groups of residues 41 and 43 of the Y35A variant displayed slightly elevated order par-

ameters. Overall, however, the order parameters for the various mutants are remarkably similar to those of the wild-type protein, in both their average values and the detailed patterns they display along the sequence. In the spectral density mapping approach, information about slower internal motions that contribute to R2 is conveyed by an increased apparent value of J0. By its formal definition, the spectral density function does not reflect motions that are slower than molecular tumbling, and the effects of conformational exchange on J0 calculated from the experimental relaxation parameters are, in a sense, an artifact.44 For convenience, however, we use J0 to refer to the apparent value of this parameter. The observed values of J0 for the wild-type and mutant proteins are plotted in Figure 7, with the gray lines representing the values for the wild-type protein at pH 4.7. As observed previously,21,30 ­ 34 there is clear evidence for conformational exchange in the wild-type protein, but these motions appear to be restricted to Cys residues 14 and 38 and their immediate neighbors.

Figure 6. Lipari-Szabo order parameters, S 2, for the amide groups of BPTI variants, calculated from the values of JN according to equation (6) of the text. In each panel, the gray line represents the values determined for the wild-type protein at pH 4.7 and the filled symbols represent the values for the indicated variant. In the panel labeled "wildtype", the symbols represent the values determined at pH 2.

434

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

Figure 7. The spectral density function evaluated at zero frequency, J0, for the amide groups of BPTI variants, calculated from the experimental R1, R2, and NOE data according to equations (9)­ (11) in the text. In each panel, the gray line represents the values determined for the wild-type protein at pH 4.7 and the filled symbols represent the values for the indicated variant. In the panel labeled "wildtype", the symbols represent the values determined at pH 2.

The value of J0 is also sensitive to faster internal motions, which, for a molecule the size of BPTI, lead to smaller values of this parameter, as seen for the C-terminal two residues of all of the variants. In contrast to the very small effects of the mutations on parameters reflecting the fast internal motions, some of the replacements caused dramatic increases in J0. To more clearly visualize the contributions of conformational exchange to J0, we estimated the values of this parameter that would be expected to arise from the fast internal motions reflected in JN, assuming that these motions are well described by the approximate form of the Lipari-Szabo spectral density function given in equation (5). By combining the expressions for J0 and JN based on this approximation, the expected value of J0 in the absence of conformational exchange is given as:
LS J0 ¼ JN ð1 þ v2 t2 Þ N m

ð7Þ

and the exchange contribution to J0 can be calculated as:
ex J0 ¼ J0 2 JN ð1 þ v2 t2 Þ N m

ð8Þ

The values of Jex calculated in this way for the 0 wild-type and mutant proteins at pH 4.7 are plotted in Figure 8. Excluding the data for residues 14, 15 and 38 ­40, which have previously been

identified as displaying conformational exchange, the average value of Jex for the wild-type protein 0 was very close to zero, 2 0.0032(^ 0.088) ns, approximately 3% of the average value of J0 for these residues (1.1 ns). These results indicate that the observed values of the three experimental relaxation parameters, R1, R2 and the NOE, are, in fact, consistent with the fast internal motions being characterized by the simplified spectral density function of equation (5). For the residues of the wild-type protein not displaying obvious exchange effects, the values of Jex 0 lay within the range of 0.2 ns, and broken lines representing this range are drawn in each of the panels as a qualitative estimate of the likely variation due to experimental error. For the purposes of comparing the wild-type and mutant ex proteins, a more conservative cutoff of J0 . 0:5 ns was used as a criterion to identify the amide groups with clear evidence for conformational exchange. As shown in the plots of Jex in Figure 8, the Y23L, 0 N43G and N44A mutants displayed patterns of conformational exchange that were quite similar to that of the wild-type protein. For all three of these variants, only the amide groups of residues 14, 15 and 39 displayed values of Jex greater than 0 0.5 ns, though the values for some adjacent residues were close to this cutoff. For the N43G and

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

435

Figure 8. The portion of J0 attributed to conformational exchange, Jex, for amide groups in BPTI variants. The values 0 of Jex were calculated according to equation (8) of the text, assuming that the internal motions of the BPTI variants were 0 well-described by the Lipari-Szabo spectral density function and that te was close to zero. The broken lines represent the range of Jex values observed for the amide groups of wild-type protein other than those of residues 14, 15 and 0 38 ­ 40, which have previously been shown to undergo conformational exchange. Values of Jex greater than 0.5 ns 0 were taken as strong evidence for conformational exchange in the BPTI mutants.

N44A variants, the value of Jex for Arg39 was 0 significantly larger than observed for the wildtype protein, suggesting that the substitutions may alter either the relative populations of the interconverting conformations, the 15N chemical shifts associated with the alternate conformations or the rate of interconversion. These substitutions, however, do not appear to expand the regions of the molecule involved in the exchange process. In contrast, the F33L replacement caused an increase in the number of residues for which exchange processes were detectable. For this protein, the Jex 0 values of residues 11, 14, 15, 17, 35, 36, 39 and 40 were greater than 0.5 ns. The most striking effects observed in the various mutants examined here were the pronounced increases in the number of residues undergoing

conformational exchange in the Tyr35 mutants. The Y35A and Y35G mutants displayed evidence for conformational exchange involving nearly all of the amide groups in the segments composed of residues 11 ­19 and 34­ 41. For the Y35L mutant, large Jex values were observed for the amides of 0 residues 11 ­ 21, as well as those of residues 33, 34 and 44. As noted above, resonances could not be detected or assigned for the amides of residues 35­ 43 in this variant, most likely because of extreme exchange broadening. Thus, all three of the Tyr35 variants show evidence of conformational exchange within the same chain segments. These results suggest that Tyr35 plays a particularly important role in limiting the extent of backbone motions in the wild-type protein, as discussed further below.

436

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

Discussion
The mutational effects described here are clearly dependent on the sites of the replacements. While replacement of Tyr35 with Gly, Ala or Leu caused pronounced conformational exchange involving 15 ­20 backbone amide groups, substitution of Tyr23 caused no detectable change in dynamics on either of the time scales probed by 15N relaxation measurements. Both of these residues are almost completely buried in the folded protein and are highly conserved in homologous proteins.45 Replacement of either with Leu has been shown previously to destabilize the native protein, relative to the fully reduced and unfolded state, by 6 ­7 kcal/mol.25 Similarly, the N43G and N44A replacements destabilize the native protein by 4.8 kcal/mol and 3.2 kcal/mol, respectively,26 but did not cause measurable effects on backbone dynamics. It thus appears that there is little if any correlation between the global stability of BPTI and the extent of backbone motions, a conclusion also supported by the minimal effects on 15N relaxation caused by lowered pH or selective reduction of the 14-38 disulfide.13 Instead, it appears that the region of the folded protein that encompasses Tyr35, the 14-38 disulfide and the trypsin-binding site is particularly prone to motions on the ms time scale. The structure of this region of the wild-type BPTI polypeptide backbone is illustrated in Figure 9(a), which also shows the side-chains of three of the altered residues, Phe33, Tyr35 and Asn44. Within

this portion of the molecule, the Tyr35 side-chain plays a central structural role, making direct contacts to atoms in the outer loop that forms the protease-binding segment (including residues 10,11 and 16­ 20), an inner loop (residues 37­ 40), as well as the side-chain of Asn44. Among these interactions, those between Tyr35 and the segment from Gly37 to Ala40 are particularly striking, as the Tyr side-chain contacts virtually every backbone atom within this segment. Most of these are van der Waals interactions, but the backbone amide of Gly37 forms a p-hydrogen bond with the aromatic ring. The other side of the ring forms a similar interaction with the side-chain amide of Asn44, and these hydrogen bonds are represented schematically in the Figure as broken lines. The side-chain of Phe33 forms van der Waals interactions with both Tyr35 and Asn44. Figure 9(b) highlights, with blue spheres, the amide nitrogen atoms that show the most pronounced evidence for conformational exchange in the wild-type protein, i.e. those for which Jex is 0 greater than 0.5 ns. Evidence for exchange at these residues was first described by Otting et al. who detected an alternate conformation in a BPTI variant in which Gly36 was replaced with Ser and, at lower levels, in wild-type BPTI.30 In the G36S mutant, the alternate conformation represents approximately 15% of the molecules at 4 8C, enabling Otting et al. to obtain NMR evidence, indicating that this conformation is associated with a reversed chirality of the 14-38 disulfide. In subsequent experiments, the time scales of these

Figure 9. Segments of the BPTI structure prone to conformational exchange. In (a), the backbone atoms of residues 10 ­ 20 (olive carbon atoms) and 32 ­ 44 (gray carbon atoms) are drawn as stick representations, and the side-chains of Phe33, Tyr35 and Asn44 are drawn as balls and sticks, as are the disulfide-bonded sulfur atoms of Cys14 and 38. The broken lines represent the p-hydrogen bonds formed between the Tyr35 side-chain and the amide groups of the Gly37 backbone and the Asn44 sidechain. In (b), the side-chains of residues 33, 35 and 44 are drawn as space-filling spheres, and the amide nitrogen atoms for which Jex 0 is greater than 0.5 ns in the wildtype protein are indicated by blue spheres. In (c) and (d), the amide nitrogen atoms displaying conformational exchange in the F33L and ex Y35G variants ðJ0 . 0:5 nsÞ are highlighted as blue spheres. In addition to the amide nitrogen atoms visible in the Figure, the Tyr35 replacements also led to detectable conformational exchange of residues 10, 11 and 34, which are hidden in the view shown. Drawn from the atomic coordinates of entry 4PTI16 in the Protein Data bank using the program PyMOL (DeLano Software, http://www.pymol.org).

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

437

motions were estimated by varying the spin-lock field strength used in rotating-frame relaxation experiments31 or the refocussing delay time in R2 measurements.21,32 ­ 34 In the most complete of these studies, Millet et al. estimated that the rate constant for conformational exchange of Cys38 and Arg39 is approximately 450 s21 at 27 8C.33 For the amides of Cys14 and Lys15, however, R2 is not sensitive to the refocusing delay time, suggesting that the exchange process is significantly faster than for residues 38 and 39 (or that the chemical shift differences associated with the conformational change are unusually large). The difference in rates observed in the two segments linked by the disulfide suggests that the motions may involve more than a simple two-state exchange between the disulfide isomers.31,32 In addition, the same pattern of enhanced transverse relaxation rates is also observed in a modified form of BPTI in which the 14-38 disulfide has been selectively reduced, indicating that the disulfide per se is not responsible for the motions, though its ability to isomerize may be required to accommodate the structural change.13 Clear evidence for a conformation with the alternate disulfide isomer is provided by a crystal structure of a BPTI variant, determined at room ° temperature (with a nominal resolution of 1.42 A) ° and 100 K (0.86 A).46,47 Two conformations of the 14-38 disulfide are readily observable in both of these structures, with one conformation having a right-handed disulfide chirality, as observed in all previously determined structures of wild-type BPTI. In the other conformation, the disulfide has a left-hand configuration. In contrast to the NMR results, the left-handed configuration represents approximately 40% of the molecules in the crystal, a discrepancy that might be due to either the amino acid replacements introduced in the mutant (T11A, P13A, K15R and M52L) or the effects of crystal packing. The disulfide isomerization is accommodated with remarkably little additional structural change, with only the x1 dihedral angle of Cys38 significantly altered and only the sulfur atom of Cys38 displaced. It is possible, however, that different or more extensive structural changes may occur in solution. The F33L replacement markedly increased the number of amide groups for which exchange is clearly detectable, as indicated by the blue spheres in Figure 9(c). Although these results may indicate that the substitution leads to motions involving a more extended region of the protein, an alternative interpretation is suggested by recent results of Wang et al., who used a new R2 experiment with enhanced sensitivity to chemical exchange to reexamine the behavior of wild-type BPTI.34 These authors observed significant exchange contributions for many of the same residues that displayed large Jex values in the F33L variant. Thus, 0 the same residues may be involved in motions in both proteins, and the more pronounced effects observed for the F33L mutant may reflect a change

in one or more of the parameters that determine the magnitude of the exchange contribution to R2 and J0, including the relative populations of the alternate conformations, their rates of interconversion or the associated chemical shifts. This interpretation is also consistent with the observation that the F33L replacement caused only small changes in 1H or 15N chemical shifts, indicating that the average structure of the protein is not greatly altered. It is striking that only one of the amide groups affected by the F33L replacement (that of Tyr35) is an immediate neighbor of the altered side-chain. Instead, most of the amide groups displaying enhanced exchange effects form direct contacts with the Tyr35 side-chain. This pattern suggests that effects of the F33L replacement are propagated through the adjacent side-chain. Interestingly, the N44A replacement does not cause similar effects, even though the altered residue makes contacts with the side-chains of both Phe33 and Tyr35. The most extensive effects on backbone dynamics were observed for the three mutants with replacements of Tyr35. As shown in Figure 8, the regions affected were remarkably similar for the three mutants, indicating that the results obtained previously with the Y35G variant reflect the site of the replacement, rather than the much greater conformational freedom of the Gly backbone. These regions of the protein also displayed large chemical shift changes in the Tyr35 variants, indicating substantial changes in the average conformation (Figure 2). The positions of the amide groups with enhanced conformational exchange in the Tyr35 variants are highlighted in Figure 9(d), using the data for the Y35G replacement. The amide groups displaying conformational exchange in the Tyr35 mutants include those in the polypeptide segment that interact directly with the altered side-chain, as well as several surrounding Phe33 and Asn44. Remarkably, replacement of Tyr35 had more pronounced effects on the backbone amides of Phe33 and Asn44, and their immediate neighbors, than did replacements of these residues themselves. A recent study of another mutant, however, demonstrates that residues other than Tyr35 are also important in defining the structure of the trypsin-binding region. As suggested by the diagrams in Figure 9, the interior interactions within the loop region involve almost exclusively backbone atoms and the three side-chains discussed above, while the side-chains of most other residues in this region interact primarily with the solvent and one another. As a consequence, it might be expected that these residues would be relatively unimportant in defining the backbone conformation. This expectation is contradicted, however, by NMR studies of a BPTI variant in which eight residues in the loop segments (11, 13, 17, 18, 19, 34, 37, and 39) were replaced with Ala.48 Together these replacements lead to a pattern of chemical shift changes that is strikingly similar to that

438

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

observed here with the Tyr35 replacements, and a solution structure determined from NMR constraints shows extensive structural changes in the loop segments, including exposure of the Tyr35 side-chain to solvent. Although the presence of multiple replacements in this variant makes it difficult to attribute the structural changes to particular residues, the authors suggest that they may be due to the removal of packing interactions among the altered side-chains, especially Ile17, Ile19 and Val34. The multiple mutant also includes the replacement of Gly37 with Ala. Although the backbone dihedral angles of Gly37 in the wild-type structure lie outside of the normally allowed regions for Ala, an NMR structure of a mutant with only the G37A replacement is remarkably similar to the structure of the wild-type protein, with the Ala residue taking on an apparently strained conformation.49 The amide hydrogen of Ala37 in the mutant also appears to form the normal p-hydrogen bond with the Tyr35 side-chain, as indicated by its chemical shift. Amide hydrogen exchange rates, however, indicate that the loop segments are more flexible in the mutant than in the wild-type protein.49 Collectively, the studies with various BPTI variants suggest that the loop segments are subject to considerable structural rearrangement upon removal of stabilizing interactions. In contrast, replacements in regions further from the trypsinbinding site, including most of the b-sheet and the a-helix, while destabilizing, generally cause only minimal structural changes. Since the structure of the loop segments is critical for efficient binding to the protease and inhibition, it is somewhat paradoxical that this structure is so fragile. This, however, may simply be a consequence of the requirement to present a relatively large and extended polypeptide segment to the enzyme'sbinding site. In this structural context, the residues that serve as platform for the binding residues, especially Tyr35, have critical roles in defining local, rather than global, conformational stability. In other inhibitor families, other solutions appear to have evolved to provide stabilizing interactions for the protease-binding segment. In the potato I family of inhibitors, which includes the well-studied chymotrypsin inhibitor 2 and elgin c, the binding segment is stabilized by a network of hydrogen bonds involving both backbone and side-chain atoms, with two Arg side-chains playing especially prominent roles.50 Replacement of either Arg residue with Ala in Cucurbita maxima trypsin inhibitor V leads to increased flexibility on the ns ­ps timescale, as measured in 15N relaxation experiments similar to those described here, and increased rates of hydrolysis by trypsin.11 In the soybean trypsin inhibitor and Kazal families of inhibitors, the side-chains of Asn residues appear to stabilize the binding loop, though these residues are not so highly conserved as, for instance, Tyr35 in the BPTI family.

The functional consequences of the Tyr35 replacements in BPTI are not so drastic as might be expected from the large effects on the backbone dynamics. All three of the variants examined here inhibit trypsin stoichiometrically at mM concentrations, and the dissociation constant for the complex formed between trypsin and Y35G BPTI is 1.6 £ 10210 M (approximately 250-fold greater than for the wild-type protein).12,20,21,51 Preliminary X-ray crystallographic studies of the Y35G BPTI ­ trypsin complex indicate that the mutant protein takes on a conformation that is almost indistinguishable from that of the wild-type protein upon binding to the protease (W.M.H, M. P. Horvath & D.P.G., unpublished results). The functional differences between the wild-type protein and the Tyr35 mutants become much more apparent, however, when the 14-38 disulfide is selectively reduced. In the context of wild-type BPTI, reducing the disulfide converts the protein to a "temporary inhibitor" that binds to trypsin but is cleaved with a half-time of about 24 hours.52 In contrast, the mutants are cleaved with a halftime of only a few minutes upon reduction of the disulfide.12,20 It thus appears that Tyr35 and the 14-38 disulfide act cooperatively to maintain the inhibitory conformation of the binding site. The results described here provide new insights into the special role of Tyr35 and the biophysical basis for the very high degree of evolutionary conservation of this residue.45

Materials and Methods
Sample preparation Wild-type and mutant forms of BPTI uniformly labeled with 15N were produced by heterologous expression in Escherichia coli and purified by ion exchange, gel permeation and reversed-phase chromatography as described.21,51 The identities of the BPTI variants and 15N incorporation were verified using electrospray-ionization mass spectrometry. For NMR experiments, the proteins were dissolved to final concentrations ranging from 1 ­3.8 mM in 90% H2O, 10% 2H2O, 1 mM NaN3, 20 mg/ml 3-(trimethylsilyl) propionate, and the pH was adjusted to 4.7 or 2, as determined by an uncorrected glass electrode. Very similar values of the overall correlation time ð3:2 , tm , 3:9 nsÞ were derived from the 15N relaxation data obtained with the samples containing different concentrations of protein, indicating that the proteins did not undergo significant concentration-dependent association. Initial NMR relaxation experiments with some of the samples, including the F33L variant and one preparation of the wild-type protein, revealed unexpectedly large R2 values for some amide groups, especially that of the C-terminal Ala58 residue. An additional purification step using a Sephadex G-25 PD-10 column (Amersham Biosciences) eliminated these effects, suggesting that they arose from a contaminant that interacted with the proteins. In addition to the wild-type and F33L samples, the samples of the Y23L, N43G and N44A mutants were also subjected to this additional purification before

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

439

carrying out the 15N relaxation measurements. Although the relaxation measurements for the Tyr35 mutants were carried out before this additional step was incorporated, the normal R2 values observed for the Ala58 amide of these proteins indicates that they were not affected by the contaminant. NMR spectroscopy Backbone resonance assignments were determined using 15N-edited two-dimensional NOESY and threedimensional 1H ­ 15N TOCSY-HSQC spectra recorded on 500 MHz and 600 MHz Varian Unity spectrometers. For wild-type BPTI at pH 2, assignments previously determined at pH 4.7 were transferred using a series of 1 H ­ 15N HSQC spectra recorded at intermediate pH values. 15 N relaxation experiments were performed as described,21 using the pulse sequences of Farrow et al.29 Spectra for these measurements were recorded with 1024 £ 128 complex points and 16 transients per increment for the NOE measurements and eight transients for R1 and R2 experiments. Longitudinal relaxation rates were determined using relaxation delays of 11, 41, 136, 266, 408, 538, 804, 1076 ms, with duplicate spectra collected for the 266 ms and 804 ms delays. Transverse relaxation rates were determined using delays of 17, 34, 51, 68, 85, 102, 119, 136, 170, and 187 ms, with duplicate spectra for the 17 ms and 119 ms delays. The spin­ echo delay time for the R2 measurements was 450 ms. The relaxation data were processed as described,21 using the program NMRpipe.53 The transformed spectra were analyzed and peak intensities measured using the program XEASY.54 The R1 and R2 rates were estimated by fitting the observed intensities to a single exponential decay function using the program Curvefit provided by the laboratory of Arthur G. Palmer III. 15N­ 1H NOE values were calculated as the ratio of peak intensities in the presence and absence of three seconds of proton saturation during the recycle delay. Analysis of relaxation data The spectral density functions evaluated at 0:87 £ vH ; vN and 0 Hz were calculated from the experimental relaxation parameters as described by Farrow et al.36 using the following equations: J0:87H ¼ R1 ðNOE 2 1Þ gN 4 gH 5d2 ð9Þ

The uncertainties in the experimental relaxation parameters were assumed to be 5% for R1 and R2 and 10% for the heteronuclear NOE. Although these uncertainties were larger than those obtained from fits of the experimental data, which were often less than 1%, the more conservative estimate was used to account for possible uncertainties in the 15N chemical shift anisotropy55 as well as possible systematic experimental error. Uncertainties in the relaxation parameters were directly propagated to the spectral density and order parameter calculations. The possible influence of anisotropic rotational diffusion was examined using the suite of programs available from the laboratory of Arthur G. Palmer III. First, local effective correlation times ðtm;local Þ for each residue for which 0:6 ns , J0 , 1:6 ns were calculated from the experimental R2/R1 ratios for wild-type BPTI at pH 4.7 using the program R2R1_Tm. Uncertainties in the R2/R1 ratios were assumed to be 10%. The resulting values of tm;local along with atomic coordinates from the X-ray structure of wild-type BPTI16 (PDB entry 5PTI) were then used to test isotropic, axially symmetric, and fully anisotropic diffusion models using the Quadric Diffusion 1.12 program. The F-statistic values calculated for the axially symmetric and fully anisotropic models were 1.7 and 0.1, respectively, indicating that neither model represented a statistically significant improvement, at the 95% confidence level, over the simple isotropic tumbling model. This conclusion was supported by diffusion tensor calculations using the program TENSOR2, where an isotropic tumbling model was also found to account for the R1 and R2 data for wild-type BPTI at pH 4.7. Since neither the lowered pH nor single amino acid replacements appeared to alter the overall structure of the protein, the isotropic tumbling model was similarly applied to the other samples as well.

Acknowledgements
We thank Barbie K. Ganser and Anna Scott for their assistance in purifying and making resonance assignments for the Y35A and F33L BPTI variants and Drs J. Patrick Loria and Peter F. Flynn for helpful discussions and comments on the manuscript. This research was supported by grant number GM42494 from the US National Institutes of Health. NMR instrumentation used at the University of Utah Health Science Center was funded by US NIH grants RR13030, RR06262 and RR14768 and US NSF grant DBI-0002806. Mass spectrometry analyses were provided by the Protein/DNA core facility of the Utah Regional Cancer Center (Supported by National Cancer Institute Grant No. 5 P30 CA 42024).

JN ¼

R1 2 J0:87H ð7d2 =4Þ ð3d2 =4Þ þ c2

ð10Þ

J0 ¼

R2 2 JN ð3d2 =8 þ c2 =2Þ 2 J0:87H ð13d2 =8Þ d2 =2 þ 2c2 =3

ð11Þ

where gH and gN are the gyromagnetic ratios for 1H and 15 N, respectively, and d and c are constants reflecting the magnitudes of dipolar coupling and chemical shift anisotropy, respectively. d ¼ ðm0 hgN gH =ð8p2 ÞÞk1=r3 l; where NH m0 is the permeability of free space, and rNH is the averpffiffiffi age length of the amide bond. c ¼ DðvN = 3Þ; where D is the 15N chemical shift anisotropy. The values of rNH and ° D were taken to be 1.02 A and 160 ppm, respectively, so that d has a numerical value of 2 7.21 £ 104 s21, and c has a value of 26.11 £ 104 s21 for 15N in a magnetic field of 14.1 T.

References
1. Laskowski, M., Jr & Kato, I. (1980). Protein inhibitors of proteinases. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 49, 593­626. 2. Read, R. J. & James, M. N. G. (1986). Introduction to the protein inhibitors. In Proteinase Inhibitors (Barrett, A. & Salvesen, G., eds), pp. 301­ 336, Elsevier, Amsterdam.

440

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

3. Bode, W. & Huber, R. (1992). Natural proteinase inhibitors and their interactions with proteinases. Eur. J. Biochem. 204, 433­ 451. 4. Laskowski, M., Jr & Qasim, M. A. (2000). What can the structures of enzyme ­inhibitor complexes tell us about the structures of enzyme substrate complexes? Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1477, 324­ 337. 5. Longstaff, C., Campbell, A. F. & Fersht, A. R. (1990). Recombinant chymotrypsin inhibitor 2: expression, kinetic analysis of inhibition with a-chymotrypsin and wild-type and mutant subtilisin BPN0 and protein engineering to investigate inhibitory specificity and mechanism. Biochemistry, 29, 7339­ 7347. 6. Lu, W.-Y., Starovansnik, M. A., Dwyer, J. J., Kossiakoff, A. A., Kent, S. B. H. & Lu, W. (2000). Deciphering the role of the electrostatic interactions involving Gly70 in Elgin C by total chemical protein synthesis. Biochemistry, 39, 3575­ 3584. ¨ ¨ 7. Perakyla, M. & Kollman, P. A. (2000). Why does trypsin cleave BPTI so slowly? J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122, 3436. 8. Radisky, E. S. & Koshland, D. E., Jr (2002). clogged gutter mechanism for protease inhibitors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 99, 10316­ 10321. 9. Kress, L. F., Wilson, K. A. & Laskowski, M., Sr (1968). The basic trypsin inhibitor of bovine pancreas. VIII. Changes in activity following substitutions of reduced half-cystine residues 14 and 38 with sulfhydry reagents. J. Biol. Chem. 243, 1758­ 1762. 10. Heinz, D. W., Hyberts, S. G., Peng, J. W., Priestle, J. P., Wagner, G. & Grutter, M. G. (1992). Changing the inhibitory specificity and function of the proteinase inhibitor elgin c by site-directed mutagenesis: functional and structural investigation. Biochemistry, 31, 8755­ 8766. 11. Cai, M., Gong, Y.-X., Wen, L. & Krishnamoorthi, R. (2002). Correlation of binding-loop internal dynamics with stability and function in potato I inhibitor family: relative contributions of Arg50 and Arg52 in Cucurbita maxima trypsin inhibitor-V as studied by site-directed mutagenesis and NMR spectroscopy. Biochemistry, 41, 9572­ 9579. 12. Goldenberg, D. P., Berger, J. M., Laheru, D. A., Wooden, S. & Zhang, J.-X. (1992). Genetic dissection of pancreatic trypsin inhibitor. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 89, 5083­ 5087. 13. Beeser, S. A., Oas, T. G. & Goldenberg, D. P. (1998). Determinants of backbone dynamics in native BPTI: cooperative influence of the 14-38 disulfide and the Tyr 35 side chain. J. Mol. Biol. 284, 1581­ 1596. 14. Gebhard, W., Tschesche, H. & Fritz, H. (1986). Biochemistry of aprotinin and aprotinin-like inhibitors. In Proteinase Inhibitors (Barrett, A. J. & Salvesen, G., eds), pp. 375­388, Elsevier, Amsterdam. 15. Huber, R., Kukla, D., Bode, W., Schwager, P., Bartels, K., Deisenhofer, J. & Steigmann, W. (1974). Structure of the complex formed by bovine trypsin and bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor. II. Crystallographic ° refinement at 1.9 A resolution. J. Mol. Biol. 89, 73 ­ 101. 16. Wlodawer, A., Deisenhofer, J. & Huber, R. (1987). Comparison of two highly refined structures of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor. J. Mol. Biol. 193, 145­ 156. 17. Vincent, J.-P. & Lazdunski, M. (1972). Trypsin ­ pancreatic trypsin inhibitor association. Dynamics of the interaction and role of disulfide bridges. Biochemistry, 11, 2967­ 2977. 18. Castro, M. J. & Anderson, S. (1996). Alanine point-

19.

20. 21.

22.

23. 24.

25.

26. 27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

mutations in the reactive region of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor: effects on the kinetics and thermodynamics of binding to beta-trypsin and alphachymotrypsin. Biochemistry, 35, 11435­ 11446. Tschesche, H. & Kupfer, S. (1976). Hydrolysis­ resynthesis equilibrium of the lysine 15-alanine 16 peptide bond in bovine trypsin inhibitor (Kunitz). Hoppe Seylers Z. Physiol. Chem. 357, 769­ 776. Goldenberg, D. P., Frieden, R. W., Haack, J. A. & Morrison, T. B. (1989). Mutational analysis of a protein folding pathway. Nature, 338, 127­132. Beeser, S. A., Goldenberg, D. P. & Oas, T. G. (1997). Enhanced protein flexibility caused by a destabilizing amino acid replacement in BPTI. J. Mol. Biol. 269, 154­ 164. Housset, D., Kim, K. Y., Fuchs, J., Woodward, C. & Wlodawer, A. (1991). Crystal structure of a Y35G mutant of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor. J. Mol. Biol. 220, 757­ 770. Makhatadze, G. I., Kim, K. S., Woodward, C. & Privalov, P. L. (1993). Thermodynamics of BPTI folding. Protein Sci. 2, 2028­ 2036. Goldenberg, D. P., Bekeart, L. S., Laheru, D. A. & Zhou, J. D. (1993). Probing the determinants of disulfide stability in native pancreatic trypsin inhibitor. Biochemistry, 32, 2835­ 2844. Zhang, J.-X. & Goldenberg, D. P. (1997). Mutational analysis of the BPTI folding pathway: II. Effects of aromatic ! Leu substitutions on folding kinetics and thermodynamics. Protein Sci. 6, 1563 ­1576. Bulaj, G. & Goldenberg, D. P. (2001). Mutational analysis of hydrogen bonding residues in the BPTI folding pathway. J. Mol. Biol. 313, 639­ 656. Brown, L. R., DeMarco, A., Richarz, R., Wagner, G., ¨ Wagner, G. & Wuthrich, K. (1978). The influence of a single salt bridge on static and dynamic features of the globular solution conformation of the basic pancreatic trypsin inhibitor. Eur. J. Biochem. 88, 87 ­ 95. Danishefsky, A. T., Housset, D., Kim, K. S., Tau, F., Fuchs, J., Woodward, C. & Wlodawer, A. (1993). Crevice-forming mutants in the rigid core of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor: crystal structures of F22A, Y23A, N43N and F45A. Protein Sci. 2, 577­ 587. Farrow, N. A., Muhandiram, R., Singer, A. U., Pascal, S. M., Kay, C. M., Gish, G. et al. (1994). Backbone dynamics of a free and phosphopeptide-complexed Src homology 2 domain studied by 15N NMR relaxation. Biochemistry, 33, 5984­ 6003. ¨ Otting, G., Liepinsh, E. & Wuthrich, K. (1993). Disulfide bond isomerization in BPTI and BPTI(G36S): an NMR study of correlated mobility in proteins. Biochemistry, 32, 3571­ 3582. ¨ ¨ Szyperski, T., Luginbuhl, P., Otting, G., Guntert, P. & ¨ Wuthrich, K. (1993). Protein dynamics studied by rotating frame 15N spin relaxation times. J. Biomol. NMR, 3, 141­164. Loria, J. P., Rance, M. & Palmer, A. G., III (1999). A relaxation-compensated Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill sequence for characterizing chemical exchange by NMR spectroscopy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121, 2331­ 2332. Millet, O., Loria, J. P., Kroenke, C. D., Pons, M. & Palmer, A. G., III (2000). The static magnetic field dependence of chemical exchange linebroadening defines the NMR chemical shift time scale. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122, 2867­ 2877. Wang, C., Grey, M. J. & Palmer, A. G., III (2001). CPMG sequences with enhanced sensitivity to chemical exchange. J. Biomol. NMR, 24, 361­366.

Mutational Effects on BPTI Dynamics

441

35. Peng, J. W. & Wagner, G. (1992). Mapping of the spectral densities of N­ H bond motions in Elgin c using heteronuclear relaxation experiments. Biochemistry, 31, 8571­ 8586. 36. Farrow, N. A., Zhang, O., Szabo, A., Torchia, D. A. & Kay, L. E. (1995). Spectral density function mapping using 15N relaxation data exclusively. J. Biomol. NMR, 6, 153­ 162. 37. Ishima, R. & Nagayama, K. (1995). Protein backbone dynamics revealed by quasi spectral density function analysis of amide N-15 nuclei. Biochemistry, 34, 3162­3171. 38. Lipari, G. & Szabo, A. (1982). Model-free approach to the interpretation of nuclear magnetic resonance relaxation in macromolecules. 1. Theory and range of validity. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 104, 4546­ 4559. 39. Lipari, G. & Szabo, A. (1982). Model-free approach to the interpretation of nuclear magnetic resonance relaxation in macromolecules. 2. Analysis of experimental results. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 104, 4559­ 4570. 40. Andrec, M., Montelione, G. T. & Levy, R. M. (2000). Lipari-szabo mapping: a graphical approach to Lipari-Szabo analysis of NMR relaxation data using reduced spectral density mapping. J. Biomol. NMR, 18, 83 ­100. ¨ 41. Fushman, D., Weisemann, R., Thuring, H. & ¨ Ruuterjans, H. (1994). Backbone dynamics of ribonuclease T1 and its complex with 20 GMP studied by two-dimensional heteronuclear NMR spectroscopy. J. Biomol. NMR, 4, 61 ­ 78. 42. Dosset, P., Hus, J.-C., Blackledge, M. & Marion, D. (2000). Efficient analysis of macromolecular rotational diffusion from heteronuclear relaxation data. J. Biomol. NMR, 16, 23 ­ 28. 43. Lee, L. K., Rance, M., Chazin, W. J. & Palmer, A. G., III (1997). Rotational diffusion anisotropy of proteins from simultaneous analysis of 15N and 13Ca nuclear spin relaxation. J. Biomol. NMR, 9. 44. Peng, J. W. & Wagner, G. (1995). Frequency spectrum of NH bonds in elgin c from spectral density mapping at multiple fields. Biochemistry, 34, 16733­ 16752. 45. Pritchard, L. & Dufton, M. J. (1999). Evolutionary trace analysis of the Kunitz/BPTI family of proteins: functional divergence may have been based on conformational adjustment. J. Mol. Biol. 285, 1589­ 1607. 46. Czapinska, H., Otlewski, J., Krzywda, S., Sheldrick, ´ G. M. & Jaskolski, M. (2000). High-resolution structure of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor with altered binding loop sequence. J. Mol. Biol. 295, 1237­1249. 47. Addlagatta, A., Krzywda, S., Czapinska, H., ´ Otlewski, J. & Jaskolski, M. (2001). Ultrahighresolution structure of a BPTI mutant. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 57, 649­ 663. 48. Cierpicki, T. & Otlewski, J. (2002). NMR structures of two variants of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55. 56.

(BPTI) reveal unexpected influence of mutations on protein structure and stability. J. Mol. Biol. 321, 647 ­658. Battiste, J. L., Li, R. & Woodward, C. (2002). A highly destabilizing mutation, G37A, of the bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor retains the average native conformation but greatly increases local flexibility. Biochemistry, 41, 2237­2243. McPhalen, C. A. & James, M. N. G. (1988). Structural comparison of two serine proteinase-protein inhibitor complexes: Elgin-c-subtilisin carlsberg and CI-2subtilisin novo. Biochemistry, 27, 6582­ 6598. Zhang, J.-X. & Goldenberg, D. P. (1997). Mutational analysis of the BPTI folding pathway: I. Effects of aromatic ! Leu substitutions on the distribution of folding intermediates. Protein Sci. 6, 1549­ 1562. Kress, L. F. & Laskowski, M., Sr (1967). The basic trypsin inhibitor of bovine pancreas VII. Reduction with borohydride of disulfide bond linking halfcysteine residues 14 and 38. J. Biol. Chem. 242, 4925 ­4929. Delaglio, F., Grzesiek, S., Vuister, G. W., Zhu, G., Pfeifer, J. & Bax, A. (1995). NMRPipe: a multidimensional spectral processing system based on UNIX pipes. J. Biomol. NMR, 6, 277­ 293. ¨ Bartels, C., Xia, T.-H., Billeter, M. P., Guntert, P. & ¨ Wuthrich, K. (1995). The program XEASY for computer-supported NMR spectral analysis of biological macromolecules. J. Biomol. NMR, 5, 1 ­ 10. Fushman, D., Tjandra, N. & Cowburn, D. (1998). Direct measurement of 15N chemical shift anisotropy in solution. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 120, 10947 ­10952. Kraulis, P. J. (1991). MOLSCRIPT: a program to produce both detailed and schematic plots of protein structures. J. Appl. Crystalallog. 24, 946­ 950.

Edited by P. Wright (Received 9 June 2003; received in revised form 12 August 2003; accepted 14 August 2003)

Supplementary Material for this paper comprising three Figures and accompanying text comparing the results of the analysis of 15N relaxation data based on spectral density functions with that derived from the model-free method is available on Science Direct

