doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2006.12.044

J. Mol. Biol. (2007) 366, 1510­1522

Relationships between the Sequence of -Synuclein and its Membrane Affinity, Fibrillization Propensity, and Yeast Toxicity
Michael J. Volles and Peter T. Lansbury Jr
Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, 65 Landsdowne Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA To investigate the -synuclein protein and its role in Parkinson's disease, we screened a library of random point mutants both in vitro and in yeast to find variants in an unbiased way that could help us understand the sequence­ phenotype relationship. We developed a rapid purification method that allowed us to screen 59 synuclein mutants in vitro and discovered two doublepoint mutants that fibrillized slowly relative to wild-type, A30P, and A53T -synucleins. The yeast toxicity of all of these proteins was measured, and we found no correlation with fibrillization rate, suggesting that fibrillization is not necessary for synuclein-induced yeast toxicity. We found that -synuclein was of intermediate toxicity to yeast, and -synuclein was non-toxic. Coexpression of Parkinson's disease-related genes DJ-1, parkin, Pink1, UCH-L1, or synphilin, with synuclein, did not affect synuclein toxicity. A second screen, of several thousand library clones in yeast, identified 25 non-toxic -synuclein sequence variants. Most of these contained a mutation to either proline or glutamic acid that caused a defect in membrane binding. We hypothesize that yeast toxicity is caused by synuclein binding directly to membranes at levels sufficient to non-specifically disrupt homeostasis.
© 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. *Corresponding authors

Keywords: synuclein; Parkinson's disease; fibrillization; membrane binding; yeast toxicity

Introduction
The -synuclein protein can cause Parkinson's disease (PD) if it is over-expressed or contains one of the mutations A53T, A30P, or E46K.1 The events leading from -synuclein expression to the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons, which causes the symptoms of PD, are unknown. In physiological buffer solutions, purified monomeric -synuclein aggregates into amyloid fibrils.2 The fibrillar form of -synuclein is the main component of Lewy bodies,3 the characteristic inclusions of the PD brain. Monomeric -synuclein binds negatively charged phospholipid membranes and micelles in vitro, and in doing so takes on significant N-terminal amphipathic -helical structure.4­6 The A30P mutation inhibits membrane binding by interfering with the
Abbreviations used: PD, Parkinson's disease; wt, wildtype; ThT, thioflavin T; GFP, green fluorescent protein. E-mail addresses of the corresponding authors: mvolles@rics.bwh.harvard.edu; plansbury@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

-helix conformation.7 There are two homologs of -synuclein ( and ) and both exhibit -helical induction upon membrane binding.8 -Synuclein fibrillizes more slowly than , and -synuclein is much slower to fibrillize than either  or .9 A number of model systems in which to study synuclein behavior and possibly the pathogenic events of PD have been described, ranging in complexity from in vitro to yeast, cell culture, worm, fly, mouse, and primate.1,10 Here, we describe screening of an -synuclein random point mutagenesis library,11 in vitro (fibrillization) and in yeast (toxicity), for sequences that behave differently from the wild-type (wt) protein. The probability of finding an interesting sequence when screening a random mutagenesis library is low, and this makes it impractical to directly screen in most of the more complex and desirable model systems, because the effective throughput is not high enough. One solution to this problem is to "prescreen" in a simple model system such as those described here and then use the selected clones as a very small "library", for screening in an animal model. The members of such a library have a much higher probability of causing

0022-2836/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

-Synuclein Sequence Variants

1511 least the 200 M level was obtained from 59 (52 of these also yielded enough protein for a 400 M incubation); nonsense mutations, frame-shifts, and improperly ligated inserts account for most of the remainder. Eleven of these sequences had a wt protein sequence (for reference, the wt -synuclein protein sequence and its domains are shown at the top of Figure 5). The in vitro thioflavin T (ThT) aggregation screen revealed several sequence variants that had increased fibrillization lag times. These candidates were re-examined in secondary trials, finally narrowing the candidates to two double-point mutants, both appearing to have a robust increase in fibrillization lag time: V49E/Q79R and A29E/T92S. No mutant with a significantly reduced lag time relative to wt was isolated in this study. Several factors in addition to low-throughput may contribute: fibrillization occurring before or during purification could cause loss of the protein. Our in vitro system itself is less sensitive in detecting fast fibrillizers (control proteins fibrillize within the first few days). Finally, mutations enhancing fibrillization could be less prevalent in a random mutagenesis library than disruptive mutations; there are typically many more ways to disrupt a specific process than to facilitate it. Detailed kinetic studies of slow fibrillizing sequence variants and their single-point mutant derivatives A series of independent fibrillization time-courses were carried out to evaluate the two double-point mutants statistically (Figure 1(a)). As expected from the initial screening procedures, they were both slow to fibrillize (Figure 1(a)) and their soluble concentrations remained elevated (Figure 1(b)), compared to the wt protein. -Synuclein did not fibrillize under these conditions, and only one of four -synuclein incubations fibrillized, within 30 days of observation (data not shown), in agreement with the results of previous studies.9,22 Six of eight of the V49E/Q79R samples fibrillized within 30 days, and every sample of every other protein examined (Figure 1) fibrillized within eight days. In addition, the four single-point mutants (A29E, V49E, Q79R, T92S) derived from V49E/Q79R and A29E/T92S were studied in order to discover whether any of the single-point mutations could be wholly responsible for the slow fibrillization (Figure 1). The delay in fibrillization lag time of doublepoint mutant V49E/Q79R was not due to either of the mutations acting alone (Figure 1(a)). We cannot draw the same conclusion definitively for the mutant A29E/T92S, although the data suggest that this may be the case: both single-point mutants showed delayed fibrillization, and neither was delayed as much as the double-point mutant. Slow fibrillizing variants of -synuclein have been created before, by rationally introducing hydrophilic point mutations into the center of the hydrophobic NAC region, including mutants A76E and

an interesting and useful phenotype than blindly chosen library clones. An alternative to random library screening is to examine a few rationally designed mutants that are expected to yield an interesting phenotype with high probability. This approach is certainly worthwhile,12­16 but rational design is restricted and biased in scope by our limited knowledge of -synuclein structure and biology.17 Another alternative is to examine natural sequence variants (A53T, A30P, mouse synucleins, etc.) but, of course, the pool of natural sequences is limited. Furthermore, variants with extreme properties are unlikely to occur in nature (they would probably be strongly selected against evolutionarily), although in our current state of understanding, extreme variants are more likely to be informative and useful than variants with properties only subtly different from the wt protein. Our in vitro system consists of purified monomeric -synuclein in physiological buffer, and fibrillization is measured over time. We used the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae as an in vivo model system, which exhibits toxicity (defined here as slowed growth) and -synuclein inclusion formation.18,19 The wt and A53T -synucleins are both toxic and localize to inclusions and the plasma membrane when expressed from multiple GAL promoters, such as those on 2  plasmids (high copy number) or from multiple integrated copies.18,20,21 In contrast, the A30P variant is non-toxic to yeast and is distributed uniformly throughout the cytoplasm.18 All of the synuclein proteins are relatively non-toxic when expressed from a single copy.18 We screened for nontoxic -synuclein sequences (2  plasmid, high copy number expression) and for highly toxic sequences (centromeric plasmid, low copy number). We were able to screen thousands of sequences in the yeast system, and approximately 60 in the in vitro system. The bottleneck in the former is replica plating, and in the latter it is purification and preparation of individual proteins. The mutations in selected clones cause their altered phenotypes. We used this relationship and our prior knowledge to infer and further test how synuclein functions in these model systems. Examining the selected clones in additional model systems can also yield suggestive results by correlation (or lack thereof). For example, we examined slow fibrillizing mutants from the in vitro screen, in the yeast system, and the results demonstrated that fibrillization is unlikely to be necessary for yeast toxicity. In the future, it will be interesting to examine the sequence variants described here in more complex and realistic PD models.

Results and Discussion
Initial in vitro screen for altered fibrillization rate Randomly chosen library clones were expressed (131 total), and sufficient protein for screening at at

1512

-Synuclein Sequence Variants

determinant of the fibrillization rate. An advantage of random screening is shown here; these three mutations could not have been designed rationally. Similarly, Wurth et al. screened an unbiased library of A peptides, and found mutations slowing the aggregation rate that could not have been predicted rationally.17 Synuclein sequences were expressed in a yeast model of Parkinson's disease In agreement with the results of previous studies,18,21 we found that wt and A53T but not A30P synuclein is toxic to yeast when expressed at high levels (Figure 2, labels shaded blue). We found also, in agreement with previous work,18,21 that the green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion proteins of wt and A53T form inclusions and localize to the plasma membrane in yeast, whereas A30P -synuclein does not form inclusions, and is predominantly cytoplasmic (Figure 3; and Supplementary Data Figure 1). We extend these results by showing (Figures 2 and 3; and Supplementary Data Figure 1) that -synuclein, like A30P, was non-toxic and -synuclein-GFP localized mainly to the cytoplasm and formed inclusions only rarely. -Synuclein is estimated to be intermediate in toxicity between wt and A30P, and its GFP fusion protein formed inclusions. Mouse -synuclein behaved like human wt -synuclein. The N-terminal 99 amino acid residues of synuclein were sufficient to produce toxicity at levels comparable to that of the wt protein (Figure 2), implying that -synuclein toxicity is not mediated by the C terminus. The tendency of wt , truncated , A30P, A53T, , and synucleins to form inclusions in yeast (Figure 3) is well correlated with their ability to bind lipid droplets in lipid-loaded mammalian cells.23 The broad distribution of 2  copy number within a yeast population causes variation in expression level among cells. When a 2  plasmid bears a toxic synuclein, cells that happen to have fewer plasmid copies (and therefore express less) propagate selectively. The result is that yeast cultures with toxic synucleins express lower levels of synuclein than those with non-toxic synucleins (Figure 3; and Supplementary Data Figure 1).18 This decreases the difference in growth-rate between toxic and nontoxic synucleins, compared to what would be observed if a fixed number of copies ( 2) was used.18 Thus, our 2  assay has less resolution to detect significant differences between toxic and nontoxic species than an assay using multiple integrated copies of synuclein. Despite this limitation, the data collected clearly supported the conclusions described below. In compensation for this decreased power, the 2  plasmid offers much greater practicality for multicopy expression of a large number of variants. Interaction of synuclein with PD-related genes We performed co-expression studies of PD-related genes (DJ-1, parkin, Pink1, UCH-L1, synphilin, or

Figure 1. Fibrillization of control -synuclein sequences, two double-point mutant sequence variants, and their single-point mutant derivatives. Each bar represents the mean of eight (except single-point mutants, where n = 4) trials of independently expressed, purified, and incubated proteins, and the error bars are individual 95% confidence intervals. Single-point mutants were created from the double-point mutants by subcloning with the aid of enzyme BseRI. (a) Lag time is defined by the crossing of a ThT fluorescence threshold as described in Materials and Methods. In two of eight V49E/Q79R incubations, a positive ThT signal had not occurred within the time of the experiment. In these cases, the day of the final measurement was used as the lag time (32 days). Therefore, the value shown for this variant may be somewhat underestimated. (b) Concentrations of soluble protein measured after incubation for 14 days. Every nonV49E/Q79R sample had fibrillized within eight days. Using a pre-planned Student's t-test on the data of (a) or (b), we were able to reject the null hypothesis of no difference in lag time between the wt protein and both V49E/Q79R and A29E/T92S with a p-value < 0.01 (indicated by an asterisk). A Games-Howell (variance is non-constant)51 multiple comparison procedure for the data in (a) did not detect a significant difference between the four derived single-point mutants and the wt protein or A29E/T92S. However, comparison of V49E/Q79R with any of the other proteins resulted in rejection of the hypothesis of no difference. Applying the Games-Howell test to the data in (b) gave similar results but was somewhat more liberal in rejecting the null hypothesis.

A76R,13 G68R and V74R,12 and V70T/V71T.14 Our Q79R mutation falls within this region and probably acts in the same way. We are unsure how the other three mutations might act, but they do indicate that the hydrophobic core of NAC is not the sole

-Synuclein Sequence Variants

1513

Figure 2. Estimated maximum specific growth-rates (proportional to the inverse of doubling time) of the yeast strain W303-1a expressing various synuclein genes or GFP (labeled in green) from 2  plasmid p426GAL1. All genes isolated by yeast library screening are labeled numerically; those isolated originally from the yeast screen with coexpressed wt -synuclein have numbers with the suffix d. All other synuclein sequences (those not isolated by yeast screening) have descriptive labels, shaded blue. The synuclein genes were not GFP-tagged and all of the synuclein cDNAs were contained in the plasmid within the same non-coding nucleotide sequence context (except wt 1­107, whose C-terminal nucleotides after the stop codon were deleted). The genes are listed on the x-axis in order of decreasing estimated yeast toxicity. Each gene was studied in independent trials (n was typically about 6), independent meaning that a new trial was begun from a different colony picked from the same transformation. An additive twoway ANOVA model (synuclein genes and blocks) was used for analysis of the maximum specific growth rates obtained by fitting the Gompertz equation. The square points are estimated population marginal means. In two of 306 samples sparse data led to a fit near 1.0, which was unreasonably high, and these outliers were set to a more reasonable upper limit of 0.3 to avoid disturbing the statistical analysis. Error bars represent simultaneous Tukey-Kramer comparison intervals: non-overlap between the bars of any two genes indicates that the hypothesis of no difference between the two was rejected at the p < 0.05 level. Two vertical bars divide the sequences into three groups: toxic, intermediate, and non-toxic. Every sequence in the non-toxic group is significantly less toxic to yeast than every sequence in the toxic group. Sequences in the intermediate group have comparison intervals that overlap some members of both the toxic and non-toxic sets.

control GFP) and various synuclein sequences to attempt to discover any interactions in the yeast model. For example, in cell culture24 and a rat model of PD,25 over-expression of parkin can suppress synuclein toxicity. No obvious and significant interaction either promoting or suppressing synuclein toxicity in yeast was detected in any case (Supplementary Data Figure 2), although synphilin itself was somewhat toxic. Are fibrils necessary for synuclein-induced yeast toxicity? On the basis of the correlation of Lewy bodies with disease, the aggregation of -synuclein in vitro, and the observed microscopic inclusions in yeast, one reasonable working hypothesis is that fibrillized synuclein is necessary for yeast toxicity. We measured the yeast toxicity of the slow-fibrillizing variants A29E/T92S and V49E/Q79R, and their single-point mutant derivatives (Figure 2, labels shaded blue). A scatter plot of fibrillization rate and yeast toxicity for a number of variants is shown in

Figure 4. Whether these data are relevant to the toxic-fibril hypothesis depends on the relationship between our in vitro fibrillization studies and fibrillization in yeast. To begin with, we must assume a monotonic relationship: slow fibrillizers in vitro are also slow to fibrillize in yeast and those that are faster in vitro are also faster in yeast. Additionally, we have to consider time-scale relevance; is the time-scale of fibrillization that we worked with in vitro, relevant to the time-scale of fibrillization in yeast? We can divide this roughly into three possible cases and consider the fibriltoxicity hypothesis for each: (1) Fibrillization is very slow in yeast relative to in vitro. Then, fibrils are not relevant to toxicity; the hypothesis of fibril-induced yeast toxicity is untrue. (2) Fibrillization in yeast is extremely rapid relative to our in vitro experiments. That is, all of our synuclein proteins actually fibrillize immediately in yeast, compressing the in vitro differences we found into irrelevance. Then, our data

1514

-Synuclein Sequence Variants

Figure 3. Microscopy of GFP-tagged synucleins. Two horizontal bars divide the synuclein variants into three toxicity groups, as defined in the legend to Figure 2. Photographs were taken after 48 h of growth in synthetic galactose medium lacking uracil, and all were taken with identical excitation intensity and exposure time (100× plan fluor objective; a Gaussian filter was applied to the images; the levels and gamma setting were adjusted identically for all images). Each green box contains two different representative photographic fields and the labels correspond with those used elsewhere in this article. The expression plasmid was p426GAL1 with GFP (the linkage between the last amino acid of synuclein and GFP is described in Materials and Methods, and was identical for , , and  synucleins); synuclein cDNAs were inserted into the plasmid by in vitro ligation.

Figure 4. Scatter plot of estimated maximum specific growth-rate (data from Figure 2) versus in vitro synuclein fibrillization lag time (data from Figure 1), for a number of synuclein variants (labeled). Right-pointing arrows are shown for  and -synuclein to indicate that their true (unknown) lag times are actually greater than the value shown; in the case of -synuclein, the true value is much greater.

do not bear on the hypothesis (in this case differences in toxicity between variants are explained by downstream necessary events affected by the mutations). This seems unlikely: -synuclein is extremely non-fibrillogenic,9 yet exhibited some toxicity to yeast (Figure 2). It would imply also that the non-toxic proteinGFP fusions such as A30P-GFP are actually fibrillar protein dispersed throughout the cytoplasm. The fact that abundant monomeric synuclein can be purified from Escherichia coli over-expressing the protein also speaks against this. (3) Fibrillization occurs on a time-scale similar to the yeast growth measurements. Then, our data (Figure 4) do not support the toxic-fibril hypothesis because they include V49E/Q79R, which is a toxic, slow fibrillizer. Additionally, -synuclein is almost non-fibrillogenic, yet caused some toxicity to yeast. It would be unlikely that both of these sequences act by a new atypical mechanism (gained by their changes from wt

-Synuclein Sequence Variants

1515 to be relatively non-toxic. These had their cDNAs placed into a fresh vector using in vivo homologous recombination. 26 A single quantitative growth experiment was carried out, along with fluorescence microscopy of GFP (Supplementary Data Figure 1). We carried forward 29 of these that appeared to be the most robustly non-toxic. After ligating the synuclein cDNAs into a fresh vector and removing the GFP tags, we analyzed the candidates and control proteins in a quantitative growth experiment, which allowed us to statistically divide all sequence variants into three classes: toxic, non-toxic, and intermediate (Figure 2). The protein sequences of these library clones are given in Figure 5. A second type of screen (in which a library clone and wt -synuclein were co-expressed; see Materials and Methods) also yielded several non-toxic sequences (these clones are labeled with a numeral and the letter d; (Figures 2, 3, and 5)). Note the correlation between yeast toxicity, synuclein-containing inclusions, and plasma membrane localization (Figure 3; and Supplementary

-synuclein), while the typical form of toxicity is fibril-mediated. In conclusion, it seems simplest and most consistent with the data to proceed with the hypothesis that non-fibrillar synuclein mediates toxicity. However, if fibrillization is necessary for toxicity, then it is not sufficient, because proteins with similar fibrillization rates had very different toxicities (Figure 4). We also conclude that the non-toxic nature of A30P cannot be explained by its slow fibrillization; other sequences (e.g. V49E/Q79R, synuclein) that are much slower fibrillizers were more toxic (Figure 4). Yeast screening for -synuclein variants with decreased toxicity -Synuclein-GFP fusions were expressed from the 2  (high copy number) plasmid p426GAL1. Library transformation yielded 2200 colonies, and we picked 88 that both expressed GFP and appeared

Figure 5. -Synuclein sequences studied by quantitative yeast growth are shown. The division of the -synuclein sequence into domains is shown at the top. Just below this, the PD-linked mutations are shown. The wt -synuclein sequence is the first in the list, and other sequences are listed in order of decreasing estimated yeast toxicity from top to bottom; sequences are divided into three statistical groups as in Figures 2 and 3. Negatively/positively charged amino acids are shown in red/blue, and proline is shaded green. As discussed in Materials and Methods, only residues 8­130 are highly mutatable because of mutation correction at the termini by PCR primers. Stop codons are indicated by an asterisk.

1516 Data Figure 1; discussed below). Dixon et al.21 showed that mutation of proteins in the yeast secretory pathway (including endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi transport) can cause -synuclein to change its localization from plasma membrane to punctate inclusions. It was later shown that synuclein itself can disrupt endoplasmic reticulumGolgi trafficking. 20 Therefore, we suspect that inclusions are downstream, rather than the originator, of yeast toxicity. Yeast screening for enhanced -synuclein toxicity -Synuclein genes were expressed from the centromeric plasmid p416GAL1. Library transformation yielded 2600 colonies, and two of these clones were consistently more toxic to growth on plates. This was confirmed in a quantitative growth experiment (Supplementary Data Figure 3). DNA sequencing revealed that both contained 1 bp deletions in nucleotide positions 282 or 323 (numbering from the start codon), resulting in 176 amino acid residue proteins, with the final  80 residues being non-synuclein, and containing three cysteine residues (Supplementary Data Figure 4). We speculated that their enhanced toxicity might be due to loss of the C-terminal portion of -synuclein, and to test this we examined two truncated -synuclein sequences (1­99 and 1­107) in our yeast growth experiments. These truncations failed to explain the toxicity of the frame-shifted mutants: they were not significantly more toxic than the wt protein (Supplementary Data Figure 3). The toxicity of the frameshifted mutants is probably due to some aspect of the severe and irrelevant change they bear, and they were not studied further. There are consensus mutations in the non-toxic -synuclein sequences Selected sequences have nucleotide mutations as the cause of their phenotype and, in our case, we can safely assume that the resulting protein mutations are directly responsible for the phenotype. We would like to know if some pattern of amino acid mutations can be discerned in the sequencing data. One of the simplest types of pattern is that particular amino acid mutations have been enriched for (or depressed) in the non-toxic sequences. As a measure of this, we use an odds ratio: the number of times a particular type of amino acid mutation (e.g. mutation to E) is observed in our sequences divided by the number of times we would expect to observe it, if there were no selective pressure. For example, an odds ratio of 2 for mutation to E means that E mutations were seen twice as often as would be expected if they were neutral (see Materials and Methods for further details). We detected two types of mutation in the set of 25 non-toxic sequences with estimated odds ratios significantly different from 1: mutation to E (estimated odds ratio 2.4; p = 0.003) and P (estimated

-Synuclein Sequence Variants

odds ratio 3.0; p = 0.016). Are P and E directly favored, or is their abundance simply a result of their being an effective way to remove particular wt amino acids that are essential for toxicity (for example, it could be that removal of lysine and not accumulation of glutamic acid is what is really selected for)? Inspection of Figure 5 shows that E and P are each favored by mutation from multiple types of wt residue. Additional confirmation of significance and specificity is available for both the P and E odds ratios: single-point mutants A30P and A29E are both non-toxic. These results, in conjunction with the mechanistic discussion below, allow us to conclude that E and P are favored directly by selection, on their own merits. The synuclein sequence variants selected for non-toxicity in yeast have decreased membrane-binding ability The known membrane affinity of wt -synuclein, its reduction by the A30P mutation,27,28 and the intracellular localization of synuclein-GFP variants (Figure 3; Supplementary Data Figure 1),18 led us to investigate the idea that the non-toxic sequences have decreased affinity for membranes. We determined the ability of 47 synuclein variants to bind negatively charged phospholipid vesicles using a vesicle sedimentation assay (Supplementary Data Figure 5). There was a strong correlation between in vitro membrane binding and yeast toxicity (Figure 6). This result, and the additional correlation between toxicity and plasma membrane localization (Figure 3; and Supplementary Data Figure 1) suggests that the plasma membrane localization of synuclein is a result of direct binding to the bilayer. The P and E consensus mutations in the Nterminal region of synuclein are consistent with a membrane-binding defect and disruption of the

Figure 6. A scatter plot of the estimated maximum specific growth-rate (data from Figure 2) versus membrane-binding level (data from Supplementary Data Figure 5). The membrane-binding level is the amount of synuclein that co-sedimented with vesicles during a centrifugation assay (see Materials and Methods). One point is shown for each of the 47 variants listed in Supplementary Data Figure 5 (some are labeled).

-Synuclein Sequence Variants

1517
described.11 The library codes for about 1.3 × 106 unique synuclein protein variants with an average of two amino acid point mutations per sequence. Amino acid residues 1­7 are not subject to mutation, because this region is complementary to the forward PCR primer.11 The diversity of the library far exceeds the needs of the screens described here. Library transformation of E. coli Strain BL21-Gold(DE3) (Stratagene) was transformed with DNA, using electroporation in the case of the library,32 and using cells made chemically competent by the Inoue method otherwise.33 All control (non-library) sequences were verified by DNA sequencing, and were expressed and purified by the same methods in parallel with the library clones. Our human wt , , and , and mouse -synuclein protein sequences match those given by the NCBI reference sequence project (GenBank accession nos. NP_000336.1, NP_003076.1, NP_003078.1, and NP_033247.1 respectively).34 The pT7-7 vector was used to express -synuclein sequences and pET-30a(+) for  and  synucleins. We used dilutions of the library DNA stock ( 60 g/ml) of several thousand-fold into water for electroporation. We never observed more than one unique plasmid in a transformed colony, by DNA sequencing. Protein expression Single colonies of BL21-Gold(DE3) were cut from agar plates using a cork borer, and expelled into 100 ml cultures (LB-ampicillin (150 mg/l) medium in 250 ml shake flasks), which were grown at 37 °C with shaking (250 rpm) to an A600 of approximately 0.7­1.5. For library sequences, glycerol stocks of the cultures were prepared and frozen for future DNA sequence analysis. The cultures were then induced with 1 mM IPTG and additional ampicillin (100 mg/l) for 3 h, pelleted, resuspended in 0.75 ml of buffer (50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 10 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl), and frozen at - 80 °C. Protein purification In order to maximize the throughput of protein purification, a non-chromatographic method was developed. The thermal solubility of synuclein, first pointed out by Jakes et al.,35 is essential to the method. Tubes of the frozen cells were placed directly in a boiling water-bath for 7 min, and then pelleted at maximum speed in a microfuge for 4 min. The supernatant was removed to a fresh tube and streptomycin sulfate (136 l of a 10% solution/ml supernatant) and glacial acetic acid (228 l/ ml supernatant) were added, followed by an additional spin for 2 min. The supernatant was again removed and then precipitated with ammonium sulfate (saturated ammonium sulfate at 4 °C was used 1:1 (v/v) with supernatant). Precipitated protein was collected by centrifugation (at this stage clones not producing purifiable protein are observed to form no precipitate), and the pellet was washed once with 1 ml of ammonium sulfate solution (4 °C; 1:1 (v/v) saturated ammonium sulfate (4 °C) and water). The washed pellet was resuspended in 900 l of 100 mM ammonium acetate (to form a cloudy solution) and precipitated by adding an equal volume of ethanol at room temperature. Precipitation in ethanol was repeated twice more, followed by a final resuspension in 100 mM ammonium acetate, freezing in liquid nitrogen, and

amphipathic -helices in general: proline interferes with -helix formation7 and based on helical wheel analysis,5,29,30 glutamic acid may interact unfavorably with the negatively charged phospholipid headgroups (especially KE) or the hydrophobic membrane interior (especially V26E). The P and E paradigm can explain 20 of the 25 non-toxic sequences (Figure 5). The remaining five (mutants 11, 14, 32d, 45, and 63) also have mutations in the N-terminal region that are consistent with decreased membrane binding: lysine 12, 23, or 34 (which probably interact with a negatively charged phosphate)29 is replaced with an uncharged, polar residue, or leucine 8 (probably located in the membrane interior)29 is replaced with a polar or positively charged residue. Is membrane binding necessary for synuclein-induced yeast toxicity? The nature and distribution of the consensus mutations and the correlation of toxicity with membrane-binding ability (Figure 6) suggest strongly that the causative mechanism of synuclein-induced yeast toxicity requires an amphipathic -helix. One possibility is that the amphipathic -helix is used to form a toxic protein­protein interaction; for example, with a yeast protein or with itself. However, the hypothesis most consistent with our previous knowledge of synuclein is that a functional amphipathic helix is necessary because of its role in lipid binding. Through a mechanism that has no direct analog in (and in fact seems opposite to) the yeast model, it is conceivable that A30P causes PD by interrupting amphipathic -helix formation. If this is true, then our results indicate that there may be additional families with autosomal dominant PD that have glutamic acid mutations in the N-terminal half of their -synuclein genes. In conclusion, we support a model of yeast toxicity in which over-expressed monomeric synuclein coats the plasma and internal membranes directly via its amphipathic -helices, disrupting normal membrane processes (including vesicle trafficking),19­21 and eventually leading to toxicity. Perhaps the simplest mechanism by which synuclein binding could disrupt membrane processes is non-specific. We have previously shown that high concentrations of monomeric synuclein (wt and A53T, but not A30P) can dissolve phospholipid vesicles by a detergent-like mechanism.31 Whether because of such bulk effects or by exclusion of protein or vesicle docking, it would not be surprising if thoroughly coating biomembranes by strongly over-expressing synuclein were toxic, in a broad range of species, including yeast.

Materials and Methods
Random point mutagenesis library Our error-prone PCR -synuclein library is contained in the E. coli expression vector pT7-7 and has been

1518
lyophilization. -Synuclein forms a very large, low-density ethanolic pellet that is difficult to recover, and was only subjected to precipitation in ethanol twice. Lyophilized proteins (100 ml cultures typically yielded 5­10 mg of powder) were stored in darkness, desiccated over P2O5. Protein resuspension and fibrillization Typically, 5­6 mg of lyophilized powder was resuspended in 80 l of HBS (10 mM Hepes (pH 7.4), 145 mM KCl, 0.04% (w/v) sodium azide). The necessary amount (several microliters) of 1 M KOH was added in order to titrate the pH to approximately 7.4 (using pH paper), and bring the protein fully into solution. Residual acetate as well as the acidic nature of -synuclein causes the pH to begin at around 5, where -synuclein is less soluble. The proteins were dialyzed against 2 l of HBS at 4 °C for 18 h, using mini-dialysis units (Pierce Slide-A-Lyzer, 10 kDa; prerinsed with HBS; typically a 1000-fold excess of solution over sample was used). The proteins were then spun through 100 kDa ultrafilters (Microcon; prerinsed with HBS) for 7 min at room temperature to sterilize and remove preformed oligo- and polymeric species. HBS (30 l) was added to the filter, followed by another 2 min spin, and the total filtrate was stored on ice. Gel electrophoresis (SDSPAGE; colloidal Coomassie stain36) revealed that the protein preparations are essentially homogenous, containing only synuclein. Mass spectral analysis (matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight) of wt -synuclein demonstrated the expected molecular mass of 14.46 kDa. Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA assay (Pierce) and then matched. The BCA assay was standardized against the absorbance of wt synuclein using an 280 of 6500 M- 1cm- 1 (280 was determined by measuring the absorbance of synuclein samples whose absolute concentrations were obtained by amino acid analysis). The samples were transferred into either Nunc 384-well plates (used in the initial screen; white polystyrene, optical bottom, non-treated, #242763; 80 l of sample per well at 200 M and 400 M; plates were sterilized with 50% (v/v) ethanol and sealed under vacuum with Corning Costar Thermowell aluminum sealing tape), or sterile 0.5 ml polypropylene tubes (used in secondary, detailed kinetic studies of selected variants, as in Figure 1; 400 l at 250 M). Samples were incubated in darkness at 37 °C with horizontal shaking (3 mm diameter circular orbit,  550 rpm; Lab-Line Instruments titer plate shaker). Assays for fibril formation For the ThT assay, protein samples (2 l) were added to glycine buffer (100 mM pH 8.5, 40 l) in a Nunc black polystyrene 384-well plate. To this solution, 50 l of ThT solution (20 M ThT in 80 mM glycine, pH 8.5) was added. Fluorescence measurements (LJL Analyst; excitation 440 nm bandpass, emission 500 nm bandpass, 475 nm dichroic mirror) were made immediately. Measurements were made daily for incubation days 0 through 8, and then on days 11, 14, 21, and finally at approximately 30 days. Fibrillization lag time was defined as a ThT fluorescence reading (arbitrary units) of greater than 1000. This cutoff was chosen because it is just far enough above the zero plus noise level of the measurement to avoid false positives, while low enough to give sensitive detection of fibrils. Our rationale for using a cutoff value as opposed to fitting the time-course is that once fibrils have begun to form, the solution is no longer homogenous and any

-Synuclein Sequence Variants further ThT measurements are therefore erratic and of questionable relevance. The onset of fibrillization was often clearly visible by eye as an increase in solution turbidity. As a control, we confirmed that both wt and A53T fibrils contained full-length -synuclein by pelleting and washing fibrils, followed by formic acid solubilization, lyophilization, and SDS-PAGE. The extent of fibrillization was determined following 14 days of incubation by measuring the amount of soluble protein remaining in solution. A 50 l sample of the fibrillization reaction was withdrawn from each tube and insoluble material was pelleted at 16,000g. The protein concentration of the supernatant was measured by UV absorbance as described above (except that we used an 280 of 8125 M- 1cm- 1 for the mouse protein, as it contains five tyrosine residues versus four in the human sequence; neither contains tryptophan or cysteine).37 Library subcloning into yeast vectors PCR of the library was performed with forward primer 5gacttctaactagtaaaaaatggatgtattcatgaaaggac and either reverse primer 5tccggactcgagtcaagaaactgggagcaaagatatttctta for non-fusion proteins or 5tccggaaagcttggcttcaggttcgtagtcttgatacccttc for preparing -synuclein-GFP fusions. The forward primer contains a SpeI site and a yeast consensus translation sequence before the start codon.38 The reverse primers contain either XhoI (no fusion) or HindIII (for GFP fusion; no stop codon). The digested, gel-purified PCR products were ligated into the appropriate digested and phosphatase-treated vectors, of which there were three, one for each screen: For non-GFPfusions we used p426GAL1 and p416GAL1, for fusion proteins we used p426GAL1 with GFP inserted between the ClaI and XhoI sites. The p426GAL1 vector39 was obtained from ATCC and others were assembled from this and the pRS series vector40 kit from ATCC. The protein sequence at the fusion junction reads synuclein... PEAKLIDSKG... GFP. The last three amino acid residues of synuclein are PEA, the linker is KLID, the N-terminal Met/start of GFP is removed (to help prevent GFP expression if an improper ligation occurs) and SKG are amino acids from GFP (this GFP gene contains the original wt codons and mutations S65T and V163A). These plasmids were designed to closely emulate those used by Outeiro and Lindquist.18 The libraries were transformed into E. coli (chemically competent DH5) and, following 45 min of growth in SOC medium, samples were dilution-plated to analyze transformation efficiency. The remaining bulk of the transformations were grown in selective medium and plasmid-prepped for subsequent yeast transformation. About 14,000 independent clones were obtained for each of the three yeast vector libraries, which was sufficient for the throughput of our yeast screening methods. Yeast library transformation and replica plating With the intention of finding less toxic and more toxic synuclein genes, S. cerevisiae haploid strain W303-1a was transformed with the libraries p426GAL1-synuclein-GFP and p416GAL1-synuclein (20 ng of plasmid and 10 ml of 2×YPDA regrown yeast culture were used for each transformation) as described .41 We also attempted to  http://www.umanitoba.ca/faculties/medicine/ biochem/gietz/method.html

-Synuclein Sequence Variants search for clones that were dominantly non-toxic. Although we later found this approach to be inadequate for this purpose, it was successful in discovering non-toxic -synuclein mutants (see below and Results): W303-1a already containing p424GAL1-(wt -synuclein) was transformed with the p426GAL1-synuclein library. Each of these three libraries was plated onto 15 plates of the appropriate synthetic non-inducing (glucose) drop-out medium (CSM dropout mixtures were from Qbiogene and contained 20 mg/ml adenine) and grown at 30 °C. After about 30 h, when small colonies became visible, the plates were replicated onto synthetic inducing (2% (w/v) galactose) drop-out medium using sterile velveteen squares, and all plates were incubated at 30 °C. Directly plating a transformation onto galactose medium failed to yield any colonies. Yeast screening In each screen, candidate colonies were picked and streaked onto fresh plates to test for consistency of the phenotype. Candidates were determined by relative colony size and, to some extent, color. Non-toxic growth tends to produce reddish colonies (exhaustion of adenine in the medium by the growing colony is one explanation; W303-1a is Ade­); toxic synuclein causes smaller, white colonies. Colonies from the p426GAL1-synuclein-GFP library were also screened to exhibit strong GFP fluorescence in order to eliminate those that were artifactually non-toxic due to lack of expression. As mentioned above, we employed a second type of screen for dominant non-toxicity. -Synuclein sequence variants were expressed from the 2  plasmid p426GAL1, in a background of W303-1a p424GAL1-wt -synuclein. That is, all of the clones (9000 transformants were obtained) expressed both wt -synuclein and one synuclein sequence from the library. Our intention was to search for clones that dominantly repressed wt synuclein toxicity. However, the experimental design was flawed: wt -synuclein toxicity was decreased by the presence of any non-toxic 2  plasmid with the GAL1 promoter (for this reason, screening enriched for nonexpressing library clones and necessitated that -synuclein expression be confirmed by immunoblot, as described below). The probable reason is that the total number of 2  plasmids (the sum of p424 and p426) is regulated rather than each plasmid individually. This allows the plasmid p424GAL1-wt -synuclein to exist at a lower copy number (and hence, expression level) than is possible when the plasmid is present by itself. This screen did yield several non-toxic clones, although none was significantly more efficacious than GFP in repressing wt synuclein toxicity (data not shown). It could be that an observed phenotype was due to incidental mutations in the plasmid backbone (for example in the replication origin) and not in -synuclein itself. Each candidate cDNA was moved into a fresh vector (identical except for a TRP marker instead of URA) by in vivo homologous recombination-mediated plasmid construction.26,42 For this procedure, the candidate cDNAs were amplified individually by PCR (from about 100 bp upstream (primer: 5gcgaagcgatgatttttgatctattaac) and 100 bp downstream (primer: 5gacctagacttcaggttgtctaactccttcctt non-GFP; 5ttaagggtaagttttccgtatgttgc for GFP fusion) of the synuclein cDNA), and the products were cotransformed into yeast with the appropriate doubly digested (SpeI and XhoI or ClaI) TRP plasmid (lacking any synuclein cDNA). In vivo double crossover events, one in each of the 100 bp overlap regions, creates a re-

1519
constructed TRP version of the candidate, which was selected for on medium lacking tryptophan. All of the non-library control plasmids were PCR amplified and prepared in parallel by the same homologous recombination method, to avoid bias. A single quantitative growth trial (see below) was carried out on the resulting clones, and candidates continuing to display a robust phenotype were taken forward to the next step. In addition, candidates from the p426GAL1-synuclein library were screened for -synuclein expression by Western blotting following SDS-PAGE of spheroplasts (Sigma Celytic Y Plus). Finally, we wanted to eliminate all possibility of false positives due to promoter, terminator, or cDNA/plasmid junction mutations (which may have been carried through the recombination method above, within the 100 bp of overlap), and GFP tags. Therefore, in the manageable number of remaining candidates, the cDNA inserts in these TRP vectors were PCR amplified and then in vitro ligated into p426GAL1 (5gacttctaactagtaaaaaatggatgtattcatgaaaggac; 5tccggactcgagttaggcttcaggttcgtagtcttgatacc; SpeI and XhoI sites directly flank the -synuclein gene). These vectors were transformed into yeast, and quantitative growth studies for statistical analysis were carried out. At this time, DNA sequencing of the clones was performed. The sequences of all of the synuclein proteins that we studied that were not selected from the yeast library were verified. Note that PCR primers will tend to correct any mutation in the regions they anneal to. Therefore, in -synuclein clones obtained from yeast, only cDNA positions 23­390 (amino acid residues 8­130) are highly mutatable. Additional PD genes We wished to determine whether additional proteins associated with PD might increase or decrease the toxicity of synuclein in yeast. A 6 × 12 factorial design in randomized blocks43 was carried out to study quantitative growth of every combination of 5 PD-related genes expressed from p426GAL1: DJ-1, synphilin, Pink1, parkin, UCH-L1, and GFP (control) with five variants of synuclein: wt, A30P, A53T, , , and GFP. Additionally, the synucleins were all expressed from both a centromeric and a 2  plasmid (p414GAL1 or p424GAL1). The inferred protein sequences of DJ-1 and UCH-L1 matched the corresponding NCBI reference sequences (GenBank accession codes NP_009193.2 and NP_004172.2, respectively). Our parkin sequence contained a P223S mutation relative to GenBank accession code NP_004553.1 but this change is also found in the human genome (GenBank accession code NT_007422.13). Pink1 contained mutation P209A relative to the reference sequence (GenBank accession code NP_115785.1); this mutation is found also in the original mammalian genome collection clone (GenBank accession code BC028215.1). Synphilin (generously provided by Zhong Pei and Christopher Ross) was identical with the sequence given originally,44 but contains V44A relative to the current NCBI reference sequence (GenBank accession code NP_005451.2). Quantitative growth studies We measured quantitative growth rates in synthetic drop-out galactose medium with 100 mg/ml adenine in sterile 12-well polystyrene plates (Falcon 353043). Each well with 1 ml of medium was inoculated with a small quantity of a yeast colony by picking with a pipet tip.

1520
There is no doubt up to several-fold variation in inoculum levels between cultures. However, the parameter we extract from the Gompertz equation (below) is inoculation-level invariant, and the trials were performed in complete randomized blocks, so any inoculation level effects would be unbiased and accounted for statistically.43 The plates were incubated on the plate shaker described above, in darkness at room temperature at an approximate speed of 400 rpm. Yeast quantity was measured by vertical turbidity through the center of each growth well (no sampling of the culture is required). For this purpose, we employed a laser diode from a laser pointer (650 nm) and a CdS photoresistor. A digital multi-meter (Radio Shack 22-812) was used to measure resistance (proportional to 1/ intensity) and computer linkage to the meter allowed data recording. By a type of Beer-Lambert law, turbidity is proportional to log (resistance when sample is in the beam/ resistance when blank is in the beam), and is roughly proportional to the number of yeast cells. We were able to use eight 12-well plates per shaker, and the measurement of turbidity in 200 samples can be completed in 30 min. For each sample, the Gompertz growth equation:45,46 H ðtÞ ¼ a expðÀeÀnðtÀgÞ Þ was fit to the turbidity  as a function of time t in order to determine the maximum specific growth rate . This parameter intrinsically characterizes the growth rate of the yeast/synuclein-variant combination, and was used in the statistical analyses of yeast growth (calculations were performed with Matlab (The MathWorks, Inc.)). Yeast microscopy After growth (in liquid galactose medium, as described above for quantitative growth studies), a few microliters of yeast in growth medium were placed on a slide with hydrophobic adhesion wells (Erie Scientific) and were overlaid with a coverslip. The slides were examined with a Nikon E600 microscope using a 100× plan fluor objective and representative photographs of fluorescence were taken through a FITC-HYQ filter cube with a Diagnostic Instruments RT slider camera in black and white mode. Membrane binding studies Yeast clones of interest were subcloned into the pT7-7 E. coli expression vector by PCR (forward primer 5cgagctctccatatggatgtattcatgaaaggac reverse primer, 5tccggaaagcttaggcttcaggttcgtagtcttgataccc). All of these pT7-7 clones were verified by sequencing to match their originating yeast clones in protein sequence. Proteins were expressed, purified, resuspended, and concentration matched as described above, except azide was not included in the buffers. Vesicles were prepared as described,31 using egg phosphatidyl-glycerol (Avanti Polar Lipids, #841138), with slight changes: After drying, lipid was resuspended in HBS 1 mM EDTA:OptiPrep (OptiPrep is a 60% (w/v) stock of iodixanol in water; Sigma D-1556) in a 1:2 (v/v) ratio. Membrane extrusion was carried out with 13 passes through a single 200 nm pore-size Whatman Nuclepore membrane. PD-10 chromatography was carried out with HBS 1 mM EDTA as the mobile phase. The vesicles were stored in glass at 4 °C, and were used within a few days. Optiprep in the vesicles allows them to be pelleted rapidly

-Synuclein Sequence Variants in a benchtop microcentrifuge (16,000g). This is necessary, considering the large number of samples to be analyzed, and the rapid time-scale helps prevent protein­vesicle dissociation during sedimentation. Similar methods have been described.47,48 Purified synuclein (25 l) in HBS, 10 mM CaCl2 was mixed with 25 l of the lipid solution. All reactions were carried out in siliconized 1.7 ml tubes (Research Products International, #145450). After incubation at room temperature for 1 h, 10 l of the solution was removed to a well of a black 96-well plate already containing 15 l of HBS and 50 l of 100 mM borate-Triton (pH 9.3; 0.3% (v/v) Triton X-100). The remaining 40 l was layered on top of 500 l of 5% OptiPrep in HBS in a 1.7 ml siliconized tube, which was then centrifuged at 16,000g for 10 min at room temperature. The supernatant was carefully aspirated from the top down, leaving only the final 25 l of fluid in the tube, and without disturbing the small lipid pellet. The pellet and 25 l of remaining supernatant was dissolved in 50 l of borate-triton and transferred to the 96-well plate. The protein concentrations of samples in the plate were measured using the Invitrogen CBQCA protein quantitation kit. This assay is insensitive to lipids and detergent, and produces a fluorescent signal proportional to the number of primary amines present (lysine and the N terminus). Fractional adjustments were made in the blank-subtracted measured signals according to the number of primary amines in the protein sequence of each sample, in order to normalize to wt -synuclein, which has 16 primary amines. Sequence analysis We take the 25 non-toxic -synuclein sequences selected from the library (Figures 2 and 5) as the set for analysis. We assume position-independent nucleotide mutation frequencies in the original, unselected, library; this assumption has empirical justification.11 The null hypothesis is that amino acid mutation Z (Z is one of the 20 naturally occurring amino acids and is not locationspecific) is neutral: it has not been enriched for or depressed in our sample. Under this null hypothesis, a nucleotide mutation ij (e.g. AT) should be observed at the same frequency at positions where it would and would not cause Z. To examine this, the data (one count for every possible nucleotide mutation at every position of every non-toxic library clone) can be organized into 2 × 2 contingency tables, with row classification based on whether ij at the particular position under consideration would cause Z, and column classification based on whether ij was observed at that position. A separate table is compiled for each of the 12 types of nucleotide mutation, since the different nucleotide mutations occur with different overall frequencies; the Mantel-Haenszel statistical test is then used to simultaneously analyze these multiple tables.49,50 In theory, each library sequence should be analyzed separately into 12 2 × 2 tables, since different sequences may arise from different generation PCR products and, hence, have different mutation frequencies. This was not found to alter the conclusions in our case, and the simpler treatment combining all of the sequences was therefore used. In the analysis, we eliminated any count that would produce a premature stop codon, since these were effectively eliminated during the screening procedure. Furthermore, only the mutatable nucleotides were considered (cDNA positions 23­390). As a test of the procedure, we used a Monte Carlo method to produce 5000 sets of 25 sequences, with overall

-Synuclein Sequence Variants nucleotide mutation frequencies identical with those found in the set of 25 non-toxic clones (Figure 5). Those with nonsense mutations were rejected, as they are in our screen. These sets of artificial "selected" sequences exactly follow the null hypothesis, because the 12 nucleotide mutation frequencies used to produce them are completely positionindependent; there is no selective pressure at all. Using an  level of 0.05 for the Mantel-Haenszel statistic, we obtained, on average, 126 "significant results" (false positives) from the 5000 sets of sequences. The Mantel-Haenszel statistic is referenced to a 2 distribution with one degree of freedom, and if that was the correct reference for this problem, we would have obtained  250 false positives (0.05 × 5000). Because significantly fewer false positives were obtained, we conclude that p-values from the Mantel-Haenszel procedure are conservative in this application. On the other hand, the p-values reported for analysis of our experimental data (Figure 5) also have a liberal contribution: this particular type of analysis was suggested by visual inspection of the data itself and the p-values, which were determined for all 20 mutation types simultaneously, do not include a multiple comparison adjustment. In this analysis, we have tacitly assumed that only amino acid Z, if any, could have been enriched or depressed. If other non-Z amino acids have been selected for or against, this might bias the statistic. None-the-less, the test is quite practical. First, we note that selection for or against any particular amino acid will alter the occurrence of only a rather small subset of possible ij mutations (for example, if methionine mutations via AT are strongly selected against, there are still numerous other locations where AT can occur without causing a methionine mutation, so its influence is not excessive). Second, visual inspection of the sequences shows that there is no obvious bias for or against most amino acids.

1521
2. Conway, K. A., Harper, J. D. & Lansbury, P. T., Jr (1998). Accelerated in vitro fibril formation by a mutant alpha-synuclein linked to early-onset Parkinson disease. Nature Med. 4, 1318­1320. 3. Spillantini, M. G., Schmidt, M. L., Lee, V. M., Trojanowski, J. Q., Jakes, R. & Goedert, M. (1997). Alpha-synuclein in Lewy bodies. Nature, 388, 839­840. 4. Bussell, R., Jr, Ramlall, T. F. & Eliezer, D. (2005). Helix periodicity, topology, and dynamics of membraneassociated alpha-synuclein. Protein Sci. 14, 862­872. 5. Davidson, W. S., Jonas, A., Clayton, D. F. & George, J. M. (1998). Stabilization of alpha-synuclein secondary structure upon binding to synthetic membranes. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 9443­9949. 6. Bisaglia, M., Tessari, I., Pinato, L., Bellanda, M., Giraudo, S., Fasano, M. et al. (2005). A topological model of the interaction between alpha-synuclein and sodium dodecyl sulfate micelles. Biochemistry, 44, 329­339. 7. Bussell, R., Jr & Eliezer, D. (2004). Effects of Parkinson's disease-linked mutations on the structure of lipid-associated alpha-synuclein. Biochemistry, 43, 4810­4818. 8. Sung, Y. H. & Eliezer, D. (2006). Secondary structure and dynamics of micelle bound beta- and gammasynuclein. Protein Sci. 15, 1162­1174. 9. Yamin, G., Munishkina, L. A., Karymov, M. A., Lyubchenko, Y. L., Uversky, V. N. & Fink, A. L. (2005). Forcing nonamyloidogenic beta-synuclein to fibrillate. Biochemistry, 44, 9096­9107. 10. Dauer, W. & Przedborski, S. (2003). Parkinson's disease: mechanisms and models. Neuron, 39, 889­909. 11. Volles, M. J. & Lansbury, P. T., Jr (2005). A computer program for the estimation of protein and nucleic acid sequence diversity in random point mutagenesis libraries. Nucl. Acids Res. 33, 3667­3677. 12. Du, H. N., Tang, L., Luo, X. Y., Li, H. T., Hu, J., Zhou, J. W. & Hu, H. Y. (2003). A peptide motif consisting of glycine, alanine, and valine is required for the fibrillization and cytotoxicity of human alpha-synuclein. Biochemistry, 42, 8870­8878. 13. Giasson, B. I., Murray, I. V., Trojanowski, J. Q. & Lee, V. M. (2001). A hydrophobic stretch of 12 amino acid residues in the middle of alpha-synuclein is essential for filament assembly. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 2380­2386. 14. Sode, K., Usuzaka, E., Kobayashi, N. & Ochiai, S. (2005). Engineered alpha-synuclein prevents wildtype and familial Parkin variant fibril formation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 335, 432­436. 15. Kessler, J. C., Rochet, J. C. & Lansbury, P. T., Jr (2003). The N-terminal repeat domain of alpha-synuclein inhibits beta-sheet and amyloid fibril formation. Biochemistry, 42, 672­678. 16. Griffioen, G., Duhamel, H., Van Damme, N., Pellens, K., Zabrocki, P., Pannecouque, C. et al. (2006). A yeastbased model of alpha-synucleinopathy identifies compounds with therapeutic potential. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1762, 312­318. 17. Wurth, C., Guimard, N. K. & Hecht, M. H. (2002). Mutations that reduce aggregation of the Alzheimer's Abeta42 peptide: an unbiased search for the sequence determinants of Abeta amyloidogenesis. J. Mol. Biol. 319, 1279­1290. 18. Outeiro, T. F. & Lindquist, S. (2003). Yeast cells provide insight into alpha-synuclein biology and pathobiology. Science, 302, 1772­1775. 19. Willingham, S., Outeiro, T. F., DeVit, M. J., Lindquist, S. L. & Muchowski, P. J. (2003). Yeast genes that

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Morris K. Udall Parkinson's Disease Research Center of Excellence grant (NS038375) and National Institutes of Health grants AG008470 and NS051243. We thank Allegra Petti for assistance with subcloning the single-point mutants of Figure 1 into yeast vectors. We thank Alina Vrbioiu and Katherina Vamvaca for helpful discussion and comments on the manuscript. We thank Sarah Luchansky, Chris Rochet, and Jeff Kessler for many useful discussions, as well as advice with molecular biology, and Craig Justman for advice regarding protein fibrillization in plates.

Supplementary Data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/ j.jmb.2006.12.044

References
1. Cookson, M. R. (2005). The biochemistry of Parkinson's disease. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 74, 29­52.

1522
enhance the toxicity of a mutant huntingtin fragment or alpha-synuclein. Science, 302, 1769­1772. Cooper, A. A., Gitler, A. D., Cashikar, A., Haynes, C. M., Hill, K. J., Bhullar, B. et al. (2006). Alpha-synuclein blocks ER-Golgi traffic and Rab1 rescues neuron loss in Parkinson's models. Science, 313, 324­328. Dixon, C., Mathias, N., Zweig, R. M., Davis, D. A. & Gross, D. S. (2005). Alpha-synuclein targets the plasma membrane via the secretory pathway and induces toxicity in yeast. Genetics, 170, 47­59. Biere, A. L., Wood, S. J., Wypych, J., Steavenson, S., Jiang, Y., Anafi, D. et al. (2000). Parkinson's diseaseassociated alpha-synuclein is more fibrillogenic than beta- and gamma-synuclein and cannot cross-seed its homologs. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 34574­34579. Cole, N. B., Murphy, D. D., Grider, T., Rueter, S., Brasaemle, D. & Nussbaum, R. L. (2002). Lipid droplet binding and oligomerization properties of the Parkinson's disease protein alpha-synuclein. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 6344­6352. Petrucelli, L., O'Farrell, C., Lockhart, P. J., Baptista, M., Kehoe, K., Vink, L. et al. (2002). Parkin protects against the toxicity associated with mutant alphasynuclein. proteasome dysfunction selectively affects catecholaminergic neurons. Neuron, 36, 1007­1019. Lo Bianco, C., Schneider, B. L., Bauer, M., Sajadi, A., Brice, A., Iwatsubo, T. & Aebischer, P. (2004). Lentiviral vector delivery of parkin prevents dopaminergic degeneration in an alpha-synuclein rat model of Parkinson's disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 17510­17515. Ma, H., Kunes, S., Schatz, P. J. & Botstein, D. (1987). Plasmid construction by homologous recombination in yeast. Gene, 58, 201­216. Jensen, P. H., Nielsen, M. S., Jakes, R., Dotti, C. G. & Goedert, M. (1998). Binding of alpha-synuclein to brain vesicles is abolished by familial Parkinson's disease mutation. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 26292­26294. Jo, E., Fuller, N., Rand, R. P., St George-Hyslop, P. & Fraser, P. E. (2002). Defective membrane interactions of familial Parkinson's disease mutant A30P alphasynuclein. J. Mol. Biol. 315, 799­807. Bussell, R., Jr & Eliezer, D. (2003). A structural and functional role for 11-mer repeats in alpha-synuclein and other exchangeable lipid binding proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 329, 763­778. Segrest, J. P., Jones, M. K., De Loof, H., Brouillette, C. G., Venkatachalapathi, Y. V. & Anantharamaiah, G. M. (1992). The amphipathic helix in the exchangeable apolipoproteins: a review of secondary structure and function. J. Lipid Res. 33, 141­166. Volles, M. J. & Lansbury, P. T., Jr (2002). Vesicle permeabilization by protofibrillar alpha-synuclein is sensitive to Parkinson's disease-linked mutations and occurs by a pore-like mechanism. Biochemistry, 41, 4595­4602. Dower, W. J., Miller, J. F. & Ragsdale, C. W. (1988). High efficiency transformation of E. coli by high voltage electroporation. Nucl. Acids Res. 16, 6127­6145. Sambrook, J. & Russell, D. W. (2001). Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual, 3rd edit. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York.

-Synuclein Sequence Variants 34. Pruitt, K. D., Tatusova, T. & Maglott, D. R. (2005). NCBI Reference Sequence (RefSeq): a curated nonredundant sequence database of genomes, transcripts and proteins. Nucl. Acids Res. 33, D501­D504. 35. Jakes, R., Spillantini, M. G. & Goedert, M. (1994). Identification of two distinct synucleins from human brain. FEBS Letters, 345, 27­32. 36. Neuhoff, V., Arold, N., Taube, D. & Ehrhardt, W. (1988). Improved staining of proteins in polyacrylamide gels including isoelectric focusing gels with clear background at nanogram sensitivity using Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 and R-250. Electrophoresis, 9, 255­262. 37. Pace, C. N., Vajdos, F., Fee, L., Grimsley, G. & Gray, T. (1995). How to measure and predict the molar absorption coefficient of a protein. Protein Sci. 4, 2411­2423. 38. Romanos, M. A., Scorer, C. A. & Clare, J. J. (1992). Foreign gene expression in yeast: a review. Yeast, 8, 423­488. 39. Funk, M., Niedenthal, R., Mumberg, D., Brinkmann, K., Ronicke, V. & Henkel, T. (2002). Vector systems for heterologous expression of proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Methods Enzymol. 350, 248­257. 40. Christianson, T. W., Sikorski, R. S., Dante, M., Shero, J. H. & Hieter, P. (1992). Multifunctional yeast highcopy-number shuttle vectors. Gene, 110, 119­122. 41. Gietz, R. D. & Woods, R. A. (2002). Transformation of yeast by lithium acetate/single-stranded carrier DNA/polyethylene glycol method. Methods Enzymol. 350, 87­96. 42. Oldenburg, K. R., Vo, K. T., Michaelis, S. & Paddon, C. (1997). Recombination-mediated PCR-directed plasmid construction in vivo in yeast. Nucl. Acids Res. 25, 451­452. 43. Cochran, W. G. & Cox, G. M. (1992). Experimental Designs, 2nd edit. Wiley, New York. 44. Engelender, S., Kaminsky, Z., Guo, X., Sharp, A. H., Amaravi, R. K., Kleiderlein, J. J. et al. (1999). Synphilin1 associates with alpha-synuclein and promotes the formation of cytosolic inclusions. Nature Genet. 22, 110­114. 45. Zwietering, M. H., Jongenburger, I., Rombouts, F. M. & van 't Riet, K. (1990). Modeling of the bacterial growth curve. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 56, 1875­1881. 46. Seber, G. A. F. & Wild, C. J. (1989). Nonlinear Regression. Wiley Series in Probability and Mathematical Statistics, Wiley, New York. 47. Cho, W., Bittova, L. & Stahelin, R. V. (2001). Membrane binding assays for peripheral proteins. Anal. Biochem. 296, 153­161. 48. Diakowski, W. & Sikorski, A. F. (1995). Interaction of brain spectrin (fodrin) with phospholipids. Biochemistry, 34, 13252­13258. 49. Ramsey, F. L. & Schafer, D. W. (2002). The Statistical Sleuth: A Course in Methods of Data Analysis, 2nd edit. Duxbury/Thomson Learning, Australia. 50. Kuritz, S. J., Landis, J. R. & Koch, G. G. (1988). A general overview of Mantel-Haenszel methods: applications and recent developments. Annu. Rev. Publ. Health, 9, 123­160. 51. Hochberg, Y. & Tamhane, A. C. (1987). Multiple Comparison Procedures, Wiley, New York.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26. 27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32. 33.

Edited by F. E. Cohen (Received 11 November 2006; accepted 8 December 2006) Available online 21 December 2006

