Drug Resistance Updates 6 (2003) 9­13

3D structure of AcrB: the archetypal multidrug efflux transporter of Escherichia coli likely captures substrates from periplasm
Christopher A. Elkins, Hiroshi Nikaido
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 426, Barker Hall, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-3202, USA

Abstract Recent advances in structural biology have extended our understanding of the multiple drug efflux complex, AcrAB­TolC, of Escherichia coli. This tripartite complex and its homologs are the major mechanisms that give most Gram-negative bacteria their characteristic intrinsic resistance to a variety of lipophilic drugs, dyes, and detergents. Most recently, the structure of the transporter AcrB was elucidated at high resolution [Nature 419(2002)587]. It is a particularly significant achievement since integral membrane proteins are notoriously elusive structures for crystallography. The striking features of this trimeric pump, such as the presence of potential substrate-binding sites in the periplasmic domain and the possibility of direct interaction with the end of TolC tunnel, refine our understanding of the mode of action of this tripartite efflux transport complex. © 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Multidrug efflux; AcrB; Substrate-binding sites; RND family transporter

1. Introduction A major finding in the area of microbial drug resistance in recent years has been the realization that the "intrinsic" resistance and in many cases the acquired, higher-level resistance owe much to the active efflux of drugs by the ubiquitous multidrug efflux pumps (Nikaido, 1994, 1998; Zgurskaya and Nikaido, 2000). There are a number of multidrug efflux pumps encoded within the genome of a given bacterial species. In Escherichia coli, at least 37 drug efflux pumps (experimentally validated and putative) have been identified with representative members in several families. Among these, the AcrAB pump is unquestionably the most important. It has an extremely wide substrate specificity, ranging from simple solvents to dyes, detergents (including bile salts that are the most important inhibitors in the natural habitat of E. coli), and practically all of the amphiphilic and lipophilic antibiotics. In addition, the inactivation of acrAB operon has a dramatic effect on antibiotic susceptibility, for example, decreasing the cloxacillin MIC by a factor of 256 (Nikaido et al., 1998). The original acr mutant was isolated as an acridine-hypersensitive strain in Japan in 1965 (Nakamura, 1965). When


Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-510-642-2027; fax: +1-510-643-9290. E-mail address: nhiroshi@uclink4.berkeley.edu (H. Nikaido).

the gene was cloned and sequenced, the mutant turned out to have an IS2 insertion in the acrA gene, which appeared to code for a periplasmic protein and was followed by a downstream gene, acrB, coding for an RND (resistance­ nodulation­division) family multidrug efflux pump energized by proton-motive force (Ma et al., 1993). There were two distinctive features of this system. First, the operon structure, as well as the requirement for both acrA and acrB genes for efflux, suggested that the pump protein functions only when it became a component of a hetero-oligomeric complex. In fact, the closely homologous operons in Pseudomonas aeruginosa contained not only the homologs of acrA and acrB, but also homologs of E. coli tolC, coding for an outer membrane channel. This led to the notion that AcrB is a part of a tripartite complex AcrAB­TolC. AcrA (and its homologs) contain a conserved domain consisting of an interrupted coiled coil (Johnson and Church, 1999), and is an elongated protein with a length of up to 20 nm (Zgurskaya and Nikaido, 1998). These observations led to the early model of this tripartite system (Fig. 1A). Second, the substrates of this system usually contain lipophilic domains; this suggested that the substrates become concentrated in the cytoplasmic membrane (Nikaido, 1996). Furthermore, the diverse ionic nature of the substrates, including non-ionic, anionic, cationic, and zwitterionic compounds, is unusual. If these substrates were pumped out from the cytoplasm, the alterations in membrane potential

1368-7646/03/$ ­ see front matter © 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/S1368-7646(03)00004-9

10

C.A. Elkins, H. Nikaido / Drug Resistance Updates 6 (2003) 9­13

Fig. 1. Speculative models of the AcrAB­TolC tripartite complex. (A) AcrA is postulated to fold upon itself using its coiled-coil domain, thus allowing a transient interaction between TolC and AcrB. (B) Such closing of the gap between the two membranes is not thought to be necessary.

Fig. 2. Cut-away view of the AcrB trimer. This is based on the coordinates in file 1IWG in Protein Data Bank. The monomer closest to the viewer was removed to show the vestibule () between the two remaining monomers. (A) and (B) together comprise the periplasmic domain, (C) the transmembrane domain. (B) is the pore domain, and (A) is the putative TolC-docking domain.

C.A. Elkins, H. Nikaido / Drug Resistance Updates 6 (2003) 9­13

11

must be adjusted by complex compensatory mechanisms. Finally, the system exports substrates that do not get into the cytoplasm (Nikaido et al., 1998). These results suggested that the complex prefers to take up substrates from periplasm, or perhaps from the outer leaflet of the cytoplasmic membrane where amphiphilic substrates become concentrated (Nikaido, 1996).

2. Three dimensional (3D) structure of AcrB The recent solution of the 3.5 Å crystal structure of AcrB (Murakami et al., 2002) was a major event in many ways. It is the first high-resolution structure for transporters energized by proton-motive force. It is the first active transporter (rather than channel) shown to exist as a trimer. An interesting feature is the presence of large periplasmic domains (Fig. 2). AcrB is composed of 1049 amino acids. It contains 12 transmembrane domains (TMDs) or helices and two large periplasmic loops between TMDs 1 and 2 and TMDs 7 and 8. These loops are a typical feature of RND pumps and contain more than 300 amino acids each. Thus, the large, 7 nm protrusion of the periplasmic domain, which is composed of the two large loops, was not unexpected. Most interestingly, three openings, called vestibules, were seen at the junctions of protomer headpieces just outside the plane of the membrane (Fig. 2). These vestibules are connected to the central cavity at the center of the trimer, and are hypothesized to be conduits for substrate entry from either the periplasm or the outer leaflet of the cytoplasmic membrane (Murakami et al., 2002). While this is still a hypothesis, it fits extraordinarily well with the prediction derived from biochemical studies, mentioned above. Support for this view was also obtained in three independent studies performed shortly before the release of the AcrB crystal structure, all implicating the two large periplasmic loops in substrate recognition. In two of the studies, functional chimeras were produced between different RND pumps. Tikhonova et al. (2002) fused N-terminal regions of AcrB to C-terminal ends of MexB from P. aeruginosa. Those chimeras with AcrB sequence that contained both of the loops displayed resistance to the entire complement of AcrB substrates. Elkins and Nikaido (2002) took a different approach in which loop regions from AcrB were exchanged with corresponding regions of another RND transporter of E. coli, AcrD, and vice versa. AcrB assumed a typically AcrD-like phenotype when the two loops of AcrB were replaced with those of AcrD (with the converse also holding true). In the third study, Mao et al. (2002) obtained point mutations of another RND pump, P. aeruginosa MexD, that broadened its substrate specificity. These mutations mapped to the periplasmic loops of the protein. Interestingly, two of the mutations, A292V and P328L, corresponded to sites located at or near

the opening of the vestibule. Taken in aggregate with the structure of AcrB, these studies are consistent with the hypothesis that substrates are cycled mainly through the periplasm. From the crystal structure it is not clear if the substrates can be captured from the cytoplasm. The TMDs of the three protomers are spread out at the inner surface of the membrane. Since the exposed residues are not particularly hydrophilic, it is difficult to imagine that they could form an open cavity, as was proposed for mammalian P-glycoprotein (Rosenberg et al., 2001). Nor do we have persuasive biochemical evidence indicating whether AcrB can pump out cytosolic substrates.

3. Structure of AcrAB­TolC complex The crystal structure of TolC was solved two years ago (Koronakis et al., 2000). TolC, like AcrB, is trimeric. The part spanning the outer membrane is essentially a -barrel, as in other outer membrane channel proteins, but here a single barrel of 12 strands is produced by each protomer contributing only four -strands. In addition, an -helical, long, tunnel-like domain extends far (approximately 10 nm) into the periplasm (Fig. 3). In the crystallized form, the extracellular face is open, whereas the periplasmic tail is tapered closed by 12, densely packed -helices. Interestingly, Murakami et al. (2002) point out that the outer end of the trimeric periplasmic domain of AcrB has the right dimension to fit onto the inner end of TolC tunnel. The combined lengths of the extramembraneous extensions of TolC and AcrB proteins (17 nm) can conceivably span the periplasm. Thus, AcrB may interact directly with TolC, even without the AcrA-mediated closing of the intermembrane distance (Fig. 1B).

4. The role of AcrA Perhaps the most acute question facing us in this system is the precise role of AcrA. It enhances the transport activity of AcrB in a reconstituted system (Zgurskaya and Nikaido, 1999). The easiest interpretation was that AcrA connected the vesicles together. However, the crystal structure of AcrB shows depressions suggested to be the AcrA-binding sites, and direct activation of AcrB by the bound AcrA is also possible. The crystal structure of AcrA was solved at low resolution (Avila-Sakar et al., 2001), and confirms the very elongated shape of AcrA. The AcrA crystallized as a head-to-head dimer in a helical structure with a central pore. Although it is tempting to imagine this helical structure to stabilize, for example, the junction between AcrB and TolC, a head-to-head dimer structure is unlikely to be a physiological one, because the N-terminus of AcrA is lipid-modified, and is likely to be inserted into the cytoplasmic membrane.

12

C.A. Elkins, H. Nikaido / Drug Resistance Updates 6 (2003) 9­13

Fig. 3. Structure of TolC trimer. This is based on the coordinate 1EK9 in Protein Data Bank. At the top, a 12-stranded membrane, and at the bottom a long barrel composed of -helices may reach the top of the AcrB periplasmic domain.

-barrel traverses the outer

5. Conclusions and future directions AcrB transporter of E. coli, an archetypal multidrug transporter of Gram-negative bacteria, has a number of unusual characteristics. First, it pumps out an extraordinarily wide range of compounds. Second, even some drugs that do not readily diffuse into the cytoplasm are pumped out. Third, it apparently forms a complex with the periplasmic lipoprotein AcrA and an outer membrane channel TolC and extrudes the drugs directly into the external medium. These properties can now be explained by the crystallographic structure of AcrB published re-

cently (Murakami et al., 2002). Most interestingly, the substrates appear to be captured through the vestibules located just outside the outer surface of the cytoplasmic membrane, suggesting that this is a most unusual pump that catalyzes efflux from the periplasm, rather than from the cytoplasm. This is of course beneficial for the bacteria because they can remove antimicrobial compounds even before they enter the cytoplasm where most of the targets are located. The structure will obviously aid the design of pump inhibitors, which may now become easier, because these inhibitors do not have to traverse the cytoplasmic membrane.

C.A. Elkins, H. Nikaido / Drug Resistance Updates 6 (2003) 9­13

13

Acknowledgements Research in the authors' laboratory was supported by a US Public Health Service grant (AI-09644). References
Avila-Sakar, A., Misaghi, S., Wilson-Kubalek, E., Downing, K., Zgurskaya, H., Nikaido, H., Nogales, E., 2001. Lipid-layer crystallization and preliminary three-dimensional structure analysis of AcrA, the periplasmic component of a bacterial multidrug efflux pump. J. Struct. Biol. 136, 81­88. Elkins, C., Nikaido, H., 2002. Substrate specificity of the RND-type multidrug efflux pumps AcrB and AcrD of Escherichia coli is determined predominately by two large periplasmic loops. J. Bacteriol. 184, 6490­6498. Johnson, J., Church, G., 1999. Alignment and structure prediction of divergent protein families: periplasmic and outer membrane proteins of bacterial efflux pumps. J. Mol. Biol. 287, 695­715. Koronakis, V., Sharff, A., Koronakis, E., Luisi, B., Hughes, C., 2000. Crystal structure of the bacterial membrane protein TolC central to multidrug efflux and protein export. Nature 405, 914­919. Ma, D., Cook, D., Alberti, M., Pon, N., Nikaido, H., Hearst, J., 1993. Molecular cloning and characterization of acrA and acrE genes of Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 175, 6299­6313. Mao, W., Warren, M., Black, D., Satou, T., Murata, T., Nishino, T., Gotoh, N., Lomovskaya, O., 2002. On the mechanism of substrate specificity by resistance nodulation division (RND)-type multidrug resistance pumps: the large periplasmic loops of MexD from Pseudomonas

aeruginosa are involved in substrate recognition. Mol. Microbiol. 46, 889­901. Murakami, S., Nakashima, R., Yamashita, E., Yamaguchi, A., 2002. Crystal structure of bacterial multidrug efflux transporter AcrB. Nature 419, 587­593. Nakamura, H., 1965. Gene-controlled resistance to acriflavin and other basic dyes in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 90, 8­14. Nikaido, H., 1994. Prevention of drug access to bacterial targets: role of permeability barriers and active efflux. Science 264, 382­388. Nikaido, H., 1996. Multidrug efflux pumps of Gram-negative bacteria. J. Bacteriol. 178, 5853­5859. Nikaido, H., 1998. Antibiotic resistance caused by Gram-negative multidrug efflux pumps. Curr. Inf. Dis. 27, S32­S41. Nikaido, H., Basina, M., Nguyen, V., Rosenberg, E.Y., 1998. Multidrug efflux pump AcrAB of Salmonella typhimurium excretes only those -lactam antibiotics containing lipophilic side chains. J. Bacteriol. 180, 4686­4692. Rosenberg, M.F., Velarde, G., Ford, R.C., Martin, C., Berridge, G., Kerr, I.D., Callaghan, R., Schmidlin, A., Wooding, C., Linton, K.J., Higgins, C.F., 2001. Repacking of the transmembrane domains of P-glycoprotein during the transport ATPase cycle. EMBO J. 20, 5615­5625. Tikhonova, E., Wang, Q., Zgurskaya, H., 2002. Chimeric analysis of the multicomponent multidrug efflux transporters from Gram-negative bacteria. J. Bacteriol. 184, 6499­6507. Zgurskaya, H., Nikaido, H., 1998. AcrA is a highly asymmetric protein capable of spanning the periplasm. J. Mol. Biol. 285, 409­420. Zgurskaya, H., Nikaido, H., 1999. Bypassing the periplasm: reconstitution of the AcrAB multidrug efflux pump of Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 7190­7195. Zgurskaya, H., Nikaido, H., 2000. Multidrug resistance mechanisms: drug efflux across two membranes. Mol. Microbiol. 37, 219­225.

