DNA-binding

domains: targets for viral and tellular regulators

Susanne Wagner and Michael R Green
University of Massachusetts Medical Center, Worcester, USA

Specific DNA binding by eukaryotic transcription factors is conferred by several types of sequence motif. These domains have been extensively studied with regard to their precise interaction with DNA and the basis of sequence specificity. Evidence is accumulating that DNA-binding domains serve functions in addition to binding DNA: they are also targets of viral and cellular regulatory proteins.

Current

Opinion

in Cell

Biology

1994,

6:410-414

Introduction
Transcriptional regulation depends on the specific interaction of cellular DNA-binding proteins with distinct DNA sequences. These `sequence-specific transcription factors' have two functions on separable domains: sequence-specific DNA binding and transcriptional activation. The activity of either domain can be independently regulated by a number of mechanisms, such as phosphorylation. Accessory proteins, perhaps best exemplified by the regulatory proteins of some animal viruses, can modulate transcriptional activity by diverse mechanisms. Formation of heterodimers within a transcription factor family has been well described, and there is now increasing evidence that transcription factors from different families, containing similar as well as unrelated DNA-binding domains, form composite regulators. In this review we will focus on control mechanisms that make use of conserved and unique features of DNA-binding domains, and will describe different ways in which these domains serve regulatory functions.

teins bind DNA following dimerization, which is mediated by a coiled-coil structure of the leucine repeat. Direct interaction with DNA is established by residues in the basic region. Bacterially expressed c-jun and c-fos require dithiothreitol for DNA-binding activity. A detailed investigation demonstrated that DNA binding is controlled by the oxidative state of a conserved cysteine in the basic region. Oxidation of this residue prevents dimerization and DNA binding. Mammalian cell extracts contain a redox factor, REF-1, which stimulates the DNA-binding activity of AR-1 as well as that of other transcription factors 131.

Regulatory domains

proteins

that target

DNA-binding

Several recent studies have investigated regulatory proteins that target the DNA-binding domain of a transcription factor. Perhaps the best characterized cases are the transcriptional activators of certain animal viruses. Recent studies on two viral activators have provided insights into why accessory proteins might target DNAbinding domains.

Enzymatic

regulation

of DNA binding
Adenovirus El a

Two types of covalent modifications have been shown to regulate the activity of DNA-binding domains. First, it is well established that DNA-binding activity of some transcription factors can be regulated by phosphorylation ill. Second, several members of the AR-1 (activating protein-l) transcription factor family [21 are regulated by a different mechanism. Their DNA-binding domain, a basic region/leucine zipper motif (bZIP), consists of a stretch of predominantly basic residues adjacent to several heptad repeats of leucine. bZI1' pro-

Adenovirus Ela proteins increase transcription from a variety of viral and cellular promoters 141. Ela proteins lack intrinsic DNA-binding activity and their ability to regulate transcription is dependent upon protein-protein interactions with cellular DNA transcription factors. Association with these factors allows Ela proteins to affect gene regulation by a number of different mechanisms [51. Early adenoviral genes that are activated by the Elal3S protein have a common

Abbreviations
AP-l-activating CR-glucocorticoid protein-l; receptor; ATF-activating HMG-high transcription mobility group; factor; bHLH-basic HTLV-l-human helix-loop-helix; T cell lymphotropic bZIP-basic virus type region/leucine I; SRF-serum zipper response motif; factor.

410

0 Current

Biology

Ltd ISSN 0955-0674

DNA-binding

domains

Wagner

and Green

411

promoter element that is a binding site for activating transcription factors (AT'Fs) 141.ATF proteins are a family of bZIP transcription factors with related binding specificities 161.Several studies have shown that ATF-2 (and its derivatives) is the only member of the ATF family that can support an Ela response 17-91. Biochemical studies reveal that Ela directly contacts ATF-2 through its bZIP DNA-binding motif, the region most conserved among the ATFs [lo"]. Accordingly, Elal3.S also binds to the bZIP domain of other ATF proteins and the closely related c-jun protein. The specificity of ATF-2 activation is conferred by a transcriptional activation domain present in the amino terminus of ATF-2 that is absent from other ATFs. Surprisingly, Ela was also found to associate with the non-bZIP transcription factors Spl and USF (upstream stimulatory factor) via their DNA-binding domains. These findings correlate well with previous results that Ela increases transcription `promiscuously' from promoters containing binding sites for ATF, Spl, USF and AP-1 proteins ([lo**], and references therein). These observations raise the intriguing question of how Ela recognizes apparently diverse DNA-binding domains.

itation constant is higher than the DNA-binding constant, dimerization limits DNA-binding. In these cases, increasing dimerization should promote DNA binding. In fact, the major target proteins of Tax, those containing a bZIP DNA-binding motif, have dimerization and DNA-binding constants that differ by several orders of magnitude. For example, the yeast transcription factor GCN4, a prototype bZIP protein, has dimerization and DNA-binding constants of approximately 104 M and 10-g M, respectively 1201. Chemical crosslinking experiments have shown that Tax facilitates dimerization of the bZIP proteins ll!?*l. These results also explain why Tax is a promiscuous activator. The bZIP is a widely used DNA-binding motif present, for example, in the ATF, AP-1 and C/EBP protein families. By targeting a common DNA-binding motif, a regulatory protein such as Tax can affect several transcription factor families. Many as yet insufficiently characterized effects on DNA binding may prove to result from changes in dimerization. For example, DNA binding of SRF is stimulated by a homeodomain protein, Phoxl l211. Interestingly, SRF binds DNA as a dimer, and the dimerization domain is part of the region involved in the Phox-dependent stimulation.

HTLV-I

Tax Cellular regulatory factors

A possible mechanism of action for DNA binding domain associated regulators has been suggested from studies on the Tax protein of human T cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I). Like Ela, Tax is not a DNA-binding protein and can activate transcription from a number of viral and cellular promoters [III. DNA sequences that are essential for activation by Tax can be compiled into three classes: ATF/CRE (CAMP response element), NF-KB, and CArG elements (a specific binding sequence: C, A-rich, G). Each of these binding sites represents a transcription factor family that has been implicated in Tax-dependent trans-activation l12,131. ATF-binding sites are the essential component of the natural HTLV-I long terminal repeat. Extracts from cells expressing Tax contain increased ATF DNA-binding activity [14,151, and several recent publications have shown that Tax can stimulate the DNA binding of various transcription factors l15-18,199 Among these are the ATF proteins as well as other bZIP proteins. Tax can also increase binding of DNA by serum response factor (SRF), which binds to CArG sequences 1121, but only modestly affects DNA binding of NF-KB 1181 and myogenin [I!?*]. In the case of bZIP proteins the DNAbinding motif is necessary and sufficient for the Tax effect [18,19"1. How does Tax increase DNA binding of bZIP proteins? bZIP domains are bipartite: one region directly contacts DNA, and an adjacent or overlapping domain mediates dimerization. Thus, DNA binding is a two-step reaction, with dimerization preceding contact of the DNA by the dimer. The `apparent DNA-binding constant' reflects a coupled equilibrium of two reactions: dimerization and binding of the dimer to DNA. If the dimer-

Interaction with DNA-binding domains is not confined to viral regulatory proteins. Studies on the virus-inducible enhancer of the human interferon-p gene promoter have identified a high mobility group (HMG) protein, HMG I(Y), as an essential accessory factor. HMG I(Y) stimulates the DNA binding of NF-KB and ATF-2 homodimers and an ATF-2/jun heterodimer. The mechanism involves direct interaction between HMG I(Y) and the DNA-binding domains of NF-KB and ATF-2 [22"1. Experiments with MyoD (one member of a family of myogenic regulators) suggest that reticulocyte lysate and cell extracts contain factors that induce DNA binding by bacterially expressed bHLH (basic region/helixloop-helix) DNA-binding proteins l231. Interestingly, this stimulatory activity preferentially increases DNA binding of MyoD/E47 heterodimers compared with MyoD homodimers. The region of MyoD important for stimulation is the bHLH motif (see below).

Interactions

between

transcription

factors

Formation of transcription factor complexes from different families has become a major area of interest. The resulting mixed complexes provide a means to integrate different signalling pathways. Extracellular signals are transferred to the nucleus by intracellular second messengers and ultimately lead to the activation of transcription factors [241. Distinct pathways have been linked to specific transcription factor families,

412

Nucleus

and gene expression

e.g. AP-1 proteins mediate induction b the phorbol ester TEA (12-Otetradecanoylphorbol-1 r -acetate>, and a subset of ATF proteins mediates induction by cAMI? There are now many examples in which transcription factors from related and unrelated families form complexes that merge different pathways.

Association of transcription DNA-binding domains

factors

with related

One way to interconnect pathways is by selective heterodimeritation between two transcription factors that share a common dimerization motif. The resulting heterodimer is often imbued with properties that are distinct from those of either homodimer. For example, a c-jun/ATF-2 heterodimer juxtaposes members of the AI'-1 and ATF families (1251, and references therein). The resulting heterodimer has a preferred specificity for the CRE/ATF element and can confer TEA responsiveness to a CRE reporter. Heterodimers between AI'-1 and C/EBP members are present in the case of jun/fos and NF-IL6, also known as C/EBPp 1261.NE-IL6 is part of the interleukin (IL)-6 signal transduction pathway and can bind to both NF-IL6 and AI'-1 sites. NF-IL6 associates with jun or fos through their respective bZIP domains. As a result, DNA binding and activation from an NF-IL6 site is reduced [261. Interaction between members of the ATE and C/EBP families has been described for C/ATE and C/EBPg 1271.The C/ATF-C/EBPi3 heterodimer shows DNA-binding specificities distinct from those of the respective homodimers. It acts preferentially on a subclass of asymmetric CRE sequences as found in the promoter of the proenkephalin gene. C/ATF is closely related to ATF-4, which has also been shown to heterodimerite with a member of the C/EBP family, IGEBPl or C/EBPy 1281.Although heterodimers have been found between select members of all bZIP families, heterodimerization is clearly not promiscuous, but based on rules of protein interaction yet to be established.

account for inhibition of transcription b291. A special case is presented by `composite elements' that juxtapose binding sites for factors from different families and are coordinately regulated by protein-protein interactions. For example, transcriptional regulation of the proliferin gene in response to hormone treatment requires both the glucocorticoid receptor and members of the AP-1 family. Co-regulation depends upon functional DNA-binding domains of both proteins. Direct interaction between GR and the AI'-1 complex can be shown by co-immunoprecipitation, and mutations that abolish AP-1 dimerization also interfere with complex formation between AI'-1 and GR 13o"l. Significantly, the level of hormone-dependent activation depends on the specific combination of bZII' partners in the GR/AP-1 complex: a c-j&c-fos dimer results in repression, whereas the c-jun/fraI complex activates transcription. Domain-swapping experiments have implicated the basic region, which differs in only four amino acids between c-fos and fral, in transcriptional stimulation 13O"l. Three of these residues lie on a supposedly accessible surface of an a-helix within the basic region [31"]. Another example of a direct interaction between GR and a bZIP protein is the synergistic activation of the rat al-acid glycoprotein promoter by GR and NF-IL6, which again requires the DNA-binding domains of both proteins [32]. Associations between members of the bZIP and bHLH families have been found for c-jun and myoD 1331, resulting in the inhibition of the muscle creatine kinase enhancer, and for c-jun and bHLH proteins acting on the insulin control element 1341. A number of recent publications have described mixed complexes between members of the rel family (NF-KB ~50 or ~65) and the bZII' protein NF-IL6 (C/EBI$) 135-371. Again, direct interaction can be mapped to the respective DNA-binding motifs. The rel family also interacts with ATE proteins as described for the E-selectin promoter, which is coordinately induced by NF-KB and ATE proteins. Once again, regulation appears to be based on direct interaction of both transcription factors 1381.

Association of transcription factors unrelated DNA-binding domains

with

Interaction between `effector' domains

DNA-binding

motifs and

Transcription factors with unrelated DNA-binding motifs can also interact with one another. For example, certain AP-1 proteins can inhibit ligand-dependent activation from a hormone response element (reviewed in 1291). Overexpression of certain API proteins (bZI1') inhibits activation of a glucocorticoid response element. Conversely, overexpression of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) represses AI'-1 dependent transcription of the collagenase promoter. Biochemical experiments have shown that c-jun and GR interact through their DNA-binding domains: a bZII' domain and a zincfinger motif, respectively. Mutual repression of DNA binding by the two partners has been suggested to

The DNA-binding domain can also serve as a target surface for interaction with `effector' domains of other transcription factors. The MyoD family of muscle-specific transcription factors, a subclass of bHLH proteins, is required for muscle differentiation (reviewed in [391>. Al'-1 proteins inhibit transcriptional activation by myogenin and MyoD 1401. The regions involved are the bHLH motif of the myogenic factor and the amino terminus of c-jun. Adenovirus Ela dependent repression of a muscle-specific MCK enhancer is believed to account for Ela-mediated inhibition of myogenic differentiation. A direct interaction between the amino terminus of Ela and the DNA-binding domain of myo-

DNA-binding

domains

Wagner and Green

413

genie and ubiquitous bHLH proteins has been reported 141,421. Thus, Ela appears to employ several strategies to influence bHLH activity. The trunsactivation domain of Ela can associate with the bHLH motif, presumably leading to synergistic activation. Conversely, association between the bHLH motif and the amino terminus of Ela downregulates transcription.

6.

Hai T, Liu F, Coukos WJ, Green MR: Transcription Factor ATF cDNA Clones: an Extensive Family of Leucine Zipper Proteins Able to Selectively Form DNA-Binding Heterodimers. Genes Dev 1989, 3:203&2090. Liu F, Green MR: A Specific Member of the ATF Transcrip tion Factor Family Can Mediate Transcription Activation by the Adenovirus Ela Protein. Cell 1990, 61:1217-1224. Van Dam H, Duyndam M, Rottier R, Bosch A, De Vries Smits L. Herrlich P, Zantema A, Angel P, Van der Eb A: Heterodimer Formation of cJun and ATF-2 Is Responsible for Induction of c-Jun by the 243 Amino Acid Adenovirus ElA protein. 1!!0 J 1993, 123479-487. Chatton B. Bocco JL, Gaire M. Hauss C, Reimund 13, Goetz J, Kedinger C: Transcriptional Activation by the Adenovirus Larger Ela Product Is Mediated by Members of the Cellular Transcription Factor ATF Family Which Can Directly Associate With Ela. Mel Cell Biol 1993, l3:561-570.

7.

8.

Conclusions
DNA-binding domains are the signature motifs of transcription factor families and are generally the region of highest homology between members of a family. Only residues that determine sequence specificity by directly contacting specific bases, however, are strictly conserved. Thus, within a transcription factor family, the DNA-binding motif provides features shared by all members, but also has differences that distinguish individual proteins. The DNA-binding motif therefore represents an ideal target for regulatory mechanisms aimed at either single members or entire transcription factor families. Depending on their target specificity, some activators act promiscuously on a certain class of transcription factors that share a common DNA-binding motif. Other activators may recognize distinct features of a transcription factor family and therefore affect only certain home- or heterodimers. Interaction between transcription factors that mediate different signalling pathways allows integration and fine-tuning of responses. To date, our knowledge of modulators of DNA-binding domains is mostly descriptive. The precise factors that establish specificity between DNA-binding domains and their co-regulators remain to be determined. Little is known about the mechanistic effects of these interactions on DNA binding and truns-activation. But we expect that an increasing number of cellular regulators will be found to take advantage of this interaction surface.
9.

Liu F, Green MR: Promoter Targeting by Adenovirus ElA through Interaction with Different CeUuhr DNA-Binding Domains. Nartrre 1994, 368:52&525. Ela protein is shown to bind directly to cellular tmnscription factors by interacting with their DNA-binding domains. Surprisingly, the interdction occurs with .severdl unreiated DNA-binding motifs. These results can explain how Ela activates promiscuously from a number of viral and cellular promoters. 11. 12. Yip MT, Chen IS: IModes T Ceil Leukemia Viruses. of Transformation by the Human Mel Biol Med 1330. 7:33-44.

10. ..

Fujii M, Tsuchiya H, Chuhjo T, Akizawa T, .Seiki M: Interaction of HTLV-I Tax1 With p67SRF Causes the Aberrant Induction of Cellular Immediate Early Genes Through CArG Boxes. Genes L&I 1992, 6:206%-2076. Smith MR, Greene Activator IMutants types. Genes Drv Matthews MH, of Transcription I Tax Protein. WC: ldcntitication Exhibiting Novel 1991, 4:1g75-llw5. of HTLV-I Transcriptional Tax Trans Pheno

13.

14.

Markowitz R, Dynan WS: In Vitro Activation by the Human T Cell Leukemia Virus Type MO/ Cell Biol 1992, 12:1986-1996.

15.

Zhao L, Giam C: Human T Cell Lymphotropic Virus Type I (HTLV-I) Transcriptional Activator, Tax, Enhances CREB Binding to HTLV-I 21-Base-Pair Repeats by Protein-ProteinIntcnction. Proc Nat1 Acad Sci USA 1992, 89:7070-7074. Franklin AA. Kubik MF, Uittenbogaard MN, Brduweiier A, Utaisincharoen P, Matthews MH, Dynan WS, Hoeffler JP, Nyborg JK: Transactivation by the Human T Cell leukemia Virus Tax Protein Is iMediated Through Enhanced Binding of Activating Transcription Factor-2 (ATF-2) ATF-2 Response and the CAMP Element Biding Protein (CREB). J Biol Chem 1993, 268:2122%21231. Suzuki T, Fujksawa J, Toita M, Yoshida M: The TransActivator Tax of Human T Cell Leukemia Vts Type 1 (HTLV-I) Interacts with &VP-Responsive Element (CRE) Binding and CRE IModulator Proteins that Bind to the 21Base-Pair Enhancer of HTLV-I. Proc Nat1 Acad Scf USA 1993, 90:610-614. Armstrong AP, Frdnkhn AA, Uittenbogaard MN, Giebler HA, Nyborg JK: Pleiotropic Effect of the Human T Cell Leukemia Virus Tax Protein on the DNA Binding Activity of Eukaryotic Transcription Factors. Prw Narl Acad Sci USA 1993, 90:73037307.

16.

References
Papers review,

and recommended

reading
within the annual period of 17.

. ..
1. 2.

of particular interest, published have been highlighted as: of special interestof outstanding interest Hunter T, Karin M: The Regulation phorylation. Cell 1992, 70:375-387.

of Transcription

by Phos 18.

Angel P, Karin M: The Role of Jun, Fos and plex in CcU Proliferation and Transformation. /@.s AcW 1991, 1072:129-157. Kanthoudakis S, Curran tion of Ref-1, a Nuclear Binding Activity. f34BO Flint J, Shenk Transactivator. Nevins tcins.

the AP-1 Corn Eiochlm Bb-

3.

T: Identification and CharactcrizaProtein that Facilitates AP-1 DNA J 1992, 11:653-665. Viral Pro

4. 5.

T: Adenovirus ElA Protein Paradigm Atmu Rw Gene1 1990, 23:141-161. Activation by Viral Sci 1991, 16:435-439. Regulatory

JR: Transcriptional Trends Eloc!iem

Wagner S, Green MR: HTLV-I Tax Protein Stimulation of DNA Binding of bZIP Proteins by Enhancing Diierization. Science 1993, 262:395-399. HTLV-I Tax protein increases DNA binding of severdi bZIP trdnscription factors by direct interaction with their DNA-binding domain. Chemical crosslinking shows that Tax stimulates DNA binding by facilitating dimer formation. 19. ..

414

Nucleus
20.

and gene expression
McKnight CJ. Kim by a Short F?zptidc PS: Sequence-Specific Dimcr. Science 1990, basis sites. 32. of DNA recognition, as well as the variability of bZIP binding

Talanian RV, DNA Binding 24976~T3.

21.

Grueneberg DA, Natesan S, Alexandre C, Gilman MZ: Human And Drosophila Homcodomain Proteins that Enhance the DNA Binding Activity of Strum Rcsponsc Factor. Sctence 1992, 257:1oH9-1095. 33.

Nishio Y, lshiki H. Kishimoto T, Akk~ S: A Nuclear Factor for lntcrlcukind Expression (NF-IL6) and the Glucocorticoid Receptor Synergistically Activate Transcription of the Rat al-Acid Glycoprotcin Gcnc Via Direct Protein-Protein Interaction. Mel Cell Blot 1993, 13:1854-1862. Bengal E, Hamsone L, Scharfmann R, Dwarki VJ, Tapscott SJ, Weintmub H, Verma IM: Functional Antagonism bctwccn cJun and MyoD Proteins: A Direct Physical Association. Cell 1992, 6&507-519. Henderson E, Stem R: cJun Inhibits Transcriptional Activation by the insulin Enhancer, and the Insulin Control Elcmcnt is the Target of Control. Mot Cefl Btol 1994, 14:655462. Stein B, Cogsweli PC, cal Association bctwccn bcrs: a Rcl Domain-bZlP 13:3964-3974. Baldwin AS: Functional and PhysiNF-KB and C/EBP Family McmInteraction. Mol Cell Btol 1993,

Du W, Thanos D, Maniatis T: Mechanisms of Transcriptionai Synergism between Distinct Virus-Inducible Enhancer Elcmcnts. Cell 1993. 74:887+98. Transcription from the human interferon-b gene is reguiated by the concerted action of .sevemi tmnscription factors. The authors show that optimal activation requires the coopemtion of HMG I(Y), NF-KB and ATF-2. 22. .. 23. Thayer MJ. Weintmuh H: A CcUular DNA Binding Activity of MyoD and Scl USA 1993, 90&W-6487. Pelech SL: Networking 3:513-515. with Protein Factor Stimulates the E47. f'roc Narl AL-ad Kinascs. Crrrr Bfo11993,

34.

35.

24. 25.

Hai T, Curt-an T: Cross-Family Dimcrization of Transcription Factors Fos/Jun and ATF/CREB Alters DNA Binding Spccificity. Proc Null Acud Sci USA 1991. 88:372&3724. Hsu W, Kerppoia TK. Chen P, Curran T, Chen-Kiang S: Fos and Jun Rcprcss Transcription Activation by NF-IL6 Through Association at the Basic Zipper Region. Mol Cell Biol 1994, 14:268-276. Vallejo M. Ron D, Miller CP, Habener JF: C/ATF, a Member of the Activating Transcription Factor Family of DNA Biding Proteins, Dimcrizcs with C&AT/Enhancer Binding Proteins and Directs Their Binding to cAiiP Response Elcmcnts. Proc Natl Acud Sci USA 1993, 90:4679-46S3. Vimson Lcucinc diction CR, Hai T, Boyd SM: Dimcrization Spcciticity of the Zipper Containing bZIP Motif on DNA Binding: Prcand Rational Design. Genes L%v 1993, 7:1047-1058. of Signal Transduction Zipper. Trends Genes

36.

26.

Matsusaka T, Fuji.sawa K, Nishio Y, Mukaida N, Matsushima K, Kishimoto T, Akim S: Transcription Factors NF-IL6 and NF-KB Syncrgisticaily Activate Transcription of the Irdlammatory Cytokincs. lnterlcukin 6 and lntcrlcukin 8. Proc Nafl Aud Sci LISA 1993, 90:1019310197. LeClair KP, Bianar MA, Sharp PA: The p50 Subunit Associates With the NF-IL6 Transcription Factor. Acizd Sci USA 1992, 89:814%8149. of NF-KB Froc Nurl

37.

27.

3%

Kaszubska W, Van Huijsduijnen RH. Ghersa P, DeRaemySchenk A, Chen BPC, Hai T, DeLamarter JF? Whelan J: Cyclic AMP-lndcpcndcnt ATF Family Members lntcract With NF-KB and Function in the Activation of the E-Sclcctin Promoter in Rcsponsc to Cytokincs. Mol Cell Biol 1993, 13:7180-7190. Olson EN, Kiein Wli: bHLH Factors in Muscle Dcvclopmcnt: Dead Lines and Commitments, What to Lcavc In and What to Lcavc Out. Genes Drv 1994, &la. Li L. Chamhard J, Karin M. Olson EN: Fos and Jun Rcpress Transcriptional Activation by IMyogcnin and MyoD: the llmino Terminus of Jun Can IMediate Repression. Genes Drv 1332, 6:676-C&9. llwun T, Bober E, Arnold HH: Inhibition of ~Musclc Diffcrcntiation by the Adcnovirus Ela Protein: Repression of the Transcriptional Activating Function of the HLH Protein Myf-5. Genes Dev 1992, 6:t?S+902. Taylor DA, KCJUSS Vi3. Schwarz JJ, Olson EN, KITJUS WE: ElA-Mediated Inhibition of Myogcncsis Correlates With a Direct Physical Interaction of ElAlZS and Basic Helix-Loop Helix Proteins. Mol Cell Biol 1993, 13:4714-4727.

28.

39.

29.

Schuele R, Evans RM: Cross-Coupling Pathways: Zinc Finger lMccts Lcucinc 1991, 7:377-381.

40.

..

30.

Miner JN, Yamamoto KR: The Basic Region of AP-1 Spccihcs Giucocorticoid Receptor Activity at a Composite Rcsponsc Eicmcnt. Genes Dev 1992, 6:2491-2501. Differential regulation of a composite element is shown to rely on protein-protein intemctions between transcription factors hound to adjacent sites. Domain-swapping experiments provide an intriguing example of how different members t)f the same family can affect expression in opposite ways. 31. .. Ellenberger TE. Bmndi CJ, Struhl K. Harrism SC: The GCN4 Basic Region Lcucinc Zipper Binds DNA as a Dimcr of Uninterrupted a Hcliccs: Crystal Structure of the Protein-DNA Complex. Cell 1992, 71:1223-1237. The first high-resolution crystal .structure of a hZlP protein hound to its DNA site. This information provides important insights into the

41.

42.

S Wagner and MR Green, of Massachusetts Medical 01605, USA.

Progmm in Moiecuiar Center, 373 Piantation

Medicine, University Street, Worcester, MA

