Neuroscience Letters, 49 (1984) 9 9 - 1 0 4
Elsevier Scientific Publishers Ireland Ltd. NSL 02851

99

T H E EFFECT OF I)-o~-AMINOADIPATE ON E X C I T A T O R Y A M I N O A C I D R E S P O N S E S R E C O R D E D I N T R A C E L L U L A R L Y FROM M O T O N E U R O N E S OF T H E FROG S P I N A L C O R D

M.S. A R E N S O N , C. BERTI, A.E. KING and A. NISTRI

Dept. of Pharmacology, St. Bartholomew's Hospital Medical College, Charterhouse Square, London ECIM 6BQ (U.K.)
(Received May 9th, 1984; Revised version received and accepted May 18th, 1984)

Key words: excitatory a m i n o acids - m o t o n e u r o n s - D-c~-aminoadipate - antagonism - receptor
classification - glutamate - spinal cord - frog

The excitatory responses to amino acids were recorded intracellularly from motoneurones in the isolated frog spinal cord a n d the effect of the antagonist D-cx-aminoadipate examined. A n unusual profile of antagonism was obtained in that with 50-100 #M D-c~-aminoadipate the depolarization to quisqualate was unaffected (or slightly potentiated) while those to L-glutamate, L-aspartate and N-methyl-D-aspartate were all considerably attenuated. D-c~-aminoadipate did not influence passive m e m b r a n e properties although a small hyperpolarization was sometimes evident. Dorsal root evoked excitations of motoneurones, particularly those using low strength stimulation, were also susceptible to antagonism by D-t~-aminoadipate. These data suggest a separate neuroeffector/receptor m e c h a n i s m for quisqualate compared to L-glutamate, t-aspartate and N-methyl-D-aspartate.

D-et-aminoadipate (DAA) is well documented as a selective antagonist of amino acid excitation in both the amphibian [4] and mammalian [8] central nervous system. Common to the majority of these extracellular studies was the finding that DAA preferentially antagonized N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-induced excitations while those of L-glutamate were less affected. Furthermore, investigations into the spinal cord showed that DAA was effective against synaptic excitations, particularly dorsal root-evoked polysynaptic reflexes [1, 4] implicating an NMDA-Iike amino acid (possibly aspartate) as the endogenous transmitter. This study employed the more direct intracellular recording technique to reexamine the profile of antagonism produced by DAA on amino acid and synaptically evoked excitations recorded from frog motoneurones. The in vitro hemisected frog (Rana temporaria) spinal cord with two pairs of intact lumbar dorsal and ventral roots was superfused with oxygenated Ringer (mM: NaC1111, KCI 2.5, NaHCO3 17, NaH2PO4 · 2H20 0.1, CaCI2 2, glucose 4) at 7°C, as previously described [9]. DC and AC intracellular recordings were made from electrophysiologically identifiable motoneurones using 3 M KCI filled microelec0304-3940/84/$ 03.00 © 1984 Elsevier Scientific Publishers Ireland Ltd.

100

trodes (50-100 Ml2) connected via a headstage to a conventional high input impedance amplifier with facilities for current injection and displayed on a storage oscilloscope (Tektronix). A flat bed pen recorder and FM tape recorder were used for permanent records and subsequent analysis. Stable intracellular recordings were made from 20 motoneurones with a resting membrane potential of - 6 5 + 2 mV ( m e a n + S . E . M . ) and input conductance, calculated from the amplitude of the electrotonic potentials in response to hyperpolarizing current injection, of 88 + 7nS. In each cell, matched depolarizations to
NR
IItlIIIIIIILIlIIHIIIII~

A

Illlllllllllllllllllllllmlllllllllllllllllll~

]

0.5 nA

-50

i · Q3OpM

NMDA 301IM

t
+

-70

mV

-90

BI

o.,r+, o^,

-50 -70 mV

-90

WASH

C
-50 -70 mV

-90

Fig. 1. The effect of D-e~-aminoadipate (DAA) on quisqualate (Q) and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) induced depolarizations recorded intracellularly from a motoneurone. The upper trace in each chart record indicates injected DC current; downward deflections are hyperpolarizing pulses used for input resistance measurements and upward deflections are depolarizing pulses which elicited a direct spike. The lower trace is the m e m b r a n e potential; the electrotonic potentials in response to current injection are apparent. A: control depolarizations and accompanying input resistance decrease in response to perfusion o f 30 #M Q and 30/LM N M D A , the duration of application is represented by the horizontal bars according to the time scales indicated. B: the N M D A induced depolarization is abolished after perfusion of D A A (0.1 mM) for 15 min while that to Q was unchanged. C: recovery of the N M D A response after washing (10-15 min).

101 superfusion of at least two excitatory amino acids (NMDA, 30 #M; L-glutamate, 2 mM; L-aspartate, 2 mM; quisqualate, 30/tM) were obtained in normal solution then after a minimum exposure of 15 min to D A A (50-200 ttM) and, if possible, after removal of the antagonist. An example of the typical effect of 50-100 #M D A A on cell responses to quisqualate and N M D A is illustrated in Fig. 1. In this particular cell the depolarizations were associated with a decreased input resistance as indicated by the reduction in the electrotonic potential amplitude. Whereas the quisqualate responses remained virtually unaffected by 100 #M DAA, those to N M D A were abolished; only with the highest concentration of 200 tzM D A A did some depression o f the quisqualate response occur. Interestingly, a change in input resistance was apparent with N M D A even in the presence of D A A (Fig. 1B), possibly reflecting a residual indirect effect on the cell. The change in resistance produced by the individual amino acids was found to be variable, with increase, decrease or no change being recorded. These factors made quantification of the effect of D A A on amino acid induced resistance changes impractical. DAA, in our hands, was unable to differentiate between N M D A , L-glutamate and z-aspartate induced depolarizations. As shown in Fig. 2, N M D A and L-glutamate were equally antagonized by D A A (100/~M) and,

A
-55] mV -65 -75 , _ ~ . P'J 60s NMDA 30pM

CONTROL RINGER

T

¢=

B

120S lOOpM DAA

GLU

2mM

L

"1

NMDA

QLU

C
-55 ]
mV -65

30pM

2mM

- -

CONTROL RINGER RECOVERY

-75 NMDA 30pM
GLU

2mM

Fig. 2. The antagonism of NMDA (30 #M) and L-glutamate (GLU, 2 mM) induced depolarizations by DAA (100/zM). The traces are continuous chart recordings of the membrane potential and associated electrotonic potentials due to injected DC current (not shown) from a single cell. The control depolarizations (A) in response to perfusion of the agonists (times indicated by horizontal bars) were antagonized after a 15 min exposure to DAA (B). Note the extended perfusion period of the amino acids in DAA compared to control. The antagonism reversed after removal of the antagonist (C).

102

although not illustrated here, similar results were obtained for L-aspartate. This DAA induced antagonism was readily reversible after a wash period of 10-15 min (Figs. 1 and 2). Examination of the current/voltage relationship for 5 cells in the presence and absence of DAA revealed no change although in some cells a small hyperpolarization (3 _+ 1 mV) together with a reduction in spontaneous synaptic activity was noted. Table I presents a quantitative summary of amino acid antagonism by DAA; it is clear that DAA was a potent antagonist and had an almost equivalent effect on L-glutamate, L-aspartate and NMDA but not quisqualate. L-Aspartate was less affected by DAA than NMDA and L-glutamate and an overall enhancement of quisqualate induced depolarizations was apparent. Concentrations of DAA similar to those inducing amino acid antagonism also produced reversible antagonism of synaptic excitations recorded intracellularly from motoneurones. Excitatory postsynaptic potentials evoked by low strength stimulation of dorsal roots were severely depressed in amplitude and duration by DAA. The amplitude of excitatory postsynaptic potentials produced by stronger dorsal root stimulation was antagonized to a lesser extent although their duration was shortened. The profile of excitatory amino acid antagonism by DAA described here does not conform to previous reports [1, 4], notably that in our study DAA was unable to discriminate between glutamate, aspartate and NMDA. However, in common with earlier work [4] quisqualate responses were not reduced but potentiated. DAA did not have any direct actions on passive membrane properties although it elicited a small hyperpolarization which may explain the observed quisqualate potentiation if the resting membrane potential was shifted further away from the quisqualate reversal potential. The origin of this hyperpolarization remains obscure but might reflect a reduction in a tonic depolarizing influence. Though yet to be studied, a significant effect of DAA on any quisqualate uptake process seems unlikely in view of the low temperature at which these experiments were performed. Moreover, DAA had only

TABLE l E F F E C T OF D - a - A M I N O A D I P I C A C I D (DAA) ON T H E E X C I T A T O R Y RESPONSES G L U T A M A T E , Q U I S Q U A L A T E , A S P A R T A T E A N D N - M E T H Y L - D - A S P A R T I C ACID Data obtained from 20 motoneurones with mean + S.E.M. Resting m e m b r a n e potential of and input conductance of 88 _+7 nS. Agonist No. of cells AVm+S.E.M. (mV) (normal Ringer) TO

65 _+2 mV

AVm_+S.E.M. (in DAA) (mV) Bracket Nos. denote % of control responses 1.0 _+0.4 1.6_+0.5 11.3 _+ 1.7 2.5 _+0.9 (11 °70) (18%) (139%) (28%)

Glutamate N-methyl-D-aspartate Quisqualate Aspartate

9 14 7 5

9.0 _+ 1.6 9.0_+ 1.0 9.0_+ 1.4 8.0 _+ 1.3

103 minimal effects on the uptake process of L-glutamate or t-aspartate in spinal cord [4]. The inability of ot-aminoadipate to differentiate between glutamate and aspartate responses was also described for rat cerebellar [14] and thalamic [8] neurones; in cultured brain and spinal neurones a-aminoadipate blocked intracellularly recorded responses to all amino acids except kainate [7]. The selectivity displayed by a particular antagonist is known to be dependent on the dose applied [1], differential sensitivity against amino acids being lost as the amount increases. We do not feel that our data were due to non-specific antagonism since the concentrations of DAA used in the present study were certainly smaller than those in extracellular studies on in vitro frog spinal cord [4] and perhaps in microionophoretic experiments [6]. We favour an alternative interpretation namely that NMDA, L-glutamate and raspartate may share a common receptor/effector mechanism distinct from the one operated by quisqualate. A similar suggestion was made on the basis of ion substitution experiments [10] and voltage-clamp analysis of excitatory amino acid effects [3]. Recently in mouse cultured neurones the characteristics of channels activated by glutamate, aspartate and N M D A but not quisqualate were shown to be equivalent [11] and in rat brain membranes L-glutamate had the highest affinity for binding sites of 2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoic acid, a selective NMDA antagonist [5] while quisqualate had a low affinity [12]. In the spinal cord synaptic excitations, particularly dorsal root evoked polysynaptic reflexes, are antagonized by DAA [1, 13]. Our study confirms the DAA induced antagonism of dorsal root evoked excitation o f motoneurones, although surprisingly the low threshold excitatory postsynaptic potentials, which comprise predominantly monosynaptic responses, were the most susceptible. This depressant effect of DAA on synaptic (and amino acid) induced excitations is unlikely to be secondary to release of endogenous inhibitory transmitters (e.g. GABA) since DAA has been shown to reduce the spontaneous release of labelled amino acids from preloaded brain slices [2]. Furthermore, a mainly indirect origin for the amino acid induced depolarizations can be excluded since these responses were little affected by tetrodotoxin [10]. Aspartate has previously been proposed as the most likely transmitter candidate at excitatory afferents to motoneurones on the evidence that it was more readily antagonized by putative selective NMDA antagonists [1]. The present study cannot support this notion nor can it disclose the identity of the transmitter which seems likely to be a substance acting on the NMDA/glutamate/aspartate receptor. The main feature of this study is the demonstration that in the spinal cord DAA is a potent antagonist of glutamate and this coupled to its general availability, low cost and the rapid reversibility o f antagonism makes DAA a useful pharmacological tool for studies of glutamate and its analogues acting on a common receptor mechanism. A.E.K. is an MRC Postdoctoral Fellow. C.B. was an EMBO Fellow. The support of the Joint Research Board of St. Bartholomew's Hospital is acknowledged.

104 1 Biscoe, T.J., Evans, R.H., Francis, A.A., Martin, M.R., Watkins, J.C., Davies, J. and Dray, A., o-c~-Aminoadipate as a selective antagonist of amino acid-induced and synaptic excitation of mammalian spinal neurones, Nature (Lond.), 270 (1977) 743-745. 2 Charles, A.K. and Chang, Y.F., Effect of o- and L-c~-aminoadipate on the efflux of L-aspartate, eglutamate and y-aminobutyrate from superfused rat brain slices, Brain Res., 259 (1983) 331-334. 3 Crepel, F., Luc Dupont, J. and Gardette, R., Voltage clamp analysis of the effect of excitatory amino acids and derivatives on Purkinje cell dendrites in rat cerebellar slices maintained in vitro, Brain Res., 279 (1983) 311-315. 4 Evans, R.H., Francis, A.A., Hunt, K., Oakes, D.J. and Watkins, J.C., Antagonism of excitatory amino acid-induced responses and of synaptic excitation in the isolated spinal cord of the frog, Brit. J. Pharmacol., 67 (1979) 591-603. 5 Evans, R.H., Francis, A.A., Jones, A.W., Smith, D.A.S. and Watkins, J.C., The effects of a series of ~-phosphonic-c~-carboxylic amino acids on electrically evoked and excitant amino acid induced responses in isolated spinal cord preparations, Brit. J. Pharmacol., 75 (1982) 65-75. 6 Kelly, J.S., Microiontophoretic application of drugs. In L.L. lversen, S.D. lversen and S. Snyder (Eds.), Handbook of Psychopharmacology, Vol. 2, Plenum Press, NY, 1975, pp. 30-67. 7 MacDonald, J.F. and Wojtowicz, J.M., The effects of L-glutamate and its analogues upon the membrane conductance of central murine neurones in culture, Canad. J. Physiol. Pharmacol., 60 (1982) 282-296. 8 McLennan, H. and Hall, J.C., The actions of D-e~-aminoadipate on excitatory amino acid receptors on rat thalamic neurones, Brain Res., 149 (1978) 541-545. 9 Nistri, A. and Arenson, M., Differential sensitivity of spinal neurones to amino acids: an intracellular study on the frog spinal cord, Neuroscience, 8 (1983) 115-122. 10 Nistri, A., Arenson, M.S. and King, A., Excitatory amino acid-induced responses of frog motoneurones bathed in low Na + media: an intracellular study, Neuroscience, submitted. 11 Nowak, L., Bregestovski, P., Ascher, P., Herbert, A. and Prochiantz, A., Magnesium gates glutamate-activated channels in mouse central neurones, Nature (Lond.), 307 (1984) 462-465. 12 Olverman, H . J , Jones, A.W. and Watkins, J.C., L-Glutamate has higher affinity than other amino acids for [3H]o-AP-5 binding sites in rat brain membranes, Nature (Lond.), 307 (1984) 460-462. 13 Padjen, A.L. and Smith, P.A., Specific effects of ~-D,L-aminoadipic acid on synaptic transmission in frog spinal cord, Canad. J. Physiol. Pharmacol., 58 (1980) 692-698. 14 Stone, T.W., Selective antagonism of amino acids by c~-aminoadipate on pyramidal tract neurones but not Purkinje cells, Brain Res., 166 (1979) 217-220.

