Current Biology, Vol. 12, R250­R252, April 2, 2002, ©2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

PII S0960-9822(02)00784-4

Water Transporters: How So Fast Yet So Selective?
Richard J. Law and Mark S.P. Sansom

Dispatch

A high-resolution X-ray structure of an aquaporin has revealed water molecules bound within the transmembrane pore and provided new clues to the mechanisms of rapid water transport and high selectivity in this important class of membrane proteins.

The aquaporins, such as red blood cell Aqp1, are intrinsic membrane proteins responsible for rapid transport of water across lipid membranes, mediating a flow of about 109 water molecules per second [1]. This transport is highly selective for water molecules: ions, including protons, cannot pass through the aquaporin pore. Some aquaporins, such as bacterial GlpF, allow small polar solutes such as glycerol to permeate at a comparable rate to water [2]. The mammalian Aqp3 has an intermediate specificity, in that it is about equally permeable to water and glycerol. Earlier structural studies of two aquaporins -- X-ray studies of GlpF [3] and electron microscopy (EM) studies of Aqp1 [4,5] -- showed they have the same fold [6] (Figure 1). But the different resolutions of these studies made a detailed structure­function analysis difficult. Now a high-resolution (2.2 Å) crystal structure has been determined for Aqp1 [7], making it possible to analyse its transport mechanism with a greater degree of certainty. Computational studies based on the 2.2 Å structure of GlpF [3] and on the lowerresolution structure of Aqp1 [4,5] provide a valuable indication of the direction such investigations may take. In particular, we would like to understand how, for example, Aqp1 is able to maintain both a high degree of selectivity for water and a high rate of transport. The high-resolution structure of bovine Aqp1 [7] casts new light on the mechanistic details of aquaporin pore function. The topology of the protein, as for all aquaporins, consists of six transmembrane helices and two re-entrant loops. Each re-entrant loop is made up of a short helix that spans half of the membrane plus a more extended region of polypeptide chain running anti-parallel to the short helix. The two re-entrant loops are located within the bundle of six transmembrane helices and penetrate into the membrane region, approaching each other near the centre of the channel. At their point of closest approach, each loop includes a conserved Asn­Pro­Ala sequence motif characteristic of aquaporins. These features of the pore are more exactly defined in the
Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, Department of Biochemistry, The University of Oxford, The Rex Richards Building, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3QU, UK. mark@biop.ox.ac.uk

Figure 1. The narrow pore formed by the Aqp1 structure (grey ribbons). The pore lining is shown as a semi-transparent blue surface with the four bound water molecules as dark green spheres. Polar groups interacting with the water are shown in red (oxygens) and blue (nitrogens). This diagram was generated from a homology model of Aqp1 based on the GlpF structure.

new X-ray structure of Aqp1 [7] than in the earlier EM structures [4,5]. In particular, although the overall pore dimensions are similar in both structures, there are quantitative differences in their pore radius profiles. Furthermore, the X-ray structure enables more exact definition of the sidechain conformations of residues that line the pore. This is a crucial advance in terms of trying to understand the relationship between pore structure and function. The X-ray structure suggests how a combination of mechanisms may determine the water selectivity of Aqp1. Firstly, size selection of water molecules occurs at a constriction site near the extracellular end of the narrow pore, which has a radius of just 1.4 Å. This constriction is about 1 Å narrower than the equivalent region in GlpF, helping to explain how large polar molecules such as glycerol can pass through the GlpF pore but not through Aqp1. This constriction was also seen in the EM models of Aqp1, but appeared to be somewhat wider. The constriction is in part due to a histidine residue (His182 in Aqp1) which is conserved throughout the water-specific aquaporins, but in GlpF is replaced by a glycine. A cysteine residue in the same region is replaced by a phenylalanine in GlpF.

Current Biology R251

This provides a more hydrophobic pore lining in GlpF at the constriction, which is thus able to interact favourably with the hydrophobic face of a glycerol molecule as it passes by. There are two major questions about the selectivity of Aqp1. First, how does it allow rapid permeation of water molecules, whilst preventing permeation by either cations or anions? And second, why is the Aqp1 pore impermeable to H+ (or H3O+ or OH­) ions? Selection against the transport of ions emerges from the properties of the long (20 Å), narrow pore and of the selectivity loops which are inserted into it. This pore is not wide enough to allow the passage of a hydrated ion. Furthermore, the lining of the pore is largely hydrophobic, punctuated by several distinct hydrophilic nodes made up of polar sidechains and the exposed carbonyl backbones of the two selectivity filter loops. This arrangement of exposed carbonyl backbones and polar residues along the pore lining is such that neither Aqp nor GlpF is able to provide a complete set of coordination sites to substitute for an ion's solvation shell. Thus, to enter the pore an ion would have to be dehydrated, but the lining of the pore is insufficiently polar to compensate energetically for this. The structural basis of the aquaporins' high water permeability has only really emerged in the light of the higher-resolution Aqp1 structure [7], which reveals four water molecules bound within the pore. These waters are located at three sites. Of these waters, only the pair located at the double site in the centre of the pore are capable of forming hydrogen bonds to one another, as the other sites are too far apart to permit strong hydrogen bonds between adjacent waters. This arrangement is suggested to provide a pathway for the water molecules to move quickly by jumping between the three hydrophilic nodes. This configuration of spatially distinct water sites is also thought to prevent proton permeability. In those pore-like proteins that conduct protons -- such as the peptide channel gramicidin and the proton pump bacteriorhodopsin -- `proton wires' are thought to occur. These are chains of hydrogenbonded water molecules, along which protons can hop rapidly via the so-called Grotthus mechanism. The `broken' nature of the water hydrogen bond chain in Aqp1 thus prevents H+ hopping. This proposal, based on the X-ray structure of Aqp1 [7], is somewhat different from that of Murata et al. [4], who suggested that it is the two central asparagine residues, Asn78 and Asn194, that provide the barrier to H+ permeation. From Structure to Function via Dynamics One might argue that having a higher-resolution structure should enable us to establish a definitive plausible mechanism by simple examination. It is possible, however, to approach such question with a little more rigour by taking the experimental structures as starting points for computational evaluation of permeation and selectivity mechanisms. This is where molecular dynamics simulations are able to provide mechanistic insights [8­11]. However,

molecular dynamics simulations of aquaporin, based on the lower-resolution EM structures, have so far been complicated by conformational instability of the protein in simulations, making it difficult to derive a definitive mechanism. Kong and Ma [11], for example, suggested that a stable column of water could be formed for certain conformations of the Asn­Pro­Ala loops. In order to guarantee such a continuous column of water, however, it seems to be necessary to apply positional restraints to the Asn­Pro­Ala loops, as otherwise these loops are too mobile and disrupt the water column within the channel [10]. Such loop instability has not been observed in GlpF simulations [9], suggesting it may be an artefact of the lower-resolution (and hence less accurate) EM structure of Aqp1 relative to the high-resolution X-ray structure of GlpF. By using computational techniques to refine EM models of Aqp1 before simulation [8], it was possible to obtain a conformationally more stable system, enabling comparison of the simulated properties of water in Aqp1 and GlpF pores. In the Aqp1 simulation, a continuously hydrogen-bonded column of water did not form through the channel -- a `proton wire' was not observed. However, simulations have not yet been performed on the basis of the higher-resolution X-ray structure. Another possibility merits examination. On the basis of the EM data, collected at a temperature of 4 K, and of the X-ray structure, determined at 100 K, models of water transport involving detailed patterns of hydrogen bonding to (static) Asn­Pro­Ala-loops have been proposed. In the Aqp1 simulations to date, the loops are highly dynamic, possibly as a result of the low resolution of the starting structure. It is conceivable, however, that at physiological temperatures (about 300 K) an intermediate situation holds -- the loops genuinely exhibit a degree of mobility. Such limited conformation mobility has been seen in molecular dynamics simulations of the K+ channel KcsA [12], and indeed seems to be essential to reduce the energetic barriers to K+ translocation along the narrow filter. It is therefore plausible that there may be local dynamic flexibility in the loops that form the Aqp1 pore, and that such flexibility may contribute to transient disruptions to the water columns. Indeed, such fluctuations in the continuity of water columns have been seen in rather long (50 nanosecond) molecular dynamics simulations of purely hydrophobic nanopores ([13] and our group's unpublished data). It will be of interest to characterise the timescale of possible loop fluctuations within the Aqp1 pore. If fluctuations occur on a timescale comparable to that of water transport (about 1 nanosecond), then one encounters a situation sometimes described by physicists as `stochastic resonance' [14], in which the dynamics of a fluctuating barrier within the pore are coupled to the water transport process. With the arrival of the high-resolution structure of this channel [7], such questions can start to be answered by high quality simulations.

Dispatch R252

A
Aqp

B
+
KcsA

C
­
ClC

Current Biology

Figure 2. Schematic diagram comparing `pore' helices in (A) Aqp, (B) KcsA and (C) ClC. The pore helices are shown coloured on a blue-to-red scale, with the blue corresponding to the positive amino terminus and the red to the negative carboxyl terminus of the helix dipole. Note that, in KcsA and ClC, a K+ ion and Cl­ ion, respectively, are found at the `focus' of the helix dipoles.

Pores, Helices and Dipoles A striking feature of the aquaporin topology is the short helices that make up half of each of the two reentrant selectivity loops (Figure 2A). These short helices are reminiscent of the pore helices seen in the structure of the bacterial potassium channel KcsA (Figure 2B), which have been suggested to electrostatically stabilise a K+ ion in the central cavity via interaction with their carboxyl termini [15]. (One should recall that an  helix generates an electrostatic dipole, positive at its amino terminus and negative at its carboxyl terminus). The amino termini of the two Asn­Pro­Ala-loop helices in Aqp1 might be expected to form a region of positive electrostatic potential in the centre of the pore, thus helping to prevent permeation of cations such as H+ ions. Furthermore, the recent structure of a chloride channel [16] contains a Cl­ binding site at the focus of the amino termini of a number of anti-parallel short helices (Figure 2C). This may imply that other transmembrane transporters might contain comparable structural elements as part of their pores. Future structural and computational studies will establish whether this marks the emergence of a general feature of channels and related transporters.
References
1. Zardoya, R. and Villalba, S. (2001). A phylogenetic framework for the aquaporin family in eukaryotes. J.Mol.Evol. 52, 391­404. 2. Borgnia, M.J. and Agre, P. (2001). Reconstitution and functional comparison of purified GlpF and AqpZ, the glycerol and water channels from Escherichia coli. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 2888­2893. 3. Fu, D., Libson, A., Miercke, L.J.W., Weitzman, C., Nollert, P., Krucinski, J. and Stroud, R.M. (2000). Structure of a glycerol-conducting channel and the basis of its selectivity. Science 290, 481­486. 4. Murata, K., Mitsuoaka, K., Hirai, T., Walz, T., Agre, P., Heymann, J.B., Engel, A. and Fujiyoshi, Y. (2000). Structural determinants of water permeation through aquaporin-1. Nature 407, 599­605. 5. Ren, G., Cheng, A., Reddy, V., Melnyk, P. and Mitra, A.K. (2000). Three-dimensional fold of the human AQP1 water channel determined at 4 angstrom resolution by electron crystallography of twodimensional crystals embedded in ice. J. Mol. Biol. 301, 369­387. 6. Sansom, M.S.P. and Law, R.J. (2001). Aquaporins - channels without ions. Curr. Biol. 11, R71­R73. 7. Sui, H.X., Han, B.G., Lee, J.K., Walian, P., and Jap, B.K. (2001). Structural basis of water-specific transport through the AQP1 water channel. Nature 414, 872­878. 8. De Groot, B.L. and Grubmuller, H. (2001). Water permeation across biological membranes: Mechanism and dynamics of aquaporin-1 and GlpF. Science 294, 2353­2357. 9. Jensen, M.O., Tajkhorshid, E. and Schulten, K. (2001). The mechanism of glycerol conduction in aquaglyceroporins. Structure 9, 1083­1093. 10. Zhu, F.Q., Tajkhorshid, E. and Schulten, K. (2001). Molecular dynamics study of aquaporin-1 water channel in a lipid bilayer. FEBS Lett. 504, 212­218. 11. Kong, Y.F. and Ma, J.P. (2001). Dynamic mechanisms of the membrane water channel aquaporin-1 (AQP1). Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 14345­14349.

12. 13.

14. 15.

16.

Sansom, M.S.P. and Shrivastava, I.H. (2002). Ion channels: Frozen motion. Curr. Biol. 12, R65­R67. Hummer, G., Rasaiah, J.C. and Noworyta, J.P. (2001). Water conduction through the hydrophobic channel of a carbon nanotube. Nature 414, 188­190. Doering, C.R. and Gadoua, J.C. (1992). Resonant activation over a fluctuating barrier. Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2318­2321. Roux, B. and MacKinnon, R. (1999). The cavity and pore helices in the KcsA K+ channel: electrostatic stabilization of monovalent cations. Science 285, 100­102. Dutzler, R., Campbell, E.B., Cadene, M., Chait, B.T. and MacKinnon, R. (2002). X-ray structure of a ClC chloride channel at 3.0 Å reveals the molecular basis of anion selectivity. Nature 415, 287­294.

