doi:10.1006/jmbi.2000.4096 available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

J. Mol. Biol. (2000) 302, 581±592

Structural Analysis of Yeast HSF by Site-specific Crosslinking
J. Jose Bonner*, David Chen, Kimberley Storey, Mark Tushan Â and Kristi Lea
Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington IN 47405, USA We have introduced cysteine substitutions into the yeast HSF1 gene at a variety of locations. Most have no phenotypic effect, and therefore provide site-speci®c probes for thiol-speci®c reagents. Crosslinking of single mutants identi®es locations where equivalent regions of individual monomers can approach each other in the HSF trimer. Crosslinking of double mutants indicates regions that can approach closely within a single subunit. Results for the DNA binding domain and trimerization domain are consistent with known structural information, and provide essential controls on the validity of the technique. In contrast to these two domains, the N-terminal and C-terminal domains, wherein lie the transcriptional activators, are highly ¯exible, and do not appear to be in stable contact with any other portions of the protein. None of these patterns are affected by the conformational change that is induced by superoxide or heat shock. We suggest a new model for the mechanism of HSF regulation that accomodates the structural information provided by these studies.
# 2000 Academic Press

*Corresponding author

Keywords: heat shock; protein structure; transcription factor; protein ¯exibility; site-speci®c crosslinking

Introduction
The heat shock transcription factor (HSF) is responsible for the regulation of eukaryotic gene expression during stress. Its primary role is to increase transcription of protein chaperone genes such as hsp70 in response to heat shock. Although it plays a major role during stress, it is nonetheless essential for normal cellular growth, as deletion of the HSF1 gene of yeast is lethal (Wiedderecht et al., 1988; Sorger & Pelham, 1988). The heat shock response is highly conserved evolutionarily. Indeed, hsp70 is one of the most conserved proteins on earth, being some 50 % identical between Escherichia coli and humans (Boorstein et al., 1994). Despite this remarkable conservation, the eukaryotic HSF gene family is remarkably diverse. Among HSFs such as those
Abbreviations used: HSF, heat shock transcription factor; EGS, ethylene glycol bis-succinimidyl succinate; CuPh, copper phenanproline; o-PDM, o-phenylenedimaleimide; p-PDM, p-phenylenedimaleimide; BMH, bis-maleimidohexane. E-mail address of the corresponding author: jbonner@bio.indiana.edu
0022-2836/00/030581±12 $35.00/0

from yeast, Drosophila, and human, the only conserved sequences lie within the DNA-binding domain and the multimerization domain. Most of the protein is surprisingly dissimilar. It is quite unusual for proteins to share such similarity of function, yet show such diversity of structure. The regulation of HSF activity occurs post-translationally. HSF exists in a relatively inactive state in unstressed cells, and is activated upon heat shock (for a review, see Morimoto et al., 1997). In metazoans, this includes trimerization, DNA binding, and activation of transcription. In budding yeast, trimerization is constitutive, and regulation occurs primarily at the level of transcriptional activation. Because yeast HSF can be demonstrated to be bound to DNA even in the absence of stress (Jakobsen & Pelham, 1988), it has been suggested that the modulation of HSF activity in response to stress occurs through a controlled conformational change (Nieto-Sotelo et al., 1990; Westwood et al., 1991; Rabindran et al., 1993; Zuo et al., 1994; Lee et al, 2000). This conformational change has recently been detected in vitro, and shown to be triggered by superoxide anion (Lee et al., 2000; S. Lee & J.J.B., unpublished results).
# 2000 Academic Press

582 Elucidating the nature of the conformational change, and therefore understanding the mechanism of heat shock regulation, would be facilitated by information on the structure of the HSF protein. Structural information exists for the highly conserved DNA-binding domain. This structure has been solved for HSF from Kluyveromyces lactis (Harrison et al., 1994; Damberger et al., 1994; Little®eld & Nelson, 1999), Drosophila (Vuister et al., 1994a) and tomato (Schultheiss et al., 1996). The structures of these species' HSF DNA binding domains are essentially the same, and prove to be a helix-turn-helix motif similar to that of the winged-helix proteins HNF3 and forkhead (Vuister et al., 1994b; Harrison et al., 1994). The trimerization domain forms a helical coiled-coil, reminsicent of that of in¯uenza virus hemagglutinin (Peteranderl et al., 1999; Carr & Kim, 1993; Bullough et al., 1994). The N-terminal domain has been shown to have very little a-helix or b-sheet (Cho et al., 1996). Detailed structural information for the remainder of the protein is lacking. This is due in part to the lack of conservation among HSF proteins from different species, which precludes taking advantage of evolutionarily invariant residues for structure prediction. Structure prediction based solely on the one HSF sequence from Saccharomyces cerevisiae suggests that a surprising fraction of the unconserved sequence may be neither a-helix nor b-sheet, as has been con®rmed for the N-terminal domain (Cho et al., 1996). These unconserved regions are likely to be highly ¯exible, and hamper efforts at crystallization. In an effort to learn about the structure of yeast HSF, we have taken an approach of site-speci®c crosslinking. The yeast HSF protein naturally lacks cysteine residues. Therefore, it is possible to introduce cysteine subsitutions at unique sites throughout the protein, thereby introducing uniquely reactive sites. We have used these cysteine substitutions to examine contacts between monomers in the HSF trimer, and to explore intramolecular contacts within monomers.

Site-speci®c Crosslinking of HSF

Previous mutational analysis of HSF (Kopczynski et al., 1992; Bonner et al., 1992; Torres & Bonner, 1995) suggested that HSF is remarkably tolerant of amino acid substitutions. Despite very high levels of mutagenesis, we recovered mutants with identi®able phenotypes extremely rarely. We therefore based our rationale for the introduction of cysteine substitutions on desirable locations, rather than on concerns about phenotypic effects. This strategy proved reasonable. Only four cysteine substitutions failed to display wild-type function (Table 1), and of these, one was intentionally introduced into the hydrophobic core of the DNA-binding domain (W235C), one was placed at a predicted intermolecular interface (E207C), and the other two were placed at sites of known mutational deregulation (M232C and R274C). Thus, the analysis of the majority of mutants in this study appears unlikely to be confounded by functional aberrations induced by the mutations themselves. Figure 1 illustrates the locations of the mutations that we introduced, in comparison to several maps of useful information, such as: (a) the functional regions that have been identi®ed, (b) conservation between yeast and human HSFs, (c) the secondary structure that is predicted by the Sacch3D program, and (d) the con®rmed structure of the DNAbinding domain. We focussed our attention on the transcriptional activators, the N-terminal domain involved in ``sequestration'' of the transcriptional activators, the DNA-binding and trimerization domains, and CE2, a region that is conserved between HSFs from Saccharomyces and Kluyveromyces.

Results
Introduction of cysteine substitutions rarely has a phenotypic effect In order to probe the structure of HSF, we sought to introduce single cysteine residues into the protein to provide uniquely reactive probes. Such a study could be compromised, however, if the mutations themselves altered the function of the HSF protein. For those regions of HSF for which structural information was available (e.g. the DNA-binding and trimerization domains), we could target our substitutions to residues that should have a low probability of structural perturbation. For other regions, however, this luxury was not available.
Figure 1. Locations of cysteine substitutions, functional, and structural elements in yeast HSF. TAD, transcriptional activation domain. CE1, CE2, conserved elements (sequence similarities between HSFs from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Kluyveromyces lactis). Sequestration, region whose deletion renders HSF unrestrainedly active. DNA, DNA-binding domain. Trimer, trimerization domain. Linker, linker between DNA-binding domain and trimerization domain. Hatched region between linker and DNA-binding domain, portion of linker that shows evolutionary conservation among HSFs. Known structure is from Harrison et al. (1994) and Peteranderl et al. (1999).

Site-speci®c Crosslinking of HSF Table 1. Crosslinking summary, BMH

583

Mutant T43C S69C S89C S111C A128C S151C S181C T189C E196C E207C E208C S221C M232C W235C Q247C K271C R274C S295C I347C Y356C M381C L400C A543C S548C S568C S626C S655C S788C

Location N-terminal activator N-terminal flexible domain N-terminal flexible domain N-terminal flexible domain N-terminal flexible domain N-terminal flexible domain DNA binding domain a1 DNA binding domain a1 DNA binding domain b1/2 turn DNA binding domaina2 DNA binding domain a2 DNA binding domain a3 DNA binding domain a3 DNA binding domain b3 (in) DNA binding domain wing DNA binding domain DNA binding domain BiP site trimerization domain HR1 (in) trimerization domain HR1 (out) loop between HR1, HR2 trimerization domain HR2 (in) CE 2 CE 2 BiP site HR3 (in) Near C-TAD C-TAD C-TAD

Phenotype Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type Lethal Wild-type Wild-type Constitutive Lethal Wild-type Wild-type Lethal Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type Wild-type

Crosslinking class I IV IV IV IV IV I I II II I I IV IV II I IV nd II III IV II nd1 II II nd1 nd1
1

Crosslinking without DNA  À À À À À       À À   À   À À       

Effect of DNA none none None None None None Eliminates XL Eliminates XL Eliminates XL NA None None None NA None Elminates XL NA None None None None None None None None None None None

Effect of heat shock duration 2X decrease with 6hr heat shock nd2 nd2 nd2 nd2 nd2 None None None None None None None None None None NA nd None None nd2 None nd2 None nd2 2X decrease with 6hr heat shock nd2 nd2
2

Effect of superoxideinduced conformational change None None None None Noee None None None None NA none None None NA None None NA None None None None None None None None None None None

Crosslinking classes (formation of homodimers): I; BMH > o-PDM, II, BMH  o-PDM; III, BMH < o-PDM; IV, no crosslinking. Crosslinking intensities: À, no crosslinking; , up to 10 % crosslinking;  , 10-33 % crosslinking;   , 33-67 % crosslinking (67 % is theoretical maximum for homodimers formed from trimers). HR1, HR2, HR3, heptad repeats that comprise the N and C-terminal portions of the trimerization domain and part of the C-terminal transcriptional activation elements. BiP site, sequence matches hsp70 binding preference (Flynn et al., 1991). CE2, short element conserved between Saccharomyces and Kluyveromyces. NA, not applicable. Lethal mutants cannot be tested in this assay. nd1, o-PDM and p-PDM not tested; both BMH and CuPh induce crosslinks. nd2, not tested after elucidation of the conformational change by Carlson et al. (1999) and Lee et al. (2000).

Intermolecular crosslinking of single mutants Prior to performing crosslinking experiments with our cysteine-tagged HSF mutants, we performed pilot experiments using the amine-speci®c

crosslinker ethylene glycol bis-succinimidyl succinate (EGS) to assess protein-protein associations in HSF complexes. When ATP has been added to the reactions to dissociate hsp70 (Bonner et al., 2000), HSF crosslinked exclusively as a trimer (Bonner

584 et al., 1994). This indicates that no additional proteins can be detected in association with HSF under these conditions. Thus, crosslinking of our cysteine mutants is likely to represent solely crosslinks between HSF monomers. To identify regions of HSF where monomers in a trimer come into proximity, we performed a series of crosslinking experiments using thiol-speci®c reagents. To detect the crosslinked products, we ran the samples on SDS/polyacrylamide gels, and detected HSF immunochemically using af®nitypuri®ed antibody to HSF. Figure 2 shows the nature of the data. Uncrosslinked HSF runs as a monomer, with no bands that run in the positions expected for HSF dimers. After crosslinking, the mutant HSFs can generate homodimers if the positions of the cysteine residues are favorable. As reported for such experiments (Falke & Koshland, 1987; Falke et al., 1988), the electrophoretic mobilities of the dimers vary, depending upon the location of the crosslink (Figure 2, lower panel). This variation in electrophoretic mobility illustrates an important aspect of this kind of analysis: that mobility on SDS/gels depends not only on molecular mass, but also is heavily dependent on the structure of the protein. Electrophoretic anomalies play a signi®cant role in these experiments. In general, we tested our mutants only after expressing them from yeast high-copy plasmids in a strain that was lacking its own HSF1 gene, and that was also de®cient in vacuolar proteases. Thus, the only HSF protein present was that containing the mutation. In those few cases where the mutation decreased HSF function suf®ciently that it did not support growth of the (already slow-

Site-speci®c Crosslinking of HSF

growing) protease-de®cient yeast strain, we coexpressed the mutant HSF with a truncated form of HSF from which residues 391-833 had been deleted. This truncated HSF1-390 does not trimerize well with full-length HSF, and has an electrophoretic mobility that is considerably faster. Thus, we could nonetheless obtain some information even for proteins that were functionally aberrant. We induced crosslinking between cysteine residues with four crosslinking agents: copper phenanthroline (CuPh), which causes oxidation of the extract and stimulates the formation of disul®de bonds, o-phenylenedimaleimide (o-PDM), p-phenylenedimaleimide (p-PDM), and bis-maleimidohexane (BMH). CuPh is a ``zero-length'' crosslinker, while the other three reagents can crosslink Ê Ê Ê thiols that are separated by 6 A, 10 A, and 16 A, respectively. BMH is ¯exible, and can also crossÊ link thiols that are separated less than 16 A, but the phenylenedimaleimides are rigid, and thus restricted in their crosslinking capacities. The cysteine mutations fell into four classes with respect to these reagents. The major patterns of crosslinking are shown for the dimaleimides in Figure 3. The majority of our mutants showed crosslinking with BMH. Of these, some were equally well crosslinked with o-PDM and p-PDM (e.g. E196C; Figure 3). Others were crosslinked more ef®ciently with BMH than with the two PDMs, with BMH being somewhat better (e.g. K271C; Figure 3), or signi®cantly better (e.g. T189C; Figure 3). There was only one mutant, Y356C (Figure 3) which showed the opposite pattern, crosslinking better with o-PDM than with the other reagents. In general, crosslinking with CuPh was as expected from the dimaleimide pattern. In most cases,if o-PDM crosslinked a cysteine mutant poorly, CuPh did not crosslink. Exceptions included T43C and S181C, for which CuPh crosslinked more ef®ciently than predicted, and Y356C, which did not crosslink with CuPh. For T43C and S181C, we do not have a good explanation beyond the inherent differences in crosslinking ef®ciency of the different reagents (perhaps due to differences in solubility). For Y356C, it is predicted that the cysteine residue faces the outside surface of the helical coiled-coil, and therefore places the cysteine residues too far apart to allow the formation of a disul®de. The crosslinking of single cysteine substitutions, to form homodimers, is summarized semi-quantitatively in Table 1, and pictorially in Figure 4(a). Most cysteine substitutions are capable of crosslinking, indicating a great deal of ¯exibility in HSF. Binding to DNA eliminates intermolecular crosslinking for many cysteine mutants We were interested to ®nd that a very large proportion of mutations in the DNA binding domain were affected by binding to DNA. Figure 5 illustrates the nature of the data. For E196C, for

Figure 2. Formation of homodimers by crosslinking of cysteine substitutions. The HSF monomer is detected immunochemically as a single band; crosslinked dimers form a band of slower mobility. Lower panel, the mobility of the dimer depends upon the position of the crosslink. m, monomer; XL, crosslinked products.

Site-speci®c Crosslinking of HSF

585

Figure 3. Formation of homodimers using di-maleimides for the crosslinker. T189C illustrates a mutant that crosslinks most ef®ciently with BMH. This crosslinking pattern identi®es sites that can approach to less Ê Ê than 16 A, but more than 10 A apart. K271C and E196C illustrate mutants that crosslink with the phenylenedimaleimides as well as with BMH. This crosslinking pattern identi®es sites that are able to approach within Ê Ê Ê 10 A but not 6 A (K271C), or to within 6 A (E196C). Y356C is the only mutant that crosslinks with o-PDM but no other crosslinkers, and therefore identi®es a site Ê that is 10 A apart, and that cannot readily approach closer or move farther. é, no crosslinker added. 25, crosslinking performed at 25  C; 4, crosslinking performed at 4  C; m, monomer; XL, crosslinked products.

Figure 4. Summary of crosslinking patterns. For (a) (homodimeric crosslinks, free in solution) and (b) (homodimeric crosslinks, DNA-bound), cysteine substitutions that are crosslinked are shown above the map of HSF, while cysteine substitutions that did not crosslink are shown below the map. For (c) (heterodimeric crosslinks) and (d) (intramolecular crosslinks), the positions of the individual mutants that were tested are noted with tick-marks above the HSF map. Brackets above the map indicate mutant pairs that exhibited crosslinking, and brackets below the map indicate mutant pairs for which crosslinking was undetectable. The shaded regions on the map are, left to right, transcriptional activation region (TAD), DNA binding domain, trimerization domain, TAD, and TAD.

Intermolecular and intramolecular crosslinks within double mutants It has been shown that deletion of the N-terminal domain of yeast HSF renders the C-terminal transcriptional activation domains constitutively active in vivo (Sorger, 1990). The ®ndings of Lee et al. (2000) suggest that this occurs through de-stabilization of the low-activity conformation of HSF. Since it was orignally suggested (Sorger, 1990) that repression of activity might occur through a direct interaction between the N and Cterminal domains, either intramolecularly, or intermolecularly, we sought experimental evidence that would shed light on the relative proximities of these two domains. As noted above, our singlemutant crosslinks suggested that the cysteine subsitutions, T43C, near the N-terminal transcriptional activator and S626C, near the C-terminal transcriptional activator were each capable of forming homodimeric crosslinks. This suggested that these two domains might be far from one another in the three-dimensional structure of HSF.

example, BMH was able to form crosslinks ef®ciently when HSF was free in solution, but was unable to do so when HSF was bound to DNA. In a similar way, K271C was prevented from crosslinking by binding to DNA, in a concentrationdependent manner. By constrast, L400C, in the trimerization domain, showed no effect of DNA binding. The effect of DNA on crosslinking patterns is summarized in Figure 4(b). This ®nding indicates that the DNA-binding domain is relatively mobile when HSF is free in solution, allowing the formation of homodimeric crosslinks at a number of locations. However, the DNA-binding domains of the HSF trimer appear to be held in place more rigidly after they have bound to DNA.

586

Site-speci®c Crosslinking of HSF

Figure 5. Effect of DNA on crosslinking. E196C and K271C illustrate cysteine mutants that formed homodimers when HSF was free in solution, but that did not crosslink when HSF was bound to DNA. L400C illustrates a cysteine substitution that formed homodimers regardless of the presence of DNA. é, no crosslinker added. 25, crosslinking performed at 25  C; 4, crosslinking performed at 4  C;. m, monomer; XL, crosslinked products.

Figure 6. Crosslinking with double mutants E208C, Q247C and T43C, S626C. Each single mutant forms homodimers of a characteristic mobility. In the double mutants, one of the cysteine residue forms homodimers preferentially, while no obvious heterodimers are visible (expected to have mobilities intermediate between those of the homodimers; see the text). No larger or smaller bands were visible on the gels. é, no crosslinker added. Arrows indicate crosslinked products.

To probe the relationship of these domains further, we constructed the double mutant, T43C,S626C. These two cysteine substitutions should be able to form inter- or intramolecular crosslinks if associations between the N-terminal and C-terminal domains bring them into proximity. Crosslinking in this double mutant could exhibit several forms. The single intermolecular homodimers (T43C-T43C and S626C-S626C) may be expected to form, and to be recognizable based on their distinct electrophoretic mobilities (Figure 2). The heterodimer resulting from a T43CS626C crosslink would be expected (according to precedent, Falke & Koshland, 1987; Falke et al., 1988) to exhibit an electrophoretic mobility that is roughly the average of the two homodimers. By contrast, the intramolecular T43C-S626C crosslink should create a circular molecule with an aberrantly rapid mobility, forming a band below the monomer (Falke et al., 1988). The last species that could form would be trimers (which might be too large to resolve on our gel system effectively), or dimers containing both homodimeric crosslinks. The latter might be expected to exhibit a mobility between that of the singly crosslinked homodimer and the monomer. Crosslinking of the double mutant showed only the individual S626C-S626C homodimers and, at

lower intensity, the T43C-T43C homodimers (Figure 6). No obvious band of intermediate mobility was apparent, indicating that no T43C-S626C heterodimers formed. No band with a mobility between the T43C dimer and the monomer was apparent. Nor were any bands of more rapid mobility visible, thus arguing against the formation of T43C-S626C intramolecular crosslinks. The lack of crosslinked products with aberrantly rapid mobility does not rule out the formation of intramolecular crosslinks, since it is possible that such a crosslinked product might exhibit normal electrophoretic mobility. However, our results with E196C double mutants, described below, indicate that altered mobility can occur, and suggest that somewhat greater weight can be given to this negative result. This crosslinking pattern therefore suggests that the N-terminal domain and the C-terminal domain do not interact so as to bring residues 43 and 626 into proximity. The crosslinking of the T43C,S626C double mutant showed a marked preference for formation of only one of the two possible homodimers (S626C; Figure 6). We observed a similar result with the double mutant, E208C,Q247C. Again, one homodimeric crosslink formed preferentially, and no intermediate band was visible that might represent the heterodimeric crosslink. We interpret these results to indicate a kinetic difference in the rates of crosslinking of the homodimers. S626C homodimers apparently form more rapidly than T43C homodimers, and Q247C homodimers form more rapidly than E208C homodimers. The failure to form other species suggests that, once a particular homodimer has formed, the ¯exibility of HSF is

Site-speci®c Crosslinking of HSF

587 we observed a consistent pattern in which the crosslinked species exhibited faster electrophoretic mobility than the un-crosslinked monomer. This is the pattern expected for intramolecular crosslinks (Falke & Koshland, 1987; Falke et al., 1988), which create a protein ``knot'' of aberrant electrophoretic mobility. Therefore, these double mutants indicate that the N-terminal domain is, indeed, in proximity to the DNA binding domain. For S151C,E196C, it was not possible to detect an electrophoretic anomaly; thus, this double mutant either does not form intramolecular crosslinks, or the mobility of the crosslinked products is not detectably different from that of un-crosslinked monomers. The single mutant E196C is normally capable of forming homodimeric crosslinks. However, in the context of the N-terminal domain double mutants, these homodimeric crosslinks were not observed (with the possible exception of the S151C,E196C double mutant, where a dimer-sized band is visible although not well resolved; Figure 7). We interpret this to indicate that the intramolecular crosslinks form more rapidly than the E196C homodimers, thereby precluding the formation of the dimers. Together, these results indicate that the N-terminal domain can contact the DNA-binding domain, but that it is not in close proximity to the trimerization domain. These results also show that a single surface of the DNA binding domain, marked with E196C, can be in proximity with any of at least four distinct regions of the N-terminal domain. This implies that the structure formed by the N-terminal domain is neither rigid, nor constrained to a particular orientation with respect to the DNA binding domain. Similar experiments (not shown) show that the C-terminal cysteine mutations A543C and S548C preferentially form homodimers, but can also form intramolecular crosslinks with the trimerization domain mutation, M381C, but not with the DNA binding domain mutation, E196C. The effect of the HSF conformational change on crosslinking We have recently shown that, upon heat shock, HSF undergoes a conformational change that is triggered by superoxide anion (Lee et al., 2000; S. Lee & J.J.B., unpublished results). This conformational change can be induced in vitro; it is detectable only when HSF is bound to DNA as two cooperatively interacting trimers (Lee et al., 2000). We therefore sought to determine whether any of the crosslinking patterns described above might be altered by heat shock of the cells from which the HSF was isolated, or by superoxide treatment of DNA-bound HSF. As summarized in Table 1, we were unable to detect any signi®cant effects. We examined the consequences of extracting the HSF from cells that had been heat shocked for a short or a long time; with these treatments, only homodimer formation by T43C and S626C showed

restricted. This would be expected if the cysteine residues were on different faces of a globular structure, as is the case for the E208C,Q247C mutations in the DNA-binding domain. Rotation could allow individual cysteine residues to come into proximity; formation of a single crosslink would prevent further rotation, and preclude formation of further crosslinks. While the data of Sorger (1990) suggest that the N-terminal domain of HSF plays a role in the regulation of the C-terminal activators, it is also clear from the remarkably normal regulatory properties of C-terminal deletions (Sorger, 1990; Lee et al., 2000; J.J.B., unpublished results) that the activity of the N-terminal domain is itself regulated by the DNA-binding and trimerization domains. We therefore generated a series of double mutants that would probe interactions of these domains. For the trimerization domain, we chose M381C, a residue predicted to face the exterior of the trimeric coiled coil, but in a region of the trimerization domain where mutations can affect the regulatory properties of HSF (Chen et al., 1993). For the DNA-binding domain, we chose E196C, a residue predicted from the crystal structure (Harrison et al., 1994) to be on the surface of this domain where it might be accessible to other portions of HSF. For the N-terminal domain, for which the structure is not clear, we created mutations at roughly 20 amino acid intervals. Crosslinking of this set of ten double mutants is shown in Figure 7. For none of the M381C double mutants was any signi®cant crosslinking observed. This indicates that neither M381C nor any of the N-terminal domain mutations were able to form homodimers, and that M381C is not in suf®cient proximity to any of the N-terminal domain cysteine residues to form intramolecular crosslinks. For most of the E196C double mutants, however,

Figure 7. Intramolecular crosslinks for mutations in the N-terminal domain and either E196C (DNA binding domain) or M381C (trimerization domain). Left panel (S69C, E196C): crosslinking () induces the formation of a faster-migrating band compared to non-crosslinked monomer (À). Center panel: crosslinking induces the formation of more rapidly migrating bands for the E196C double mutants, but not the M381C double mutants. m, monomer; XL, crosslinked products; *, position of E196C-E196C homodimer.

588 any change. These two cysteine substitutions showed a mere twofold decrease in crosslinking ef®ciency on prolonged heat shock, well after the conformational change has occurred in vivo, and during the time that HSF activity is decreasing with concomitant phosphorylation and hsp70 binding (Bonner et al., 2000). This minor and delayed effect is not informative with respect to HSF's immediate response to heat shock. To trigger HSF to undergo the superoxidedependent conformational change, we treated DNA-bound HSF with 10 mM MgCl2, which stimulates superoxide production in our buffer system, and triggers the conformational change (Lee et al., 2000). For no cysteine substitutions was any effect observed. This was true even for K271C, which is in the ¯exible loop of the DNA-binding domain that plays a role in the superoxidedependent conformational change (Lee et al., 2000). The HSF conformational change requires only the DNA-binding domain, the trimerization domain, and the linker in between (Lee et al., 2000). Sixteen of our 28 cysteine subsitutions are within this region, and mark the major structural elements of these domains (b-turns, surfaces of a-helices, etc). Since no major changes in crosslinking were detectable even with such extensive cyteine tagging, we conclude that the conformational changes that HSF undergoes are subtle, and do not involve large-scale movement.

Site-speci®c Crosslinking of HSF

Discussion
Here, we have examined the crosslinking behavior of HSF free in solution, and bound to a single DNA sequence. In interpreting the data, it is important to ask whether these two conditions are suf®cient to probe the behavior of HSF. With our DNA oligonucleotide that contains six GAA motifs, HSF can bind as two cooperatively interacting trimers. Such a structure is required for the heat/superoxide-inducible conformational change to be detectable (Lee et al., 2000). This is therefore the DNA probe of choice for analyzing the conformational change. This probe does, however, make it dif®cult to determine whether homodimeric crosslinks bridge the monomer-monomer interface across the TTC..GAA dyad (monomers 1 and 2 of a trimer), across the GAA..TTC dyad (monomers 2 and 3 of a trimer), or between neighboring monomers bound to GAA..nnn..GAA (monomers 1 and 3 of a trimer, or neighboring monomers of two different trimers). Since a single trimeric binding site exhibits these same interfaces, there is no signi®cant gain from using a probe that can bind only a single trimer. There are, however, natural HSEs upon which yeast HSF shows somewhat different behavior, the best studied of which is that of the CUP1 gene of yeast (Santoro et al., 1998). It is regrettable that we have been unable to obtain suf®ciently high af®-

nity binding of yeast HSF to this HSE to facilitate analysis by this method (J.J.B., unpublished results). Furthermore, this HSE is insuf®cient to give activity in vivo by itself; additional sequence elements beyond the HSF-binding site are required (Santoro et al., 1998). This suggests that HSF functions on this site only in combination with other, as yet undetermined, DNA-binding proteins. Therefore, we conclude that the use of non-canonical HSEs, such as that of CUP1, is impractical, while the use of HSEs with a more traditional arrangement of GAA motifs (three or more in an inverted repeat), are all likely to yield the same information as we have recovered here. The structure of yeast HSF is enigmatic. A signi®cant fraction has been either shown or predicted to be neither a-helix nor b-sheet (Cho et al., 1996). Many of the amino acid residues in the random coil regions are hydrophilic, suggesting that the structure might be quite ¯exible. Furthermore, there is little dependence on the speci®c identities of the individual amino acid residues. Phylogenetic comparison of different species' HSF genes reveals extensive dissimilarity, and general mutagenesis of yeast HSF yielded phenotypically recognizable mutations in only 13 of the 833 residues (Kopczynski et al., 1992; Bonner et al., 1992; Torres & Bonner, 1995; Sewell et al., 1995; Yang et al., 1991; Silar et al., 1991). The site-speci®c crosslinking reported here provides a very low-resolution view of the structure of the HSF trimer. For regions whose structure is known, our crosslinking experiments provide consistent data. The trimerization domain is an extended coiled coil (Peteranderl et al., 1999). Cysteine residues facing the hydrophobic interior of this coiled coil (I347C and L400C) crosslink ef®ciently, while cysteine residues facing the hydrophilic exterior do not (Y356C and M381C). The DNA binding domain is more globular, forming a helix-turn-helix motif similar to that of the winged helix proteins (Harrison et al., 1994; Vuister et al., 1994a,b) With few exceptions (e.g. W235C) we introduced our cysteine substitutions at locations that are on the surface of this domain. When this domain is in contact with DNA (Little®eld & Nelson, 1999), very few of these posÊ itions are within the 16 A range that is required for homodimeric crosslinking with BMH. Only E207C, E208C, and S221C are clearly within this distance. Therefore, few of the DNA-binding domain cysteine residues exhibit homodimeric crosslinking when HSF is bound to DNA. These results, in which our crosslinking data are wholly consistent with other structural information, provide an essential control for the validity of the crosslinking approach. Because we did not observe spurious crosslinking behavior for regions for which the structure is known, we have reasonable con®dence that the technique provides valid information for the remaining portions of HSF. Our crosslinking data therefore provide the following insights into HSF structure. For the

Site-speci®c Crosslinking of HSF

589

DNA-binding domain, which displays highly predictable crosslinking when bound to DNA, we observe a high degree of homodimeric crosslinking when HSF is free in solution. This implies that, while the HSF monomers are stably joined at the trimerization domain coiled-coil, the ¯exible linker joining the trimerization domain to the DNA-binding domain (Flick et al., 1994) allows considerable movement of the DNA-binding domains realtive to one another. In solution, these domains appear to be relatively free to swivel at the end of the ¯exible linker, thereby bringing different surfaces of the DNA-binding domain into contact. Swiveling would be prevented by DNA binding, which would hold the DNA-binding domains in a speci®c orientation. The N-terminal domain contains little, if any a-helix nor b-sheet (Cho et al., 1996). The C-terminal domain is predicted to be similar. Although this information does not preclude the formation of a well-ordered structure, our data lend support to the model that these regions are highly ¯exible. One cysteine substitution in the N-terminal domain (T43C) was able to form homodimeric crosslinks, but others were not (S69C, S89C, S111C, A128C and S151C). The latter were, however, able to crosslink ef®ciently to the DNA-binding domain (E196C). That each of these N-terminal domain cysteine residues could crosslink to the same DNA binding domain cysteine suggests that the N-terminal domain is mobile. That none of these same N-terminal domain cysteine residues could crosslink to the trimerization domain (M381C) indicates that the physical space in which the domain moves is restricted to the vicinity of the DNA-binding domain, to which it is tethered. The C-terminal domain shows similar ¯exibility. Every mutation we introduced into this region was able to form homodimeric crosslinks. Two were able to form intramolecular crosslinks with the trimerization domain as well as form homodimeric crosslinks. This argues strongly against a globular structure, or a structure with signi®cant rigidity, for these would allow only some surface residues to come into contact. Instead, the data suggest a ¯exible region similar to that of the N-terminal domain. A popular model for HSF regulation was proposed by Jakobsen & Pelham 19911; see their Figure 6). In this model, the C-terminal domain makes a stable contact with a more N-terminal region of HSF to maintain the low-activity conformation. If such a stable contact were made, it should have prevented some of our C-terminal cysteine substitutions from forming homodimeric crosslinks, because it would have held these domains in quite different regions in space. Therefore, the crosslinking data do not support such a model. Instead, our data suggest a model such as that shown in Figure 8(a). The DNA binding domain and trimerization domain form well-de®ned structures. The N-terminal domain is ¯exible, and able

Figure 8. A. Structure of HSF implied by the crosslinking data. Relative proportions of the drawing are based on the data from Harrison et al. (1994) and Little®eld & Nelson (1999), with whose structures the crosslinking for the DNA-binding domain and trimerization domains are consistent. The N-terminal and C-terminal domains exhibit patterns of crosslinking that are best ®t by ¯exible, un-structured elements that are free to move within a limited space de®ned by their length. (b) Minimal structure required for the heat/superoxideinducible conformational change (Lee et al., 2000).

to adopt a variety of conformations within the limited space to which it is tethered. The C-terminal domain is equally ¯exible, but tethered to the opposite end of the DNA-binding/trimerization domain. How, then, does HSF regulation occur? Carr & Kim (1993) suggested a very interesting idea based on the crystal structure of the trimerization domain of in¯uenza virus hemagglutinin (HA). HA undergoes a dramatic conformational change upon acidi®cation. A structurally similar change in the trimerization domain of yeast HSF would dramatically alter the proximity of one or the other end of the trimerization domain. We tested this hypothesis by marking each end of this domain with the cysteine substitutions I347C and L400C. Both cysteine residues formed homodimeric crosslinks ef®ciently. For neither mutant was there any change in crosslinking with any of the conditions that we tested. Our results thus appear to rule out this particular mechanism for a conformational change of yeast HSF.

590 Signi®cant thought has gone into the fact that HSF, in unstressed cells, restrains the activity of its transcriptional activation domains (Nieto-Sotelo et al., 1990; Sorger, 1990; Jakobsen & Pelham, 1991), while heat shock relieves this restraint. Sorger (1990) focussed attention on the N terminus of yeast HSF. He showed that deletion of this domain renders the C-terminal activators constitutive, suggesting that this domain might have a ``sequestration'' function (although the analogous deletion in Kluyveromyces HSF does not have this effect; Jakobsen & Pelham, 1991). It has been imagined that the N-terminal domain functions to restrain the activity of the C-terminal transcriptional activators either by physical contact with the C-terminal domains, or by contact with the DNA-binding domain or trimerization domain. Our crosslinking data make both of these models appear untenable. First, as noted above, the ability of virtually all of our C-terminal cysteine substitutions to form homodimeric crosslinks argues against their being in any such rigid structure as stable contact with another domain would require. Second, the N-terminal substitutions S69C, S89C, S111C, and A128C are all equally capable of crosslinking to E196C, which similarly indicates that the N-terminal domain maintains no single, stable structure. The data are more consistent with the notion of a ¯exible region that can form crosslinks in several ways as random motion brings different regions into proximity with one another. Therefore, it does not appear likely that the N-terminal domain regulates the activity of the C-terminal activators by any form of stable contact with any other domain. A similar conclusion was reached by replacement of the C-terminal activators with unrelated, heterologous sequence (Bonner et al., 1992). The N-terminal domain does have an effect on the conformational change that HSF undergoes. Lee et al. (2000) have shown that, for HSF mutants lacking the N-terminal domain, the low-activity conformation is less stable than normal. These mutants can still undergo the conformational change, indicating that the N-terminal domain is not essential; nonetheless, its effect on stabilizing the inactive conformation may account for the mutant phenotype observed in vivo when this domain is deleted (Sorger, 1990). With such a structure as our data suggest, how can HSF manage to regulate gene expression at all? Figure 8(b) shows the minimal part of HSF that is required for the conformational change that occurs upon heat shock or exposure to superoxide anion (Lee et al., 2000; S. Lee & J.J.B., unpublished results). This minimal region undergoes the conformational change in the absence of the N-terminal domain or in the absence of the C-terminal domain. How can this region, which is fairly well constrained structurally, restrain the activity of transcriptional activation domains that reside in highly ¯exible domains, and with which it does not appear to make speci®c contacts? We can envision few solutions to this puzzle, but offer one

Site-speci®c Crosslinking of HSF

speculative possibility that might account for the observations. Perhaps these central domains may function as a negative transcriptional regulator (i.e. repressor) that interacts directly, but non-productively, with the transcriptional machinery, essentially in competition with the HSF transcriptional activation domains. If the conformational change were to prevent this non-productive interaction, it would eliminate competition between the repression function and the transcriptional activators, allowing the latter to interact productively with the transcriptional machinery. This highly speculative model has the interesting property of accounting for much of the data. It would allow the transcriptional activation domains to be highly ¯exible as shown here, yet still exhibit regulation. It would account for the observation that regulation can still occur after the endogenous transcriptional activation domains have been replaced with heterologous sequence (Bonner et al., 1992). It would also allow the transcriptional activation domains to evolve freely, the only evolutionary constraint being that the activators not become stronger than the repressor. This model is intriguing in the context of the work of Cahill et al. (1996), who have shown that HSF can function as a repressor when bound to certain non-canonical heat shock elements. If the binding site does not facilitate the conformational change that occurs when HSF trimers are bound cooperatively (Lee et al., 2000), the repression function would be the dominant activity. It is also interesting to think of this model with respect to the experiments of Jakobsen & Pelham (1988), who showed that HSF can interfere with transcriptional activation from a nearby regulatory sequence.

Materials and Methods
Mutagenesis of HSF was performed by the method of unique restriction site elimination. Using the plasmids pJB414 and pJB415 (the EcoRI-BamHI and BamHI-XhoI fragments of the HSF1 gene, respectively, cloned into pUC19), we prepared a mutagenesis template by digestion with EcoRI in the presence of 50mg/ml ethidium bromide, for one hour at 25  C. This introduces singlestranded nicks into the plasmid, facilitating the generation of single-stranded circular template upon melting of the DNA, and greatly increases the ef®ciency of the technique. To this template, we annealed phosphorylated mutagenic oligonucleotide and a second oligonucleotide that eliminates a unique SphI site in the pUC19 mulitple cloning site. We used T7 DNA polymerase and T4 DNA ligase to generate the second strand, then incubated the DNA with SphI and transformed XL1-mutS Escherichia coli (Stratagene). We isolated DNA from these cells, cut again with SphI, and transformed E. coli strain DH5a. We picked individual colonies and examined their plasmids for restriction site differences introduced by the mutagenic oligonucleotide, then sequenced presumtive mutants to ensure the presence of the correct mutation. Mutations were then subcloned into pJB398 (Torres & Bonner, 1995) for expression. Mutant plasmids were transformed into yeast strain pJB341 (Torres & Bonner, 1995) for phenotypic analysis,

Site-speci®c Crosslinking of HSF to take advantage of the HSE-lacZ reporter gene resident in this strain. Plasmids were transformed into the protease-de®cient strain YJB270 (Torres & Bonner, 1995) for preparation of extracts. For both strains, the resident HSF1 gene (on a YEp-HSF1-URA3 plasmid) was removed by plating cells on 5-¯uoro-orotic acid to select against the URA3-containing plasmid. Extract preparation was performed as described (Bonner et al., 1994). Crosslinking was performed essentially as described by Torres & Bonner (1995). Extract (105 mg of protein) was either diluted directly into 250 ml 1 Â BB (20 mM Hepes (pH 7.9), 1 mM EDTA, 60 mM KCl, 12 % (v/v) glycerol) containing 100 mM ATP, or into a 45 ml DNA binding reaction in 1 Â BB containing 100 mg/ml E. coli DNA with, or without 350 ng/ml double-stranded oligonucleotide (sequence 5H -ACAGGGATCCTGAAGCTTCTAGAAGCTTCTAGAAGCTTCCTAGAGTCGACCTGCAG-3H and its complement), and with or without 10 mM MgCl2 added to induce the conformational change of HSF to its active state (Lee et al., 2000). After 60 minutes, DNA binding reactions were diluted into 250 ml 1 Â BB containing 100 mM ATP, with or without 10 mM MgCl2. If reactions were to be crosslinked at 4  C, we incubated the reactions on ice for ten minutes prior to adding crosslinker. Crosslinker was added from 100Â stocks of 40 mM (in DMSO) bis-maleimidohexane (BMH), o-phenlyenedimaleimide (o-PDM), or p-phenlyenedimaleimide (p-PDM), or 25 mM CuSO4, 130 mM 1,10-phenanthroline (copperphenanthroline, CuPh). Crosslinking was carried out at room temperature for ten minutes (or on ice for 20 minutes), and reactions were stopped by addition of 20 mM 2-mercaptoethanol (for di-maleimide reactions) or 2 % (w/v) SDS, 50 mM NEM, 5 mM EDTA (for CuPh experiments). After ten minutes, protein was precipitated by addition of three volumes 95 % (v/v) ethanol, and samples were run on 8 % (w/v) polyacrylamide/SDS gels for 1600 volt-hours, and processed for immunodetection using antibody to HSF and enhanced chemiluminescence (Pierce) as a detection system. To aid quantitation, samples were always run alongside a concentration series of extract. To facilitate quantitation, as well as to enable comparison from experiment to experiment, we included on every gel a dilution series of extract. This provides a ``standard curve'' to which to compare the signal intensities of the HSF bands in the experiments. On test gels quantitated by ¯uourescensce, using a ¯uorescently labeled secondary antibody, or by scanning of the ®lms produced by ECL, we obtained reliable curves from this dilution series provided the gels were adequately exposed to overcome the strong dropoff of signal at low intensities (not shown). This indicates that comparison to the dilution series is a valid method of quantitation. Therefore, we estimated percent crosslinking by comparing the signal intensities of both monomer and dimer bands to the intensities of the bands in the dilution series.

591

References
Bonner, J. J., Heyward, S. & Fackenthal, D. L. (1992). Temperature-dependent regulation of a heterologous transcriptional activation domain fused to yeast heat shock transcription factor. Mol. Cell. Biol. 12, 1021-1030. Bonner, J. J., Ballou, C. & Fackenthal, D. L. (1994). Interactions between DNA-bound trimers of the yeast heat shock factor. Mol. Cell. Biol. 14, 501-508. Bonner, J. J., Carlson, T., Fackenthal, D. L., Paddock, D., Storey, K. & Lea, K. (2000). Complex regulation of the yeast heat shock transcription factor. Mol. Biol. Cell. In the press. Boorstein, W. R., Ziegelhoffer, T. & Craig, E. A. (1994). Molecular evolution of the HSP70 multigene family. J. Mol. Evol. 38, 1-17. Bullough, P. A., Hughson, F. M., Skehel, J. J. & Wiley, D. C. (1994). Structure of in¯uenza haemagglutinin at the pH of membrane fusion. Nature, 371, 37. Cahill, C. M., Waterman, W. R., Xie, Y., Auron, P. E. & Calderwood, S. K. (1996). Transcriptional repression of the prointerleukin 1b gene by heat shock factor 1. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 24874-24879. Carlson, T., Christian, N. & Bonner, J. J. (1999). A role for RNA metabolism in inducing the heat shock response. Gene Express. 7, 283-292. Carr, C. M. & Kim, P. S. (1993). A spring-loaded mechanism for conformational change of in¯uenza hemagglutinin. Cell, 73, 823-832. Chen, Y., Barlev, N. A., Westergaard, O. & Jakobsen, B. K. (1993). Identi®cation of the C-terminal activator domain in yeast heat shock factor: independent control of transient and sustained transcriptional activity. EMBO J. 12, 5007-5018. Cho, H. S., Liu, C. W., Damberger, F. F., Pelton, J. G., Nelson, H. C. & Wemmer, D. E. (1996). Yeast heat shock transcription factor N-terminal activation domains are unstructured as probed by heteronuclear NMR spectroscopy. Protein Sci. 5, 262-269. Damberger, F. F., Pelton, J. G., Harrison, C. J., Nelson, H. C. M. & Wemmer, D. E. (1994). Solution structure of the DNA-binding domain of the heat shock transcription factor determined by multidimensional heteronuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Protein Sci. 3, 1806-1821. Falke, J. J. & Koshland, D. E., Jr (1987). Global ¯exibility in a sensory receptor: a site-directed cross-linking approach. Science, 237, 1596-1600. Falke, J. J., Dernburg, A. F., Sternberg, D. A., Salkin, N., Milligan, D. L. & Koshland, D. E., Jr (1988). Structure of a bacterial sensory receptor: a site-directed sulfhydryl study. J. Biol. Chem. 263, 14850-14858. Flick, K. E., Gonzalez, L., Harrison, C. J. & Nelson, H. C. M. (1994). Yeast heat shock transcription factor contains a ¯exible linker between the DNAbinding and trimerization domains: implications for DNA binding by trimeric proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 12475-12481. Flynn, G. C., Pohl, J., Flocco, M. T. & Rothman, J. E. (1991). Peptide-binding speci®city of the molecular chaperone BiP. Nature, 353, 726-730. Harrison, C. J., Bohm, A. A. & Nelson, H. C. M. (1994). Crystal structure of the DNA binding domain of the heat shock transcription factor. Science, 263, 224227. Jakobsen, B. K. & Pelham, H. R. B. (1988). Constitutive binding of yeast heat shock factor to DNA in vivo. Mol. Cell. Biol. 8, 5040-5042.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank the following individuals for technical contributions to this work: Monica Bonner, David Paddock, Erickirk, Meredith Campo, Cynthia Champion. This work was supported by grant GM 51853 from the National Institute of Health.

592
Jakobsen, B. K. & Pelham, H. R. B. (1991). A conserved hepatpeptide restrains the activity of the yeast heat shock transcription factor. EMBO J. 10, 369-375. Kopczynski, J. B., Raff, A. C. & Bonner, J. J. (1992). Translational readthrough at nonsense mutations in the HSF1 gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol. Gen. Genet. 234, 369-378. Lee, S., Carlson, T., Christian, N., Lea, K., Kedzie, J., Reilly, J. P. & Bonner, J. J. (2000). The yeast heat shock transcription factor changes conformation in response to superoxide and temperature. Mol. Biol. Cell. In the press. Little®eld, O. & Nelson, H. C. M. (1999). A new use for the `wing' of the `winged' helix-turn-helix motif in the HSF-DNA cocrystal. Nature Struct. Biol. 6, 464470. Morimoto, R. I., Kline, M. P., Bimston, D. N. & Cotto, J. J. (1997). The heat-shock response: regulation and function of heat-shock proteins and molecular chaperones. Essays Biochem. 32, 17-29. Nieto-Sotelo, J., Wiederrecht, G., Okuda, A. & Parker, C. S. (1990). The yeast heat shock transcription factor contains a transcriptional activation domain whose activity is repressed under non-shock conditions. Cell, 62, 807-817. Peteranderl, R., Rabenstein, M., Shin, Y. K., Liu, C. W., Wemmer, D. E., King, D. S. & Nelson, H. C. (1999). Biochemical and biophysical characterization of the trimerization domain from the heat shock transcription factor. Biochemistry, 38, 3559-3569. Rabindran, S. K., Haroun, R. I., Clos, J., Wisniewski, J. & Wu, C. (1993). Regulation of heat shock factor trimer formation: role of a conserved leucine zipper. Science, 259, 230-234. Santoro, N., Johansson, N. & Thiele, D. J. (1998). Heat shock element architecture is an important determinant in the temperature and transactivation domain requirements for heat shock transcription factor. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18, 6340-6352. Schultheiss, J., Kunert, O., Gase, U., Scharf, K. D., Nover, L. & Ruterjans, H. (1996). Solution structure of the DNA-binding domain of the tomato heatstress transcription factor HSF24. Eur. J. Biochem. 236, 911-921.

Site-speci®c Crosslinking of HSF Sewell, A. K., Yokoya, F., Yu, W., Miyawaga, T., Murayama, T. & Winge, D. R. (1995). Mutated yeast heat shock transcription factor exhibits elevated basal transcriptional activation and confers metal resistance. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 25079-25086. Silar, P., Butler, G. & Thiele, D. J. (1991). Heat shock transcription factor activates transcription of the yeast metallothionein gene. Mol. Cell. Biol. 11, 12321238. Sorger, P. K. (1990). Yeast heat shock factor contains separable transient and sustained response transcriptional activators. Cell, 62, 793-805. Sorger, P. K. & Pelham, H. R. B. (1988). Yeast heat shock factor is an essential DNA-binding protein that exhibits temperature-dependent phosphorylation. Cell, 54, 855-864. Torres, F. A. G. & Bonner, J. J. (1995). Genetic identi®cation of the site of DNA contact in the yeast heat shock transcription factor. Mol. Cell. Biol. 15, 50635070. Vuister, G. W., Kim, S.-J., Orosz, A., Marquardt, J., Wu, C. & Bax, A. (1994a). Solution structure of the DNA-binding domain of Drosophila heat shock transcription factor. Nature Struct. Biol. 1, 605-614. Vuister, G. W., Kim, S. J., Wu, C. & Bax, A. (1994b). NMR evidence for similarities between the DNAbinding regions of Drosophila melanogaster heat shock factor and the helix-turn-helix and HNF3forkhead families of transcription factors. Biochemistry, 33, 10-16. Westwood, J. T., Clos, J. & Wu, C. (1991). Stress-induced oligomerization and chromosomal relocalization of heat shock factor. Nature, 353, 822-827. Wiedderecht, G., Seto, D. & Parker, C. S. (1988). Isolation of the gene encoding the S. cerevisiae heat shock transcription factor. Cell, 54, 841-853. Yang, W., Gahl, W. & Hamer, D. (1991). Role of heat shock transcription factor in yeast metallothionein gene expression. Mol. Cell. Biol. 11, 3676-3681. Zuo, J., Baler, R., Dahl, G. & Voellmy, R. (1994). Activation of the DNA-binding ability of human heat shock transcription factor 1 may involve the transition from an intramolecular to an intermolecular triple-stranded coiled-coil structure. Mol. Cell. Biol. 14, 7557-7568.

Edited by K. Yamamoto (Received 31 January 2000; received in revised form 12 May 2000; accepted 1 August 2000)

