Previews
Rubisco: The Enzyme that Keeps on Giving
F. Robert Tabita1,*
1

Leading Edge

Department of Microbiology and the Plant Molecular Biology/Biotechnology Program, The Ohio State University, 484 West 12th Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210-1292 USA *Correspondence: tabita.1@osu.edu DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2007.06.002

In cyanobacteria, the RbcX protein enhances the production of Rubisco, the multisubunit enzyme that catalyzes the first step of carbon dioxide fixation in most autotrophic organisms. In this issue of Cell, Saschenbrecker et al. (2007) report that RbcX acts as a specific assembly chaperone that mobilizes the large subunits of Rubisco to a specific oligomeric core that can then combine with the small subunits of Rubisco to form the functional holoenzyme.
The most abundant enzyme in nature is Rubisco (ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase), which catalyzes the first step of carbon dioxide fixation in the majority of photosynthetic and chemoautotrophic organisms. In eukaryotes, the catalytically competent Rubisco holoenzyme (form I) is fully active only when eight large (L) subunits and eight small (S) subunits form an (L 2) 4 (S4) 2 hexadecamer. Since its identification nearly 50 years ago, Rubisco has frequently emerged at the leading edge of important issues in biochemistry, cell and molecular biology, and structural biology. In particular, analysis of the assembly of the Rubisco holoenzyme in chloroplasts led to the discovery of molecular chaperones (Barraclough and Ellis, 1980). Subsequently, the GroE heat-shock proteins were found to act as molecular chaperones (Goloubinoff et al., 1989) for the products of the L (rbcL) and S (rbcS) genes allowing their assembly into the fully active recombinant Rubisco of cyanobacteria (Gatenby et al., 1985; Tabita and Small, 1985). Further studies using the simpler Rubisco from the purple nonsulfur bacterium Rhodospirillum rubrum, which consists of a homodimer of L subunits (form II), showed that GroEL and GroES facilitate reconstitution of the native form of the enzyme from unfolded monomers in vitro. However, examination of the folding and assembly of subunits of form I Rubisco from certain cyanobacteria indicated that there was more to the story of Rubisco assembly. In the cyanobacterium Anabaena and in other species, the rbcX gene is situated between rbcL and rbcS (Larimer and Soper, 1993), and all three genes are cotranscribed. Most importantly, RbcX is important for maximal production of catalytically competent recombinant cyanobacterial Rubisco (Li and Tabita, 1997), although its function has been unclear. Curiously, rbcX is either required or nonessential for Rubisco activity and solubility depending on the strain of unicellular cyanobacterium (Onizuka et al., 2004; Emlyn-Jones et al., 2006). In an elegant new study, Saschenbrecker et al. (2007) present biochemical and structural evidence that RbcX acts as a specific Rubisco assembly chaperone to facilitate formation of an oligomeric RbcL8 ((RbcL 2) 4) core complex. Newly formed RbcL8 is then capable of spontaneously combining with S subunits to form the catalytically competent hexadecameric holoenzyme complex. RbcX performs this feat after GroEL and GroES, and perhaps other chaperones, have assisted productive folding of newly translated Rubisco L polypeptides. Soon after folded RbcL emerges, RbcX maximizes the correct assembly of RbcL octamers; otherwise, RbcL has a tendency to misassemble or produce unproductive aggregates. To gain further insight into how RbcX functions, Saschenbrecker and colleagues solved X-ray structures of two separate RbcX proteins. These efforts yielded similar structures, suggesting that all RbcX proteins are functionally alike. The asymmetric unit appears to be composed of three dimers. Two highly conserved regions were identified, one at the central groove of the dimer, which contains several hydrophobic residues. The other conserved region is a polar surface region, located around the corners of the molecule. Sitedirected mutagenesis of various residues in the two regions indicates that the central groove region is essential and facilitates the formation of soluble RbcL subunits, whereas the polar surface region ensures that the RbcL subunits are properly arranged. The structural studies also indicate that the central groove of RbcX could serve as an interface for binding a long peptide (presumably derived from newly translated RbcL). The authors provide evidence that a conserved peptide (EIKFEFD), derived from the C terminus of RbcL, specifically interacts with the central groove of RbcX in a dynamic manner. The last stage of the assembly process involves the displacement of RbcX from the RbcLRbcX complex by RbcS, resulting in the formation of the functional hexadecameric holoenzyme. Clearly, these studies represent a seminal advance toward understanding how a complex oligomeric protein assembles in the cell. Spurred by this

Cell 129, June 15, 2007 ©2007 Elsevier Inc. 1039

work, others will undoubtedly seek to determine whether similar systems and other chaperones for protein assembly might have functions analogous to RbcX. This study provokes many questions and also reveals additional curiosities. First of all, the authors suggest that RbcX might play a general role in the assembly of form I Rubiscos, which have been subdivided into four distinct classes (A through D). RbcX may play this role in cyanobacteria, green algae, and plants, all of which possess RbcX homologs and form IB Rubisco (Tabita, 1999). However, many organisms, such as proteobacteria and nongreen algae that contain form I Rubisco (forms IC and ID), do not possess any discernible RbcX homologs. In addition, the genes encoding the IC form of Rubisco from purple nonsulfur photosynthetic bacteria and various chemolithoautotrophic bacteria are easily expressed as fully functional hexadecameric proteins in Escherichia coli without the need for any other protein. Interestingly, comparisons of the C-terminal regions of several form I Rubiscos indicate that the form IC proteobacterial proteins, as well as form ID enzymes from nongreen algae, do not contain the absolute consensus C-terminal RbcX recognition motif (EIKFEFD) found in form IB enzymes (Table 1). For the IC and ID forms of Rubisco, there are two conserved residues and a couple of conservative substitutions in this region. Is this enough to confer specificity for any type of RbcX protein? Form IA Rubisco, found in some marine cyanobacteria and other classes of chemolithotrophic proteobacteria, does contain this motif, yet, to date, no identifiable RbcX homologs have been identified in these organisms. Does this mean that even though these organisms contain the RbcX recognition motif at the Rubisco L C terminus, they use another protein to facilitate assembly? As for organisms that contain the IC form of Rubisco but do not possess the consensus C-terminal motif of IB Rubisco or an RbcX protein, is there a completely independent mechanism to facilitate assembly of

Table 1. The RbcX Recognition Motif in the Large Subunit of Rubisco Rubisco Type IB IB IB IB IB IA IA IA IC IC IC ID ID ID Organism Synechococcus PCC7002 Synechococcus PCC6301 Anabaena PCC7210 Chlamydomonas reinhardtii Spinacia oleracea Thiobacillus denitrificans Synechococcus WH8102 Prochlorococcus MIT9312 Ralstonia eutropha H16 Rhodobacter sphaeroides 241 Xanthobacter flavus Cylindrotheca N1 Porphyridium aerugineum Cryptomonas  C-Terminal Sequence EIKFEFD EIKFEFE EIKFEFE EIKFEFD EIKFEFP EIKFEFD EIKFEFD EIKFEFD DIsfnYT nITfnYT EVTfnYA DIsfnYT DIsfnYT DITfnYA

Form I Rubisco can be subdivided into four distinct classes (A, B, C, and D) based on sequence homology (Tabita, 1999). The EIKFEFD RbcX interaction motif is found at the C terminus of RbcL/CbbL in organisms containing form IB and form IA Rubisco. However, to date, only organisms containing form IB Rubisco are known to have the RbcX protein. With only two residues in common, along with a couple of conservative substitutions, form IC and form ID Rubisco possess sequence differences at their C termini. Organisms containing these classes of form I Rubisco do not contain any discernible RbcX homolog. These sequence differences and the absence of RbcX in some organisms suggest that the mechanisms to assemble form I Rubisco hexadecamers may differ depending on the organism.

the enzyme both in the native organism and in E. coli? Is it possible that these enzymes do not require any type of assembly chaperone? Finally, eukaryotic nongreen algae, which contain form ID Rubisco and no identifiable RbcX homolog, are similar to bacteria in that both the rbcL and rbcS genes are cotranscribed behind a single promoter, but in the chloroplast of these organisms. As with other eukaryotic Rubisco genes, active fully assembled recombinant form ID Rubisco has not been successfully produced in E. coli, suggesting that additional factors and/or specific processing/posttranslational events may be required. Although, as the authors suggest, it might be necessary to take RbcX into account for future attempts to improve the catalytic properties of Rubisco in crop plants, the new work raises other intriguing questions concerning assembly of Rubisco, the most abundant enzyme known.

REfEREncEs Barraclough, R., and Ellis, R.J. (1980). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 608, 18­31. Emlyn-Jones, D., Woodger, F.J., Price, C.D., and Whitney, S.M. (2006). Plant Cell Physiol. 47, 1630­1640. Gatenby, A.A., van der Vies, S.M., and Bradley, D. (1985). Nature 314, 617­620. Goloubinoff, P., Gatenby, A.A., and Lorimer, G.H. (1989). Nature 337, 44­47. Larimer, F.W., and Soper, T.S. (1993). Gene 126, 85­92. Li, L.-A., and Tabita, F.R. (1997). J. Bacteriol. 179, 3793­3796. Onizuka, T., Endo, S., Akiyama, H., Kanai, S., Hirano, M., Yokota, A., Tanaka, S., and Miyasaka, H. (2004). Plant Cell Physiol. 45, 1390­ 1395. Saschenbrecker, S., Bracher, A., Rao, K.V., Rao, B.V., Hartl, F.U., and Hayer-Hartl, M. (2007). Cell, this issue. Tabita, F.R. (1999). Photosynth. Res. 60, 1­28. Tabita, F.R., and Small, C.S. (1985). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82, 6100­6103.

1040 Cell 129, June 15, 2007 ©2007 Elsevier Inc.

