VIROLOGY

22,

539-543

(1964)

Electron

Microscopy

of

Partially

Degraded

Tobacco

Mosaic

Virus'

M. K. CORBETT
Plant Virus Labo,atoy, Plant Accepted Pathology

Gainesville,
December

Department, Florida 27, 1963

University

of Florida,

Electron microscopy of purified preparations of tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) that had been treated with phenol revealed particles from which the protein had been stripped from one end only, particles from which the protein had been removed from both ends, particles from which protein had been removed from one or more places in the middle of the rod, and still other particles from which no protein at all had been removed. It appears, therefore, that degradation of TMV by phenol occurs in a random fashion along the virus rod. Numerous long ribonucleic acid threads were found in all preparations. Some of the partially degraded virus particles were approximately 3000 A long and 200 A wide. The exposed nucleic acid of such particles was approximately 66 A wide. Partially degraded preparations were about Y,,, as infectious as the intact virus, and when such preparations were incubated with ribonuclease the infectivity was almost completely lost. INTRODUCTION

Protein may be removed from tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) particles by treatment with alkali (Schramm et al., 1955;`Harrington and Schachman, 1956), urea (Buzzell, 1960)) detergents (Hart, 1958), and phenol (Gierer and Schramm, 1956). Whether it is removed first from one end of the particle, from both ends simultaneously, or at random still appears to be an open question and may depend upon the treatment used. The absence of protein units of 170 S from alkaline degradation products of TMV indicated to Harrington and Schachman (1956) that the protein unravels from only one end of the rod, and they therefore suggested that one end of the virus particle is structurally different from the other. Hart (1955) made electron micrographs of TMV particles partially degraded by hot detergent and found that the protein unravels from
1 Florida Agricultural Experiment Stations Journal Series, No. 1812. This investigation was supported in part-by research grant AI 03148 from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, United States Public Health Service.
539

one end of the particle, leaving a projecting fiber of ribonucleic acid (RNA). Schramm et al. (1955) found that the I + II electrophoretic fractions of alkali-degraded TMV were infectious and had a higher RNA content than did that of TMV. Considering the structure of TMV, which consists of an RNA helix at 40 A radius surrounded by protein subunits arranged in a helical fashion, Harrington and Schachman (1956) concluded that virus particles may be degraded at random, if the treatment breaks both the secondary bonds between the protein subunits and also the phosphodiester bonds of the nucleic acid, or that the protein may be gradually removed from either or both ends of the particle. Klug and Caspar (1960) concluded from the evidence regarding the structure of TMV that protein subunits are more easily removed from one end of the virus particle and that this implies polarity of the TMV particle. This paper presents evidence from electron microscopy that protein may be removed at random from the TMV particle when it is exposed to phenol.

540

CORBETT

MATERIALS AND METHODS the procedure was repeated twice with Purification. Tobacco mosaic virus subsequent shakings of 2 minutes. The (TMV), American Type Culture Collection final aqueous phase was removed and No. 2 maint,ained by serial passages through shaken with peroxide-free ether (v/v). The tobacco plants, Sicotiana tabacum L. var. ether extraction was repeated 5 times; the Turkish, was used in all experiments. All final aqueous phase was removed and nitroinoculations were made by the Carbogen was slowly bubbled through it until all rundum gauze-pad method. Leaves to be traces of ether were gone. The preparation inoculated mere dusted with 500-mesh was used directly for infectivity studies and electron microscopy. Some preparations Carborundum, inoculated, and rinsed with tap water. Infectivity tests were made on were incubat,ed 10 minutes at 10" with 2 plants of Sicotinnn glutinosa L.; each in- pg of Pentex ribonuclease per milliliter beoculum was tested on 5 leaves of each of fore infectivity and electron microscope studies were made. 5 plants. Leaves of tobacco plants exhibiting a strong mottle 3 weeks after inoculaElectron microscopy. Samples were mixed latex tion were harvested and ground in a food with a small amount of polystyrene chopper. The sap and pulp were frozen overand sprayed onto collodion-covered specinight; when thawed, the juice was expressed men grids as described by Backus and Williams (1950). The latex suspension through cheesecloth. The pulp was extracted with buffer (,O.Ol &I KCl, 0.005 M K,HPO, , (Dow Chemical Co., Midland, Michigan I 0.0005 M KHZPO1, pH 7) equal to one- was from run LS-057-A with an average half the volume of sap. The two, crude sap particle size of 264 * 6 rnp. Screens were shadowed with platinum at an angle of and extract from pulp, were mixed and ccntrifuged for 20 minutes at 5000 rpm in a 12 degrees and viewed with a Philips model 100 electron microscope. Servall model SP centrifuge. The low speed supernatant was mixed with activated charRESULTS coal (Merck N.F. 18351) at the rate of The partially deproteinized preparations 0.05 g/ml and filtered through Whatman No. 1 filter paper in a Biichner funnel. were assayed without dilution on 5 leaves The filtrate, which was clear with an of each of 5 L$r. g2utinosa plants in comopalescent sheen, was centrifuged for 90 parison with a 1: 100 dilution of intact deproteinized prepaminutes at 29,000 rpm in a No. 30 rotor of virus. The partially a Spinco model L preparative ultracentrirations gave an average of 444 lesions per fuge. The brownish gelatinous pellets were inoculated leaf whereas the intact virus resuspended in glass-distilled water and gave 910. After incubation with ribonuclease, 2 pg/ml (v/v), the partially deproteinized centrifuged for 20 minutes at 5000 rpm. The centrifugat,ion cycle was repeated. The preparations were compared with similarly treated intact virus at, a final concentration final preparation, which had been concenof 1: 100. The partially deproteinized virus trated 20 times, contained 33 mg of virus induced an average of only 4.2 lesions per per milliliter as determined by dry weight, inoculated leaf whereas the intact virus and induced an average of 28 local lesions induced an average of 898 lesions per inper inoculated N. glutinosa leaf at a conoculated leaf. centration of 2.8 x 10W4 mg/ml. It was Electron microscopy of the aqueousphase divided into aliquots and frozen at -24°C. showed virus particles in various stages Deproteinization. Samples of frozen purified TMV were thawed and treated with of deproteinization (Figs. l-4). The protein had been removed from one end, both phenol (Gierer and Schramm, 1956). ends, or from one or more places in the Fisher reagent grade water-saturated phenol (5 ml) was mixed with purified TMV (5 center of the particles. Some particles were deproteinized and others apml) and vigorously shaken for 8 minutes in completely parently were not affected by the phenol a I&ml centrifuge tube. The emulsion was broken by 5 minutes' centrifugation at 3000 treatment. The numbers of such particles rpm. The aqueous phase was removed and were determined by counting the various

PARTIALLY

DEGRADED

TMV

541

FIGS. l-4. Electron micrographs of tobacco mosaic virus particles in various degrees of protein dcgrndation resulting from treatment with phenol. Preparations mere r;h:tdowcd with platinum at an angle of 12 degrees. (Photos by J. W. Carlisle.)

types in representative fields. Of the 325 particles counted, 135 were not degraded for they were still approximately 3000 A long, 35 were degraded from one end only, 70 wcrc degraded from both ends, 30 were degraded in the middle, and 55 were very ;hort. Numerous long threads were found in all preparations. Figure 1 is an electron micrograph of a single TMV particle with the protein removed from two places on the particle. This particle is approximately 2800 A long by 200 A wide. Since the particle length

is approximately that accepted for TMV, the nucleic acid of this part.icle should therefore still be in a helix rather than uncoiled. According to the S-ray results of Franklin et ccl. (1957), the RNA in a helical configuration should be approximately 80 A in diameter. Although the exact diameter of the nucleic acid thread is difficult to determine from the electron micrograph, the thread in Figs. 1 and 2 is approximately 66 A wide. This is considerably less than 80 A, especially considering the metal deposited on it. Tl~us, the helix has most

542

CORBETT

likely collapsed. Figure 3 shows the protein removed from one end of the particle. The total length of the protein and nucleic acid in this case is considerably longer than 3000 A. Thus, the nucleic acid is undoubtedly uncoiled. Figure 4 illustrates 2 types of protein removal-from the center and from both ends. The particle with the protein removed from the center is approximately 2500 X 200 A whereas the particle with the protein removed from both ends is approximately 3000 x 200 A. The nucleic acid thread in the lower left (Fig. 4)) which did not receive much metal, is approximately 20 A wide.
DISCUSSION

Protein may be removed from either one or both ends or from the middle of the TMV particle when it is exposed to phenol. Of the particles counted, 41% were not degraded. This is considerably less degradation than that reported by Gierer and Schramm (1956). They reported less than 0.02% native tobacco mosaic virus protein in phenol-prepared nucleic acid preparations as determined by complement-fixation, and no infectivity when the preparation was incubated with 2 pg ribonuclease per milliliter. The large percentage of nondegraded and partially degraded particles found in this study may be the result of incomplete exposure of the particles to phenol due to a' volume:space ratio in the tubes used for shaking or to the fact that the preparation was in distilled water. The present procedure does, however, offer a way of obtaining particles in various degrees of deproteinization. That the threads seen with the electron microscope are ribonucleic acid is inferred because they were not present in preparations incubated with ribonuclease. The electron microscopic evidence for presence of the nucleic acid localized near the center of the virus particle is similar to that reported by Hart (1955) from partial degradation studies with hot detergents. He (1958) made no mention, however, of finding particles from which the detergent treatment had removed the protein from the middle. Alkali and phenol apparently act similarly on TMV prot,ein but differently

from detergents, for Schramm et al. (1955) reported finding particles with the protein removed by alkali from various places on the rod. Buzzell (1960) treated TMV with 6 M urea and found degraded particles with ribonucleic acid tails. She showed (1962) that treating such preparations with ribonuclease converted a component of 130-140 S into a component of 160-165 S and suggested that the sedimentation rate was probably increased by the elimination of the viscous drag of the ribonucleic acid tail. Electron microscopy of TMV treated with urea showed less than 5% of the particles with one tail and no two-tailed particles. The phenol treatment reported here, on the other hand, produced approximately 10% of the particles with one tail and 20% with two tails. This difference could be attributed to the TMV concentration, ionic concentration of the preparation, or the difference between the degrading action of urea and phenol. Buzzell made no mention of finding particles with the protein removed from the middle. The conclusion of Klug and Caspar (1960) that the protein subunits are more easily removed from one end of the particle may be correct for treatments with such materials as urea and hot detergents, but, it appears that the protein may be removed from TMV at random by phenol.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Grateful acknowledgment is made to the technical staff of the Plant Virus Laboratory for their assistance, and to J. W. Carlisle, Physics Departmcnt, University of Florida, for electron micros(`OPq'. REFERENCES BACKUS, R. C., and WILLIAMS, R. C. (1950). The use of spraying methods and of volatile suspending media in the preparat,ion of specimens for electron microscopy. J. Appl. Phys. 21, 11-15. BUZZELL, A. (1960). Action of urea on tobacco mosaic virus. J. Am. Chem. Sot. 82,1636-1641. BUZZELL, A. (1962). Action of urea on tobacco mosaic virus II. The bonds between protein subunits. Biophys. J. 2,223-233. FRANKLIN, R. E., KLUG, A., and HOLMES, K. C. (1957). X-ray diffraction studies of the structure and morphology of tobacco mosaic virus. Ciba

PARTIALLY

DEGRADED titles

TMV of tobacco mosaic virus. Proc. Nat.

543
Acad.

Found. Symp. Nature Viruses 1957, pp. 39-52. Little, Brown, Boston, Massachusetts. GIERER, A., and SCHRAMM, G. (1956). Infectivity of ribonucleic acid from tobacco mosaic virus. Nature 177,702-703. HARRINGTON, W. F., and SCHACHMAN, H. K. (19561. Studies on the alkaline degradation of tobacco mosaic virus. I. Ultracentrifugal analysis. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 65,278-295. HART, R. G. ( 1955). Electron-microscope evidence for the localization of ribonucleic acid in the par-

Sci.U8.41,261-264.
HART, R. G. (1958). The nucleic acid fiber of the tobacco mosaic virus particle. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Z&457-464. KLUG, A., and CASPAR, D. L. D. (1960). The structure of small viruses. Adwan. Virus Res. 7, 225-

325.
SCHRAMM, G., SCHUMACHER, G., and ZILLIG, W. (1955). An infectious nucleoprotein from tobacco mosaic virus. Nature 175,549-550.

