Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

www.elsevier.com/locate/neuaging

The women's health initiative estrogen replacement therapy is neurotrophic and neuroprotective
Roberta Diaz Brintona,b,*, Shuhua Chena, Marissa Montoyab, Debra Hsieha, Jasmin Minayab, Jeffrey Kimb, Hsiao-Pai Chua
a

Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Toxicology and the Program in Neuroscience, University of Southern California, Pharmaceutical Sciences Center, 1985 Zonal Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA b USC STAR Program, University of Southern California, Pharmaceutical Sciences Center, 1985 Zonal Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA Received 24 August 1999; received in revised form 14 January 2000; accepted 28 January 2000

Abstract The current study investigated the neurotrophic and neuroprotective action of the complex formulation of conjugated equine estrogens (CEEs), the most frequently prescribed estrogen replacement therapy in the United States and the estrogen replacement therapy of the Women's Health Initiative. Morphologic analyses demonstrated that CEEs significantly increased neuronal outgrowth in hippocampal, basal forebrain, occipital, parietal and frontal cortex neurons. Dose­response analyses indicated that the lowest effective concentration of CEEs exerted the maximal neurotrophic effect with greatest potency occurring in hippocampal and occipital cortex neurons. CEES induced highly significant neuroprotection against beta amyloid25­35, hydrogen peroxide and glutamate-induced toxicity. Rank order of potency and magnitude of CEE-induced neuroprotection in the brain regions investigated was hippocampal neurons basal forebrain neurons cortical neurons. In hippocampal neurons pre-exposed to beta amyloid25­35, CEEs halted A 25­35-induced cell death and protected surviving neurons from further cell death induced by A 25­35. Because CEEs are the estrogen replacement therapy of the Women's Health Initiative, results of the current study could provide cellular mechanisms for understanding effects of CEEs on cognitive function and risk of Alzheimer's disease derived from this prospective clinical trial. © 2000 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Estrogen; Alzheimer's disease; Estrogen replacement therapy; Conjugated equine estrogens; Premarin; Neuroprotection; Neurotrophism; Hippocampus; Cerebral cortex; Basal forebrain

1. Introduction The beneficial effects of estrogen replacement therapy (ERT) on both the short- and long-term consequences of estrogen deficiency accompanying menopause are well documented. ERT is effective in preventing hot flushes, osteoporosis and primary cardiovascular disease [26]. In the brain, increasing evidence suggests that cognitive function can be adversely affected after loss of estrogen either through natural, chemically or surgically induced menopause. Memory impairments associated with a loss of es-

This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Aging (PO1 AG1475: Project 2), Wyeth­Ayerst Laboratories and the Norris Foundation to RDB. * Corresponding author. Tel.: 1-323-442-1430; fax: 1-323-4421489. E-mail address: rbrinton@hsc.usc.edu (R.D. Brinton).

trogen after natural, chemically, or surgically induced menopause are reversible to premenopausal levels with estrogen replacement [24,38,39,42]. In addition to these controlled laboratory studies in women, epidemiological data derived from retrospective and case-control studies suggest that women who ever used ERT exhibited a decreased risk of developing Alzheimer's disease [5,25,36,49]. Although the epidemiological evidence suggesting a beneficial effect of conjugated equine estrogens in reducing the risk of Alzheimer's disease is encouraging, prospective, placebo-controlled, randomized studies are necessary to document a definitive benefit. Currently one such prospective trial is in progress. One arm of the Women's Health Initiative of the National Institutes of Health, a large-scale (over 8000 women), long-term (follow-up for at least 6 years) study, will evaluate the role of conjugated equine estrogens (CEEs) on both symptom onset and progression of Alzheimer's disease [43].

0197-4580/00/$ ­ see front matter © 2000 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved. PII: S 0 1 9 7 - 4 5 8 0 ( 0 0 ) 0 0 1 0 9 - 3

476

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

In a number of small open [16,22] clinical trials, ERT has been associated with improved cognitive function in women diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease (reviewed in [13]). A small, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized study of the effect of CEEs in the treatment of women over 70 years old with mild AD was conducted by Birge and Mortel [7]. Results of these analyses also indicate improvement in both cognition and daily living capabilities after 3 months of CEE therapy in women suffering from mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease. In addition to the use of this formulation of ERT for clinical trials, CEEs is the most frequently prescribed ERT in the United States [58]. Thus, the preponderance of evidence in humans showing a beneficial effect of ERT in reducing the risk of developing AD is based on this formulation of ERT. CEEs under the trade name Premarin® is a natural source product composed of a complex mixture consisting of estrogens, progestins, androgens and a large portion of uncharacterized molecules [26,51]. In the current study, we sought to determine the impact of this complex formulation of ERT on neuronal features associated with memory function and neuronal survival. Results of these analyses indicate that conjugated equine estrogens are neurotrophic for neuronal populations involved in cognitive function. In addition, the data show that in these same neuronal populations, conjugated equine estrogens exerted a highly significant neuroprotective effect against toxic insults known to occur in Alzheimer's disease and that can also occur in the aging brain.

glia. However, glial cells were not apparent in cultures after just 24 h in culture. Conjugated equine estrogens was acquired in lyophilized form from the USC Health Science Pharmacy in 5 ml ampoules of the therapeutic formulation Premarin containing 25 mg of the estrogenic formulation, 200 mg lactose, 12.5 mg sodium citrate, and 0.2 mg simethicone dissolved in sterile H2O2. Inert components, 200 mg of lactose, 12.5 mg sodium citrate, and 0.2 mg simethicone, were obtained from Wyeth­Ayerst laboratories. Two morphological experiments were conducted to determine if the inert components of the formulation, over the same concentration range used in the neurotrophic experiments, had a significant effect upon neuronal outgrowth of occipital cortex neurons. Results of those analyses showed no consistently significant effect, although in the second experiment a significant decrease was observed in the number of microspikes (F 8.15; df 5444; P 0.000). 2.2. Morphological analysis Nerve cells attached to polylysine-coated coverslips were removed from the culture dish and rapidly mounted into a recording chamber. Volume of the chamber was 200 l and pH was maintained at 7.4. Videomicroscopic recording of nerve cells was accomplished using a Dage-MTI camera equipped with a Newvicon tube linked to an Olympus BH-2 microscope and a Panasonic time-lapse video recorder (Model AG-6050). Recordings were made using phase contrast optics with a 40 objective and a 1.50 multiplier with 100 W tungsten source passed through a green filter. Nerve cell recordings were conducted after 24-h exposure to test substances. Selection of nerve cells for analysis was random and all recording and morphological analyses were conducted blind to the experimental condition. Morphological analysis was achieved using a BioQuant Image Analysis system designed for quantitative analysis of cellular morphological features. Cell size was controlled by selecting an equal number of cells from each coverslip that fell within three size categories: small, medium and large. Cell size was determined by the area of the field encompassed by the length of extensions. If a cell encompassed 1/4 of the monitor field it was categorized as small, 1/2 the field was medium, the entire monitor field or required multiple fields for analysis it was categorized as large. Number of neurites was defined as the number of extensions greater that 50 m in length emanating directly from the cell body. Neurite length represents the summation of the length of all neurites/neuron. Branches were operationally defined as any extension that exceeded 10 m in length and occurred along the shaft of the neurite. Branches that occurred as second or third order processes were not included in this measure. Branch length represents the summation of the length of all branches present on an individual neuron. The number of bifurcation points represents the total number of points at which branches extend from the

2. Materials and methods 2.1. Neuronal culture Primary cultures of dissociated hippocampal, cortical and basal forebrain neurons (derived from septal area) were performed as described in Brinton [11]. Briefly, brain regions were dissected from the brains of embryonic Day 18 (E18 days) rat fetuses, treated with 0.02% Trypsin in Hank's Balanced salt solution (5.4 mM KCL, 0.4 mM KH2PO4, 137 mM NaCl, 0.34 mM Na2HPO4.7H20), 10 mM glucose, 10 M HEPES) for 5 min at 37°C and dissociated by repeated passage through a series of fire polished constricted Pasteur pipettes. For morphological analyses between 20 000 to 40 000 cells were seeded onto polylysinecoated (10 g/ml 22 mm coverslips whereas cultures used for biochemical analyses were plated onto 0.1% polyethylenimine coated 35 mm petri dishes at a density of 105 neurons/ml. Nerve cells were grown in Neurobasal medium (NBM) (Life Sciences, St. Petersburg, FL, USA) supplemented with B27, 5 U/ml penicillin, 5 mg/ml streptomycin 0.5 mM glutamine, and 25 m glutamate (Gibco, Rockville, MD, USA), at 37°C in 10% CO2. Cultures grown in serumfree NBM yields approximately 99.5% neurons and 0.5%

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

477

neuritic shafts plus those points at which branches extend from other branches for an entire neuron. Microspikes were defined as processes emanating from either neurites or branches that measured less than 10 m. Statistically significant differences were determined by a one-way ANOVA followed by a Newman­Keuls post-hoc analysis for individual differences. 2.3. Neuronal survival For analyses of neuronal survival between 40 000 to 60 000 cells were seeded onto poly-D-lysine-coated (10 g/ml) 25 mm2 coverslips with grid size of approximately 600 m2 composed of 520 alphanumeric grids. Hippocampal neurons were treated with varying concentrations of CEE beginning at 3 days of age and exposed for a total of 4 days before exposure to 20 m H2O2. Neurons were counted at 7 days of age and grids with viable neurons were selected for analysis over the entire period of the experiment. One hundred neurons per coverslip were selected for study and there were three coverslips per condition for a total of 300 analyzed neurons per condition per experiment. After the Time 0 neuron count, cultures were rinsed with 37°C HEPES-buffered saline solution (HBS). Dilution of hydrogen peroxide was made fresh from a 30% stock solution into HBS just before each experiment. Cultures were exposed to 20 m H2O2 in HBS for 15 min at 37°C. CEEs were present in the medium during H2O2 exposure. After 15 min, the cultures were rinsed 2 with HBS, and fresh media with CEEs replaced. Culture dishes were returned to the culture incubator for neuronal cell counts the following day. Viable neurons in the same grid were counted before and 24 h after H2O2 by morphological criteria: smooth, round neuronal soma with extensive neuritic arborizations. Neuronal viability was determined by three morphological criteria, phase brightness, possession of at least one or more neurites longer than the diameter of the cell body, and granulation free neurites as described by Mattson [29,32]. Statistically significant differences were determined by a one-way ANOVA followed by a Newman­Keuls post-hoc analysis for individual comparisons. 2.4. Efflux assay of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) LDH release into the culture media after a neurotoxic insult was measured using the Cytotoxicity Detection Kit from Boehringer Mannheim Biochemicals and a spectrophotometer at 490 nm. Neurotoxins utilized included 0.2 mM glutamate (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), 20 m hydrogen peroxide (VWR) and 8 g/ml beta amyloid peptide25­35 (A 25­35; Lot Number: B01200; Bachem, Torrence, CA, USA). Neuronal cultures were pretreated with CEE at varying concentrations for 7 days before exposure to one of three toxic agents, at room temperature in HEPES buffer containing (mM) 100 NaCl, 2.0 KCl, 2.5 CaCl2, 1.0 MgSO4, 1.0 NaH2PO4, 4.2 NaHCO3, 12.5 HEPES, and 10.0

glucose. Glutamate was dissolved in the same buffer as was hydrogen peroxide whereas A 25­35 was dissolved in sterile distilled water at a concentration of 1 mg/ml as a stock solution. This stock was aliquoted and stored at 20°C. After exposure to the neurotoxins, cultures were washed 2 with 37°C HEPES buffer and replaced with fresh NBM media. Cultures were then returned to the incubator and assessment of LDH release conducted 24 h after exposure to the neurotoxins. Statistically significant differences were determined by a one-way ANOVA followed by a Newman­ Keuls post-hoc analysis for individual comparisons. 2.5. ATP Intracellular ATP levels were determined by the luciferase method with the ATP bioluminescent assay kit (#FLASC, Sigma). After exposure to experimental neurotoxins, medium was aspirated off and 0.5 ml ATP-Releasing Reagent was added to each culture dish to solubilize cellular membranes that permitted release of cellular ATP into the medium. Medium containing released ATP was collected and stored in eppendorf tubes at 4°C for ATP assay. ATP assay was performed according to the instructions of the manufacturer (Sigma). Light intensity was determined by a luminometer (TD-20e TURNER). ATP content was normalized to protein level/culture before analysis of the data. Statistically significant differences were determined by a one-way ANOVA followed by a Newman­Keuls post-hoc analysis for individual comparisons. 2.6. Hydrogen peroxide exposure One week old neuron cultures pretreated with CEEs for 4 days were rinsed with HEPES-buffered saline solution (HBS). Dilution of hydrogen peroxide was made fresh from a 30% stock solution into HBS just before each experiment. The cultures were exposed to 20 m hydrogen peroxide in HBS for 15 min at 37°C. During exposure, CEEs was added concurrently with hydrogen peroxide. After 15 min the cultures were rinsed two times with HBS, and fresh medium with CEEs was replaced. Cultures were returned to the culture incubator and allowed to incubate for 24 h before LDH measurements on the following day. 2.7. Glutamate exposure One week old neuron cultures pretreated with CEEs for 7 days were exposed to 0.2 mM glutamate for 5 min at room temperature in HEPES buffer containing (mM) 100 NaCl, 2.0 KCl, 2.5 CaCl2, 1.0 MgSO4, 1.0 NaH2PO4, 4.2 NaHCO3, 12.5 HEPES, and 10.0 glucose. Immediately after glutamate exposure, cultures were washed 2 times with HEPES buffer and replaced with fresh NBM. Cultures were returned to the culture incubator and allowed to incubate for 24 h before LDH measurements the following day.

478

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

Fig. 1. Photomicrographs of control and conjugated equine estrogen treated hippocampal neurons. Neurons derived from hippocampus E18 rat pups were exposed to serum free media in the absence or presence of 1 ng/ml CEEs. Panel A shows a representative control neuron after 24 h in culture. Panel B shows a representative CEEs treated neuron after 24 h in culture. Note the greater abundance of branching and morphological complexity in the CEEs treated neuron. Bar 15 m.

2.8. Beta amyloid25­35 (A

25­35)

exposure

A 25­35 (Lot Number: B01200), purchased from Bachem, was dissolved in sterile distilled water at a concentration of 1 g/ml as a stock solution. This stock was aliquoted and stored at 20°C. Cultures were pretreated with varying concentrations of CEEs for 4 days in NBM. Exposure to A 25­35 followed the procedure described by Behl et al. [3]. On the seventh day of culture, NBM containing A 25­35 alone or A 25­35 plus varying concentrations of CEE were prepared and cultures incubated in test substances for 24 h at 37°C. After 24 h of exposure to A 25­35, culture medium was exchanged for A 25­35-free medium with CEEs. Cultures were returned to the incubator and allowed to incubate for 24 h before LDH and ATP measurements the following day.

3. Results 3.1. Neurotrophic actions of conjugated equine estrogens and cellular selectivity The goal of these studies was to determine the cellular mechanisms that could underlie the maintenance of cognitive function in postmenopausal women receiving estrogen

replacement therapy. Therefore, we investigated the neurotrophic action of conjugated equine estrogens in neurons derived from the hippocampus, cerebral cortex and basal forebrain. Each of these brain regions have been shown to be involved in learning and memory [40] and vulnerable to the degenerative process of Alzheimer's disease [47]. Our previous work investigating the neurotrophic action of individual estrogens, 17 -estradiol and equilin, indicated that a neurotrophic effect in one neuronal population did not predict a neurotrophic response in another nerve cell group [11,12]. Thus, we elected to investigate the neurotrophic action of conjugated equine estrogens directly in each of these cell populations. In each of the neurotrophic experiments, neurons were treated with varying therapeutically relevant concentrations of conjugated equine estrogens approximately 45 min after seeding onto polylysine coated coverslips. At the time of treatment, cultures within each condition were assigned a random letter assignment and a code corresponding to the experimental condition was recorded. The code was not broken until the statistical analysis of the data had been performed. After 24 h of exposure, videomicroscopy was performed blind to the experimental condition whereupon 75 to 100 neurons per condition were videorecorded in a random sequence. Video recorded neuronal images were then individually analyzed blind to the experimental condition. Six different morphological fea-

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

479

tures of both macro and micro features of neuronal morphology were assessed. Each dose response was repeated 3 for each neuronal population resulting in a total of 4770 individually analyzed neurons. In neurons derived from the hippocampus, conjugated equine estrogens significantly increased hippocampal neuron outgrowth at picogram concentrations (see Figs. 1 and 2). For a single experiment 540 neurons were individually analyzed. The number of neurons analyzed after completion of three replications of the dose response analysis totaled 1620. Fig. 1 shows a control neuron and a neuron treated with CEEs. The CEEs treated neuron exhibited an enhanced morphological complexity (Fig. 1B) compared to the untreated control neuron (Fig. 1A). Both macro features of neuronal morphology, number of neurites (F 2.89; df 5496; P 0.0138) and neurite length (F 3.87; df 5496; P 0.0019) were significantly increased. The micro features of neuronal morphology were also significantly increased with total number of branches (F 3.65; df 5496; P 0.0030), branch length (F 3.23; df 5496; P 0.0070) and number of microspikes (F 5.31; df 5496; P 0.0001) all showing greater abundance (Fig. 2). Analysis of the dose response profile, indicates that, for the most part, neuronal process outgrowth occurred at the lower or lowest concentration tested (0.02 ng/ml) and that higher concentrations were no more effacious than the lower concentrations. The exception was the number of neurites that required 1 ng/ml for a significant increase to occur. Such a profile suggests that the mechanism(s) underlying estrogenic-steroid-induced neuronal process outgrowth is saturated at the lower concentrations or that a secondary regulatory mechanism is activated that limits and controls the magnitude of neurotrophism. In basal forebrain neurons, conjugated equine estrogens were significantly neurotrophic for the micro features of morphology whereas they were not for the macro features (see Fig. 3). For a single Experiment 450 neurons were individually analyzed with a total of 1350 neurons analyzed after completion of three replications of the dose response analyses in the basal forebrain. In contrast to the hippocampus and cortex, the number and length of basal forebrain neurites did not increase in response to conjugated equine estrogen exposure (F 1.30; df 5444; P 0.2619, a significant difference occurred between the 0.04 and 0.4 ng/ml concentrations but not between these concentrations compared to control (F 2.32; df 5444; P 0.0423). Conjugated equine estrogens did induce a significant enhancement in the number of branches (F 3.67; df 5444; P 0.0029), branch length (F 4.24; df 5444; P 0.0009), number of branch bifurcation points (F 2.26; df 5444; P 0.0476), and number of microspikes (F 2.78; df 5444; P 0.0174). The most consistently neurotrophic concentration occurred at 0.8 ng/ml for basal forebrain neurons whereas lower concentrations were neurotrophic in the other neuronal types investigated. It remains to be determined whether greater than 24 h of exposure to conjugated

equine estrogens will significantly increase the macro features of basal forebrain morphology. Our previous work had shown that neurons derived from the occipital cortex were consistently responsive to the neurotrophic action of estrogenic steroids [11,12]. Thus, we elected to conduct the concentration response analysis for conjugated equine estrogen-induced neurotrophism using neurons derived from the occipital cortex. For a single experiment 600 neurons were individually analyzed with a total of 1800 neurons analyzed after completion of three replications of the dose response analysis in occipital cortex neurons. Results of the dose response analysis in occipital cortex neurons demonstrated that conjugated equine estrogens were also neurotrophic in this population of nerve cells and significantly increased both the macro and micro features of neuronal morphology (see Fig. 4). The number of neurites exhibited a significant increase at both lower and higher concentrations (F 4.03; df 5564; P 0.0013) whereas a significant decrease in neurite length occurred at the 0.02 ng/ml concentration that was reversed at the 2 ng/ml concentration (F 5.81; df 5564; p 0.0000). Exposure to conjugated equine estrogens induced significant increases in the total number of branches (F 3.14; df 6690; P 0.0048), branch length (F 2.40; df 6690; P 0.026), and number of microspikes (F 7.55; df 6690; P 0.0000). The dose response exhibited a bimodal inverted-U shaped dose response pattern. This pattern of response indicates that select concentrations induce activation of mechanisms that lead to induction of neurotrophism whereas other concentrations either induce the cessation or nonactivation of the neurotrophic response mechanisms. The underlying mechanisms of the complexity of the dose­ response relationship is a current area of investigation in our laboratory. To determine the neurotrophic potential of conjugated equine estrogens throughout the cortex, we investigated the response of temporal, parietal and frontal neurons (results from occipital cortex neurons are shown in Fig. 5). The sites of dissection are depicted in Fig. 5 and were selected to ensure that distinct populations of cortical neurons were sampled. Neurons derived from sites indicated in Fig. 5 were selectively cultured and exposed to a low and high concentration of conjugated equine estrogens (0.04 ng/ml and 1 ng/ml). Results of these analyses indicated that the neurotrophic effect of conjugated equine estrogens was selective for different cortical neuron populations (see Fig. 5). In parietal cortex neurons, conjugated equine estrogens significantly increased the number of branches (P 0.0001), the length of branches (P 0.0001), and the number of branch bifurcation points (P 0.0001). Temporal cortex neurons showed no significant response, either negative or positive, to conjugated equine estrogens on any of the morphological parameters assessed. In response to conjugated equine estrogens, frontal cortex neurons showed a trend toward increased branch outgrowth, which was evident in the number, length and number of branch bifurcation points,

480

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

481

and a significant increase in the number of microspikes (P 0.0009). 3.2. Neuroprotection against neurotoxic insults The neuroprotective effects of conjugated equine estrogens were investigated using three different neurotoxic insults, exposure to beta amyloid peptide25­35, H2O2 and supraphysiological glutamate. Each of these neurotoxic agents were selected because of their role in degeneration associated with Alzheimer's disease [2,30]. In addition, we investigated the cellular specificity of conjugated equine estrogen-induced neuroprotection using hippocampal, cortical and basal forebrain neurons. Three measures of neuronal responses to toxic insults were assessed, LDH release, intracellular ATP levels and neuronal survival. LDH is a stable cytoplasmic enzyme present in all cells including neurons and can be used to assess plasma membrane damage. To assess neuronal viability, intracellular ATP levels were determined. To assess actual neuronal survival, neurons were monitored and individually analyzed for survival following the criteria described by Mattson [32]. 3.3. Beta amyloid25­35 peptide-induced neurotoxicity The first series of neuroprotection experiments investigated the impact of conjugated equine estrogens on the toxicity induced by a 24 h exposure to the toxic peptide beta amyloid25­35 (A 25­35). After 24 h of exposure to A 25­35, degeneration of cultured hippocampal neuron processes and toxicity was apparent (see Fig. 6). Those neurons pretreated for 4 days with 1 or 100 ng/ml of conjugated equine estrogens exhibited no A 25­35-induced degeneration of hippocampal neuronal processes (see Fig. 6). Analysis of LDH release demonstrated that exposure to picogram quantities of conjugated equine estrogens significantly reduced the LDH released after exposure to 8 g/ml A 25­35 (see Fig. 7). The significant neuroprotective effect of CEEs was apparent in all three neuronal populations investigated. The greatest neuroprotective efficacy and potency was apparent in cultured hippocampal neurons that exhibited a greater than 50% reduction in LDH release in response to 10 ng/ml of conjugated equine estrogens (see Fig. 7A). Neurons derived from the cerebral cortex exhibited less responsivity than hippocampal neurons and also exhibited a more complex dose response profile. Significant

Fig. 2. Conjugated equine estrogen-induced neurotrophism in hippocampal neurons. Hippocampal neurons derived from E18 rat pups were exposed to varying concentrations of CEEs for 24 h. After 24 h hippocampal neurons were videomicroscopically recorded blind to the experimental condition and later morphologically analyzed blind to the experimental condition. Data are from one of three experiments (75 neurons/condition) and are expressed as mean SEM, (*P 0.05, **P 0.01, ***P 0.001, significantly different from control condition).

neuroprotection occurred at both the lowest and highest concentrations tested (0.01 and 10 ng/ml) whereas no effect occurred at the 0.1 and 1 ng/ml concentrations (see Fig. 7B). The complexity of the dose response occurred in each of the replications in the cortical neurons. The magnitude of the neuroprotection approached 40% at the highest concentration tested, 10 ng/ml. Basal forebrain neurons exhibited a neuroprotective response between that observed in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex. The dose response for the neuroprotective effect of conjugated equine estrogens was linear with a significant decrease in LDH release at 10 pg/ml (see Fig. 7C). Maximal neuroprotection, greater than 50% reduction of A 25­35 ­induced LDH release, occurred at 1 ng/ml conjugated equine estrogens. Analysis of intracellular ATP levels after A 25­35 exposure demonstrated that A 25­35 significantly reduced intracellular ATP levels (see Fig. 8). Exposure to 1 and 10 ng/ml of conjugated equine estrogens led to a significant increase in intracellular ATP levels above that of A 25­35 treated hippocampal neurons. Moreover, the ATP levels in hippocampal neurons exposed to A 25­35 and pretreated with conjugated equine treated neurons were not significantly different from control levels. These data indicate that neuronal viability in the conjugated equine estrogen treated neurons was comparable to that of neurons not exposed to A 25­35. In an attempt to determine whether CEEs could impact the survival of hippocampal neurons after and during exposure to A 25­35, we conducted a study in which neurons were pretreated with A 25­35 before exposure to CEEs and then continued to be exposed to A 25­35 throughout the duration of the experiment. After 7 days in vitro, two subsets of hippocampal neuron cultures were randomly selected for exposure to A 25­35 for 48 h. Forty-eight hours of A 25­35 exposure resulted in a neuronal death rate of approximately 40% (Fig. 9). Clear indicators of neurodegeneration were apparent in the remaining surviving neurons (see Fig. 6 -amyloid condition alone). After the 48-h exposure to A 25­35, cultures were randomly selected for either continued exposure to A 25­35 alone or continued exposure to A 25­35 plus 10 ng/ml of CEEs. Neuronal survival was assessed at each subsequent 24 h period for a total of 4 days and the data expressed as per cent of change from the Day 0 cell count conducted just before addition of A 25­35. Data were analyzed using a two-way ANOVA. Results of the statistical analyzes indicated a significant difference between treatment groups (F 63.72, df 263, P 0.001) and a significant difference between day of treatment (F 33.81, df 363, P 0.001). In addition, a significant interaction between treatment and day occurred (F 8.80, df 663, P 0.001). Post-hoc analyses indicated that the 3 groups were significantly different (P 0.05) from each other across all days. Post-hoc analyses of individual days showed that at Days 3 and 4, the three groups were significantly different from each other (P 0.05). On Day 2, the control group was significantly higher

482

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

483

than both groups treated with A 25­35 (P 0.05). On Day 2, before treatment of CEEs, the two groups treated with A 25­35 were not significantly different from each other (59% 8.5 and 66% 5.1 survival, respectively). At the 4 day time point, exposure to A 25­35 alone induced cell death in 71% of hippocampal neurons, (a decrease of 30% in neuronal survival relative to Day 2 survival) with 29% of neurons surviving. In contrast, in cultures exposed to A 25­35 CEEs 49% of neurons had died by the fourth day (a decrease of 16% in neuronal survival relative to Day 2 survival), with 51% of neurons continuing to survive at the end of the four day exposure. Overall, the CEE A 25­35 treated neurons exhibited a 22% increase in survival rate above that of neurons exposed to A 25­35 alone. These data indicate that in the presence of CEEs the neuronal death induced by A 25­35 is greatly attenuated even in the continuing presence of the neurotoxic agent A 25­35. Although no statistically significant difference occurred between the number of surviving neurons at Day 2, 3 or 4 in the CEE A 25­35 group cell death did continue which indicates that the protective effect of CEEs was not absolute under these conditions. Together, results of this experiment indicate that CEEs can substantially attenuate the cell death induced by A 25­35 by reducing the severity of A 25­35-induced damage in the surviving neurons. 3.4. Hydrogen peroxide-induced neurotoxicity Hydrogen peroxide acts as a precursor for the hydroxyl free radical, HO , and is well documented to be a free radical generator [8]. Investigation of H2O2-induced damage was selected for investigation for three reasons. First a well-documented change in the CNS associated with aging is oxidative damage caused by free radicals [27]. Second, free radical induced damage has been associated with the neuronal injury and death observed in a number of neurological diseases and is hypothesized to be a contributing factor in Alzheimer's Disease [3,27]. Further, H202 generation by microglial activation in Alzheimer's disease is postulated to be one of the mechanisms that contribute to the degenerative process (reviewed in [13]). Thus, we investigated the ability of CEEs to act as a neuroprotective agent against H2O2. Hippocampal neurons exposed to 20 m H2O2 exhibited pronounced morphological degeneration and death (see Fig. 10). In striking contrast, hippocampal neurons pretreated

with 0.1 ng/ml of conjugated equine estrogens continued to survive and exhibited morphological features consistent with neuronal viability (see Fig. 10). Quantitative analysis of neuronal survival demonstrated that exposure to H2O2 induced cell death in approximately 80% of the neurons resulting in a survival rate of 20% (see Fig. 11). In contrast, 70 to 80% of hippocampal neurons pretreated with conjugated equine estrogens for 4 days survived the exposure to H2O2 (Fig. 11). Biochemical analysis of the impact of conjugated equine estrogens on LDH release after H2O2 exposure, demonstrated that pretreatment with conjugated equine estrogens induced a highly potent and significant reduction in H2O2-induced LDH release (see Fig. 12). Again, hippocampal neurons exhibited the greatest response with a 50% reduction in H2O2-induced LDH release occurring at 0.001 ng/ml (see Fig. 12A). Essentially, the neuroprotective effect of conjugated equine estrogens was asymptotic at the lowest concentration tested, 0.001 ng/ml, in hippocampal neurons. Cortical neurons also exhibited significant reduction in H2O2-induced LDH release at 0.001 ng/ml and again the neuroprotective effect was asymptotic at this lowest concentration, however, the magnitude of the neuroprotection was not as great as that which occurred in the hippocampus and ranged between 20 to 30% (see Fig. 12B). The response in basal forebrain neurons was again midway between hippocampal and cortical neurons. Again 0.01 ng/ml of conjugated equine estrogens significantly reduced H2O2-induced LDH release with 0.1 ng/ml maximal neuroprotection (see Fig. 12C). In basal forebrain neurons the magnitude of the reduction of H2O2-induced LDH release ranged from 40 to 50%. Results from these studies demonstrated that the complex formulation of CEEs induced a clearly visible and highly significant protection against H2O2-induced lethality. The dose response for CEE-induced neuroprotection against H2O2-induced toxicity exhibited a linear profile similar to the beta amyloid25­35 data. Again, neurons from the hippocampus and basal forebrain showed the greatest response to CEEs with a maximal magnitude of 50% in LDH reduction. Rank order for potency of CEE-induced neuroprotection against free radical damage was hippocampus basal forebrain cerebral cortex. 3.5. Glutamate-induced neurotoxicity Although free radicals can induce neuronal damage directly, they also induce secondary and tertiary events that further decrease the viability and survival of neurons. Studies by Mattson and his coworkers have shown that generation of reactive oxygen species impairs ion-motive ATPase activities that can lead to a disruption of calcium homeostasis and cell death [31]. Glutamate-induced excitotoxicity is a multifaceted process that includes excessive influx of sodium and calcium ions into neurons through glutamate activated cation channels [14]. The influx of calcium can lead to a lethal rise in intracellular calcium and the generation of free radicals [37]. More-

Fig. 3. Conjugated equine estrogen-induced neurotrophism in basal forebrain neurons. Basal forebrain neurons derived from E18 rat pups were exposed to varying concentrations of CEEs for 24 h. After 24 h basal forebrain neurons were videomicroscopically recorded blind to the experimental condition and later morphologically analyzed blind to the experimental condition. Data are from one of three experiments (75 neurons/ condition) and are expressed as mean SEM, (*P 0.05, **P 0.01, ***P 0.001, significantly different from control condition).

484

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

485

over, glutamate-induced excitotoxicity has been proposed to be one of the contributing factors to the neurodegenerative characteristic of Alzheimer's disease and other neuropathological states [15,30]. This series of catastrophic events has been postulated to be a precursor to the toxicity induced by glutamate that led us to investigate the impact of CEEs on glutamate-induced toxicity. Results of these analyses demonstrated that 200 m glutamate induced visible and pronounced neuronal toxicity (see Fig. 13). Pretreatment of cultured hippocampal neurons with 1 ng/ml conjugated equine estrogens for 4 days exerted a marked neuroprotective effect against the neurotoxic effects of glutamate. Exposure of hippocampal neuron cultures to 100 ng/ml of conjugated equine estrogens for 4 days seemed to exert a greater neuroprotective effect upon visual inspection (see Fig. 13). Quantitative biochemical assessment of plasma membrane damage demonstrated that conjugated equine estrogens exerted a highly significant reduction in glutamateinduced LDH release that was both potent and efficacious. In hippocampal neurons, a significant reduction in glutamate-induced LDH release occurred at 10 pg/ml of conjugated equine estrogens that was asymptotic at 100 pg/ml (see Fig. 14A). The magnitude of the conjugated equine estrogen-induced reduction in glutamate-induced toxicity ranged from 40 to 50%. Again, neurons derived from the cerebral cortex were less responsive than hippocampal or basal forebrain neurons. Pretreatment with conjugated equine estrogens for 4 days induced a significant neuroprotective effect at 0.01 ng/ml with approximately a 20 to 30% reduction in glutamate-induced LDH release (see Fig. 14B). Conjugated equine estrogens were highly potent and efficacious in reducing glutamate-induced LDH release in basal forebrain neurons. Significant reduction occurred at 0.001 ng/ml with the neuroprotective effect achieving asymptote at 10 pg/ml of conjugated equine estrogens (see Fig. 14C). Magnitude of the conjugated equine estrogens-induced reduction in LDH release ranged from 30 to 50%. 4. Discussion 4.1. Neurotrophic actions of conjugated equine estrogens and cellular selectivity Three distinctive features of conjugated equine estrogeninduced neurotrophism emerged from the dose response

Fig. 4. Conjugated equine estrogen-induced neurotrophism in occiptal cortex neurons. Occipital neurons derived from E18 rat pups were exposed to varying concentrations of CEEs for 24 h. After 24 h occipital neurons were videomicroscopically recorded blind to the experimental condition and later morphologically analyzed blind to the experimental condition. Data are from one of three separate dose response analyses (75 neurons/ condition) and are expressed as mean SEM, (*P 0.05, **P 0.01, ***P 0.001, significantly different from control condition).

analyses. First, the magnitude of the increases in morphological parameters ranged from 20 to 50% of control values. The second important aspect of the dose response was the differential potency of conjugated equine estrogen-induced neurotrophism across brain regions. Conjugated equine estrogen-induced neurotrophism was most potent in hippocampal and occipital cortex neurons whereas the potency was shifted to the right in basal forebrain neurons. In addition, hippocampal and occipital cortex neurons responded to multiple concentrations whereas basal forebrain neurons responded for all intents and purposes to a single concentration. Although the potency of conjugated equine estrogeninduced neurotrophism varied across neuronal populations, the magnitude of the neurotrophic response did not. The magnitude of the neurotrophic effect ranged from 20 to 50% above control values. The similarity in neurotrophic magnitude suggests activation of a common underlying mechanism across neuronal populations whereas the difference in potency suggests a different threshold for activation of that common mechanism. We are currently investigating the underlying mechanism for the neuron specific potency of conjugated equine estrogen-induced neurotrophism and is discussed below. Therapeutically, this finding may be of importance. These data would predict that higher concentrations of conjugated equine estrogens would not be more effacious than the lowest effective dose in promoting the cellular features of learning and memory. Third, the dose response analysis demonstrated that the neurotrophic effect of conjugated equine estrogens was not linear. If these experiments were conducted only once per neuronal type, one might attribute the non-linearity to variability. However, each of the dose response analyses were conducted three times per neuronal type and in each instance the non-linear response profile emerged. The nonlinear nature of the neurotrophic response stands in direct contrast to the linearity of the neuroprotective effect that further supports the postulate that the non-linearity is specific and not due to uncontrolled independent variables. These data would predict different mechanisms of action underlying the neurotrophic and neuroprotective effects. The non-linear nature of the dose response profile suggests that the factors that regulate estrogen-induced neurotrophism are both conditional and limiting. An alternative postulate is that the differential response of neurons to CEEs is due to a difference in the maturation of neurons across brain region with some neurons expressing the mechanism whereas others did not. In the neuroprotection experiments, the variability across brain regions was in magnitude of response suggesting that the mechanisms underlying the neuroprotective effect were expressed to varying degrees of magnitude or varying degrees of efficacy, both of which may be developmentally regulated. We attempted to control for this potential variable by allowing neurons to maturate for the same period of time in culture before exposing the neurons to either the experimental variable or the toxic

486

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

Fig. 5. Selectivity of conjugated equine estrogen-induced outgrowth of neurons derived from three regions of the cerebral cortex. Neurons from three regions of cerebral cortex of the embryonic Day 18 rat fetuses were cultured in serum free media in the absence or presence of either a low or high concentration of CEEs. Data are from one of three separate regional specificity analyses (75 neurons/condition) and are expressed as mean SEM, (***P 0.001, significantly different from control condition).

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

487

Fig. 6. Neuroprotective effect of conjugated equine estrogen against A 25­35-induced toxicity in cultured hippocampal neurons. Photomicrograph images show fields of hippocampal neurons grown for 8 days in vitro under the indicated conditions. (A) Hippocampal neurons under control conditions appear healthy with a dark cell body and a phase bright halo and abundant clearly defined neuronal processes. B: Hippocampal neurons exposed to 8 g/ml A 25­35 for 24 h display shrunken cell bodies and degeneration of neuronal processes. (C) Hippocampal neurons grown in the presence of 0.1 ng/ml CEEs for 4 days before exposure to 8 g/ml A 25­35 for 24 h display a marked reduction in features of degeneration. (D) Hippocampal neurons grown in the presence of 10 ng/ml CEEs for 4 days before exposure to 8 g/ml A 25­35 for 24 h display exhibit clear features of neuronal viability with a dark cell body and a phase bright halo and abundant clearly defined neuronal processes similar to those of control neurons not treated with A 25­35. Scale bar 50 m.

insult. Each of the neuronal populations seemed to be highly differentiated morphologically as can be seen in Figs. 6, 10, and 13. Although morphological differentiation is not a ubiquitous indicator of subcellular differentiation, it did provide us with a consistent visual marker to assess the maturation of the neurons and to gauge whether the neurons were visually uniform in their differentiation. Because the difference in neuroprotective responsivity was one of magnitude and dose threshold, the presumption was that the mechanisms underlying neuroprotection were present in all the neuronal populations investigated. This presumption is not applicable however to the neurotrophic data where the differences are not only in dose threshold but in responsiveness versus unresponsive. To address the issues underlying

the dose response profiles, we are currently investigating whether the factors and/or mechanisms that regulate the conditionality of conjugated equine estrogen-induced neurotrophism are synonymous with the limiting regulatory mechanisms. Conjugated equine estrogens-induced neurotrophism was found to be brain region specific, significantly increasing neuronal outgrowth in five of the six brain regions investigated. Hippocampal, basal forebrain, occipital, parietal and frontal cortex neurons all showed increased neuronal outgrowth in response to conjugated equine estrogens whereas temporal cortex neurons exhibited neither a positive or negative response to conjugated equine estrogens. Each of the estrogenic steroids that we have examine thus

488

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

far, 17 -estradiol, equilin and the complex formulation of conjugated equine estrogens have induced a neurotrophic response in hippocampal and occipital cortex neurons [11, 12]. In other cortical regions, 17 -estradiol, equilin and conjugated equine estrogens exerted a neurotrophic effect in frontal neurons whereas parietal neurons exhibited a neurotrophic response to 17 -estradiol and conjugated equine estrogens but not to equilin. Temporal cortex neurons exhibited a unique pattern of estrogen responsivity. In the presence of 17 -estradiol, temporal cortex neurons exhibited a significant decrease in neuronal outgrowth whereas in the presence of conjugated equine estrogens and equilin no effect on the outgrowth of these neurons occurred [11,12]. These data indicate that the regional selectivity of estrogen regulation of neuronal outgrowth is controlled by at least two factors, neuronal phenotype and estrogen steroid structure. Moreover, these data indicate that the mechanisms underlying estrogen-induced neuronal outgrowth are differentially distributed in neurons involved in learning and memory. 4.2. Potential functional significance of CEE-induced changes in neuronal morphology It is increasingly evident that growth in the projections of and synaptic connections between neurons constitute fundamental cellular mechanisms involved in learning and memory. The brain regions selected for study in this work, the hippocampus, cerebral cortex and basal forebrain, are known to be critical to the complex processing required for memory formation and storage [13,21]. Utilizing in vitro and in vivo animal studies, several investigators have documented that 17 -estradiol, the principal neuroactive estrogen secreted by the ovaries, exerts a direct effect on CNS neurons. In vitro studies have documented a neurotrophic effect of 17 -estradiol both in cultured hippocampal neurons [10,35] and in cultured cortical neurons [12,50]. Importantly, the same neurotrophic effect of 17 -estradiol observed in vitro occurs in vivo. Woolley and colleagues have found that, in vivo, 17 -estradiol increased the number of dendritic spines on apical dendrites of CA1 pyramidal cells [54]. Moreover, this same group has shown that the emergence of dendritic spines is an estrogen dependent process throughout the rat estrous cycle [55]. The physiological significance of the increases in morphological complexity remains to be determined, however, several potential implications apply. The morphological characteristics found to be altered by CEEs are known to have a major impact on the signal transmission and integration properties of neurons. Passive membrane properties ( , length constant and , time constant), which govern the spread of potentials spatially and their summation temporally, exhibit a strong dependence on morphological characteristics such as process diameter and branching pattern [48]. Thus, increases in dendritic branching complexity, such as those observed after exposure to CEEs, have been

Fig. 7. Effect of conjugated equine estrogens on A 25­35-induced LDH release. Primary hippocampal (A), cortical (B) and basal forebrain (C) neuronal cultures (7­9 in vitro) grown in the absence or presence of CEEs for 4 days were exposed to 8 g/ml A 25­35 for 24 h. The following day media was harvested from all cultures and assayed for LDH content. Results are expressed as percent of A 25­35-induced LDH release. Data are expressed as mean SEM and were combined across three separate experiments, n 12 per condition. * P 0.05; ** P 0.01 and *** P 0.001 compared with A 25­35-treated cultures.

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

489

Fig. 8. Effect of conjugated equine estrogen on A 25­35-induced depletion of ATP in hippocampal neurons. Hippocampal neurons (7­9 days in vitro) were grown in the absence or presence of indicated concentrations of CEEs for 4 days before exposure to A 25­35 for 24 h. Intracellular ATP levels determined the day after A 25­35 exposure. Results are expressed as mean SEM. Data are represented as mean SEM and were combined across three separate experiments, n 9 per condition. * P 0.05; ** P 0.01 and *** P 0.001.

Fig. 9. Conjugated equine estrogens promote cell survival after exposure to -amyloid. Hippocampal neurons were cultured onto grided coverslips to allow assessment of the same selected grids over time. At the outset of the experiment all grids were randomly selected and then the same grids followed during the course of the experiment. At 7 days in vitro neurons were counted followed by exposure to A 25­35 for 48 h and the number of surviving neurons assessed, Day 0. After 48-h exposure to A 25­35 the number of surviving neurons was assessed, Day 2. Note that no significant difference between the two A 25­35 treated groups was apparent at 48 h before CEE exposure. A 25­35 exposed cultures were then randomly divided into two groups for continued exposure to either A 25­35 alone or continued exposure to A 25­35 plus 10 ng/ml of CEEs. Results are expressed as percent change from baseline (Day 0), the cell count just before addition of A 25­35. Data are represented as mean SEM and were combined across three separate experiments. Data were pooled across 3 separate experiments for a total of 20 ­24 grids (1 mm) of 14 ­18 neurons each assessed for each condition. , P 0.05 versus control group; , P 0.05 vs A 25­35 alone group.

shown both with modeling and experimental studies, to be a major factor in determining the amplitude-time course of EPSPs [23,48]. An increase in dendritic surface area alone would provide a structural basis for subsequent development of synaptic input from other neurons. Simulation modeling analyses have suggested that greater neuronal morphological complexity is associated with greater information processing capability and information storage capacity [28]. If the complexity of neuronal morphology impacts cognitive function, there should be a relationship between estrogen replacement therapy and cognitive function. In studies of neurologically normal adult menopausal women, Sherwin and colleagues have consistently found that a decline in estrogen is associated with loss in select memory functions that were reversed with estrogen replacement therapy [24,38,39,42]. In animal studies, Simpkins and colleagues found that ovariectomized rats do not learn as well as animals with ovaries [45]. In addition, they found that E2 replacement not only reversed the learning impairment but also accelerated learning. Very recent data indicate that

CEEs altered brain activation patterns in post-menopausal women in specific brain regions during the performance of memory functions relevant to daily life [41]. Collectively, human and animal data document that estrogen exerts a positive effect upon specific forms of memory function and that loss of estrogen results in a decline in memory function. However, a caveat to these effects in humans may be a dose dependent effect of estrogenic steroids on cognitive function. The dose response data derived from the neurotrophic experiments would predict that there would be optimal concentrations that would exert positive effects upon cognition whereas other concentrations would be without effect. To date there have been no clinical trials that specifically address this issue. 4.3. Proposed mechanism of CEE -induced neurotrophism A first consideration in determining a mechanism of action is the potential for interactions with other factors in the media. These experiments, as well as the neuroprotection investigations, were conducted in serum free media. Thus, the effects observed in response to conjugated equine estrogens were not due to an interaction with factors present in serum such as growth factors. A second source of inter-

490

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

Fig. 10. Neuroprotective effect of conjugated equine estrogen against hydrogen peroxide-induced toxicity. Photomicrograph images show fields of hippocampal neurons grown for 7 days in vitro under the indicated conditions. Left panel displays images of hippocampal neurons 24 h before exposure to hydrogen peroxide (left side) and the same field of neurons 24 h after a 15 min exposure to 20 m H2O2 (right side). Neurons in control condition appear healthy with dark cell bodies and long neuronal processes. Hippocampal neurons before H2O2 exposure exhibit same features of viability as control neurons whereas after exposure H2O2, these neurons exhibited shrunken cell bodies and a loss of process integrity. Many neurons failed to survive. Hippocampal neurons exposed to 0.1 ng/ml CEEs 4 days before exposure to H2O2 exhibited same features of viability as control neurons and continued to exhibit features of viability after exposure to H2O2. Scale bar 50 m.

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

491

Fig. 11. Effect of conjugated equine estrogen on survival of H2O2-treated hippocampal neurons. Hippocampal neurons were treated with indicated concentration of conjugated equine estrogen for 4 days before exposure to 20 M H2O2. Viable neurons were counted just before H2O2 exposure and 24 h after H2O2 exposure. Data are presented as percent of control neuron survival (mean SEM from 3 separate experiments, 100 hundred neurons were counted per neuronal culture, 7 to 8 cultures were analyzed/condition/ experiment). *** P 0.001 compared with H2O2-treated cultures.

acting variables are glial cells. Characterization of the cellular constituents of these cultures indicate that in the presence of the defined medium used in these studies approximately 99.5% of the cells are neuronal and 0.5% are glia [9]. These experiments were conducted within 24 h of seeding and thus time for proliferation of glial cells was minimal. It is unlikely that given the very low abundance of glial cells that the neurotrophic effect of conjugated equine estrogens was due to an interaction with factors secreted by glial cells. Lastly, the cultures were seeded at a density that allowed analysis of individual neurons with the requirement that analyzed neurons exhibit no structural contacts with other neurons. Thus, the neurotrophic effects of CEEs can not be attributed to factors released during synaptic transmission. Having ruled out the interactive possibilities mentioned above, the data would suggest that the mechanism of conjugated equine estrogen induced neurotrophism is a direct effect on neurons. Several lines of evidence suggest that the mechanism for estrogen-induced neurotrophism involves the NMDA glutamate receptor. Recent work from our laboratory demonstrates a direct effect of 17 -estradiol to enhance the NMDA mediated EPSP in hippocampal neurons [17]. This

effect is in addition to the enhancement of the glutamate AMPA mediated EPSP induced by 17 -estradiol [17,53]. Previously, we had shown in vitro that the glutamate NMDA receptor antagonist blocked the neurotrophic effect of two estrogen components of the conjugated equine estrogen formulation, 17 -estradiol [11] and equilin [12]. Importantly, we have also shown that functional NMDA receptors exist in the neuronal populations studied at embryonic Day 18 and at 1 day in vitro when the neurotrophic experiments were performed [12]. Moreover, in vivo studies conducted by Woolley and colleagues have shown that 17 -estradiol-induction of dendritic spines was blocked in the presence of antagonists to the glutamate NMDA receptor. In addition, Woolley and colleagues have also shown that in vivo treatment with 17 -estradiol-induced increased spine/ synapse density and NMDA receptor binding, and increased sensitivity of CA1 pyramidal cells to NMDA receptormediated synaptic input and that sensitivity to NMDA receptor-mediated synaptic input was correlated with dendritic spine density [56,57]. Studies from our group have shown 17 -estradiol enhances LTP in the slice [17] and studies from Greenough's group has shown that LTP is enhanced during the proestrous, the high estrogen phase of the rat estrous cycle [52]. Lastly, Gazzaley and colleagues found that 17 -estradiol did not alter NMDA receptor subunit mRNA but did increase NMDA receptor binding via a post-transcriptional regulation of the NMDAR1 subunit protein [18]. Together, these data strongly support involvement of NMDA receptors in estrogen-induced changes in neuronal morphology. In synaptically connected hippocampal cultures, data from Murphy and colleagues suggest that inhibition of GABAergic neurons and down regulation of BDNF mediate the 17 -estradiol-induced rise in hippocampal spine number [33,34]. However, inhibition of inhibitory neurons as a mechanism for increased neuronal outgrowth is not applicable to the present data because no synaptic contacts occurred in the neurons that contributed to these analyses. We are currently investigating whether an NMDA receptor dependent mechanism can account for the neurotrophic effect of CEEs, the non-linearity of the dose response profiles and the regional specificity of the neurotrophic response. 4.4. Conjugated equine estrogen-induced neuroprotection Three different neurotoxic insults, beta amyloid peptide25­35, H2O2 and glutamate were investigated because of their proposed role in degeneration associated with Alzheimer's disease [2]. Also investigated was the regional selectivity of CEE-induced neuroprotection against these three different neurotoxins. Results of those experiments revealed that CEEs are highly neuroprotective against each of the neurotoxins investigated. Analysis of regional differences revealed a differential response in the magnitude and potency of CEE-induced neuroprotection with hippocampal neurons exhibiting the greatest neuroprotective effect fol-

492

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

lowed by basal forebrain neurons followed by cortical neurons. 4.5. CEE-induced protection against beta amyloid25­35 peptide-induced neurotoxicity CEE's induced a highly significant protection against beta amyloid25­35-induced toxicity. The brain regions showing the greatest CEE-induced neuroprotection were the hippocampus and basal forebrain. In the cortex, CEE's induced a significant neuroprotection to a lesser extent than in the hippocampus and basal forebrain. The potency and magnitude of CEE-induced neuroprotection was greatest in hippocampal neurons. In the basal forebrain, higher concentrations of CEEs were required to induce the same magnitude of neuroprotection as the hippocampus. Cortical neurons were the least responsive and required the highest concentration of CEEs to exert maximal neuroprotection. The concentration response profile for CEE-induced neuroprotection against A 25­35-induced toxicity is quite different from that of CEE-induced neurotrophism. Essentially the concentration response profile for CEE-induced neuroprotection against each of the three different neurotoxic insults is linear in nature. The different profile of the dose response analyses between the neurotrophic and neuroprotective effects of CEEs, both in potency and pattern, strongly indicates different mechanisms of action. Studies are currently underway to investigate the mechanism of action for both these CEE-inducible responses. In those neurons treated with A 25­35 for 4 days, 29% of neurons continued to survive. In contrast, 51% of neurons pretreated with A 25­35 for 2 days followed by exposure to CEEs continued to survive at the end of the 4 day exposure. The data indicate that in the presence of CEEs the neuronal death induced by A 25­35 is greatly attenuated despite the vulnerable state of these neurons and the continuing presence of the neurotoxic agent A 25­35. These data may provide a cellular correlate to the human data showing that estrogen replacement therapy attenuates the degenerative process in women with existing Alzheimer's disease [6,16,22]. 4.6. CEE-induced protection against hydrogen peroxideinduced neurotoxicity Results of these studies demonstrated that the complex formulation of CEEs induced a clearly visible and highly significant protection against H2O2-induced lethality. The dose response for CEE-induced neuroprotection against H2O2-induced toxicity exhibited a linear profile similar to the beta amyloid25­35 data. Again, neurons from the hippocampus and basal forebrain showed the greatest response to CEEs with a maximal magnitude of 50% in LDH reduction. Rank order for potency of CEE-induced neuroprotection against free radical damage was hippocampus basal forebrain cerebral cortex. CEE-induced protection against H2O2-induced toxicity could provide a mechanism

Fig. 12. Effect of conjugated equine estrogens on hydrogen peroxide -induced LDH release. Primary hippocampal (A), cortical (B) and basal forebrain (C) neuronal cultures (7­9 days in vitro) grown in the absence or presence of CEEs for 4 days were exposed to 20 m H2O2 for 15 min at 37°C. The following day media was harvested from all cultures and assayed for LDH content. Results are expressed as percent of H2O2induced LDH release. Data are expressed as mean SEM and are combined across three separate experiments, n 18 per condition. * P 0.05; ** P 0.01 and *** P 0.001 compared with H2O2-treated cultures.

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

493

Fig. 13. Neuroprotective effect of conjugated equine estrogen against glutamate-induced toxicity in cultured hippocampal neurons. Photomicrograph images show fields of hippocampal neurons grown for 8 days in vitro under the indicated conditions. (A) Hippocampal neurons under control conditions appear healthy with a dark cell body and a phase bright halo and abundant clearly defined neuronal processes. B: Hippocampal neurons exposed to 0.2 mM glutamate for 5 min and visualized 24 h later display shrunken cell bodies and degeneration of neuronal processes. (C) Hippocampal neurons grown in the presence of 0.1 ng/ml CEEs for 4 days before exposure to 0.2-mM glutamate for 5 min displayed a marked reduction in features of degeneration. (D) Hippocampal neurons grown in the presence of 10 ng/ml CEEs for 4 days before exposure to 0.2 mM glutamate for 5 min display exhibit clear features of neuronal viability with a dark cell body and a phase bright halo and abundant clearly defined neuronal processes similar to those of control neurons not treated with 0.2 mM glutamate. Scale bar 50 m.

by which CEEs could prevent or reduce degeneration caused by a wide range of toxic insults. 4.7. CEE-induced protection against glutamate-induced neurotoxicity Exposure of hippocampal, basal forebrain or cortical neurons to CEEs resulted in a significant reduction in glu-

tamate-induced excitotoxicity. The dose response analysis revealed both a potent and fairly linear neuroprotective effect of CEEs against glutamate-induced toxicity. As with the CEEs neuroprotection against beta amyloid and H2O2induced toxicity, hippocampal and basal forebrain neurons exhibited the greatest neuroprotective response. Neurons derived from the cerebral cortex exhibited a far more shallow dose response to CEEs relative to the hippocampus and

494

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

basal forebrain. The magnitude of CEE-induced neuroprotection was greatest in basal forebrain neurons, exhibiting a 50% reduction, followed by hippocampal neurons exhibiting a 40% reduction followed by cortical neurons exhibiting a 20 ­30% reduction in LDH levels. In hippocampal and basal forebrain neurons, the neuroprotective effect was asymptotic at 0.01 ng/ml of CEEs whereas in cortex maximal neuroprotection was achieved at 1 ng/ml of CEEs. 4.8. Proposed mechanism of CEE -induced neuroprotection An antioxidant effect of 17 -estradiol and other select estrogens has been demonstrated in a broad range of cell types [4,19,26]. Data from both the Simpkins and Behl laboratories indicate a mechanism independent of a nuclear estrogen receptor [4,20]. The protective ability of select estrogens in a broad range of cell types against a nearly equally broad range of toxic insults suggests that the protective estrogens activate a ubiquitously expressed protective mechanism. A promising candidate molecule is the tripeptide, glutathione, which is ubiquitously expressed in all cells and is the major determinant of the oxidationreduction state of the cytosol and endoplasmic reticulum. In addition to the glutathione mechanism, Toran­Allerand and co-workers [46] reported that estrogen-induced activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinases, ERK1 and ERK2. Dorsa and colleagues [44] have reported that activation of the MAPK pathway by estrogen participates in mediating neuroprotection against glutamate toxicity via a non-nuclear estrogen receptor. Together these data indicate that multiple mechanisms can be activated by estrogens and that activation of these mechanisms can lead to protection against a wide range of neurotoxic agents. We are currently pursuing activation of these and other signaling pathways in an effort to determine the mechanism of CEE-induced neuroprotection against each of the neurotoxic agents investigated in the current study. Lastly, because CEEs is a complex formulation of multiple estrogens, an obvious question is which of these estrogens exert the neurotrophic and neuroprotective effects? Data from the Behl and Simpkins research groups would predict that hydroxylated estrogens at the three position of the A phenolic ring structure of estrogens would exert a neuroprotective effect [3,19]. We are currently testing this hypothesis by investigating the neuroprotective effect of individual estrogenic components of the complex CEE formulation.
Fig. 14. Effect of conjugated equine estrogens on glutamate-induced LDH release. Primary hippocampal (A), cortical (B) and basal forebrain (C) neuronal cultures (7­9 days in vitro) grown in the absence or presence of CEEs for 4 days were exposed to 0.2 mM glutamate for 5 min at room temperature. The following day media was harvested from all cultures and assayed for LDH content. Results are expressed as percent of glutamate -induced LDH release. Data are expressed as mean SEM and are combined across three separate experiments, n 18 per condition. * P 0.05; ** P 0.01 and *** P 0.001 compared with glutamate -treated cultures.

4.9. Potential functional significance of CEE-induced neuroprotection The ability of CEEs to induce a highly significant neuroprotective effect against three toxic agents associated with the degenerative process of Alzheimer's disease could provide a mechanism to explain the reduced risk of developing

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496

495

AD in women using ERT. In addition, the ability of CEEs to protect -amyloid treated neurons from further -amyloid-induced death could provide a therapeutic advantage in women with existing Alzheimer's disease. Collectively, data from the present study demonstrate that CEEs induced a highly significant increase in the morphological complexity of neurons associated with learning and memory. An increase in neuronal morphology has been held as one of the cellular correlates of memory function and has been postulated to be one of the mechanisms by which information is encoded for long-term storage. CEEinduced increases in neuronal morphology may provide a cellular mechanism by which estrogen replacement therapy can restore cognitive function to premenopausal levels in postmenopausal women. Lastly, the highly significant neuroprotective action of CEEs may provide a cellular mechanism by which estrogen replacement therapy could reduce the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease and, in addition, sustain neuronal survival in women with existing Alzheimer's disease. Because CEEs are the estrogen replacement therapy of the Women's Health Initiative, results of the current study could provide a cellular mechanism for effects of CEEs on cognitive function and risk of Alzheimer's disease derived from this prospective clinical trial. References
1. 2. 3. Behl C. Amyloid beta-protein toxicity and oxidative stress in Alzheimer's disease. [review 153]. Cell Tissue Res 1997;290:471­ 80. Behl C, Davis JB, Lesley R, Schubert D. Hydrogen peroxide mediates amyloid beta protein toxicity. Cell 1994;77:817­27. Behl C, Skutella T, Lezoualc, Post, Widmann M, Newton CJ, Holsboer F. Neuroprotection against oxidative stress by estrogens: structure-activity relationship. Mol Pharmacol 1997;51:535­ 41. Behl C, Widmann M, Trapp T, Holsboer F. 17-beta estradiol protects neurons from oxidative stress-induced cell death in vitro. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1995;216:473­ 82. Birge SJ. Is there a role for estrogen replacement therapy in the prevention and treatment of dementia? [see comments]. [review 79 refs] J Am Geriatr Soc 1996;44:865­70. Birge SJ. The role of estrogen in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. [review 55 refs] Neurology 1997a;48:S36 ­S41. Birge SJ, Mortel KF. Estrogen and the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. [review 97 refs] Am J Med 1997b;103:36S­ 45S. Boveris A, Cadenas E. Cellular sources and steady-state levels of reactive oxygen species. In: Clerch LB, Massaro DJ, editors. Oxygen, Gene Expression, and Cellular Function. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1997. p. 1­25. Brewer GJ, Torricelli JR, Evege EK, Price PJ. Optimized survival of hippocampal neurons in B27-supplemented Neurobasal, a new serum-free medium combination. J Neurosci Res 1993;35:567­76. Brinton RD. 17 -estradiol induction of filopodial growth in cultured hippocampal neurons within minutes of exposure. Mol Cell Neurosci 1993;4:36 ­ 46. Brinton RD, Proffitt P, Tran J, Luu R. Equilin, a principal component of the estrogen replacement therapy premarin, increases the growth of cortical neurons via an NMDA receptor-dependent mechanism. Exp Neurol 1997a;147:211­20. Brinton RD, Tran J, Profitt P, Kahil M. 17 -estradiol increases the growth and survival of cultured cortical neurons. Neurochem Res 1997b;22:1339 ­51.

13. 14. 15. 16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21. 22.

23.

24. 25.

26.

27.

4.

5.

28. 29. 30.

6. 7. 8.

31.

9.

32.

10.

33.

11.

34.

12.

35.

Brinton RD, Yamazaki RS. Therapeutic advances and challenges in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. Pharm Res 1998;15:384 ­97. Choi DW. Ionic dependence of glutamate neurotoxicity. J Neurosci 1987;7:369 ­79. Coyle JT, Puttfarcken P. Oxidative stress, glutamate, and neurodegenerative disorders. [review 96 refs]. Science 1993;262:689 ­95. Fillit H, Weinreb H, Cholst I, Luine V, McEwen B, Amador R, Zabriskie J. Observations in a preliminary open trial of estradiol therapy for senile dementia­Alzheimer's type. Psychoneuroendocrinology 1986;11:337­ 45. Foy MR, Xu J, Xie X, Brinton RD, Thompson RF, Berger TW. 17 -estradiol Enhances NMDA Receptor-mediated EPSPs and Long-term Potentiation. J Neurophysiol 1999;81:925­ 8. Gazzaley AH, Weiland NG, McEwen BS, Morrison JH. Differential regulation of NMDAR1 mRNA and protein by estradiol in the rat hippocampus. J Neurosci 1996;16:6930 ­ 8. Green PS, Gordon K, Simpkins JW. Phenolic A ring requirement for the neuroprotective effects of steroids. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1997;63:229 ­35. Green PS, Gridley KE, Simpkins JW. Nuclear estrogen receptorindependent neuroprotection by estratrienes: a novel interaction with glutathione. Neuroscience 1998;84:7­10. Greenough WT, Bailey C. The anatomy of a memory: convergence of results across a diversity of tests. TINS 1988;11:142­7. Honjo H, Ogino Y, Naitoh K, et al. In vivo effects by estrone sulfate on the central nervous system-senile dementia (Alzheimer's type). J Steroid Biochem 1989;34:521­5. Horwitz B. Neuronal plasticity: how changes in dendritic architecture can affect the spread of postsynaptic potentials. Brain Res 1981;224: 412­ 8. Kampen DL, Sherwin BB. Estrogen use and verbal memory in healthy postmenopausal women. Obstet Gynecol 1994;83:979 ­ 83. Kawas C, Resnick S, Morrison A, et al. A prospective study of estrogen replacement therapy and the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease: the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging. Neurology 1997;48:1517­21. Klein R, Berlin L. Benefits and risks of hormone replacement therapy. In: Pavlik EJ, editor. Estrogens, Progestins, and Their Antagonists. Boston: Birkhauser, 1996; p. 3­50. ¨ Liu J, Shigenaga MK, Mori A, Ames BN. Free Radicals and neurodegenerative disease: stree and oxidative damage. In: Packer L, Hiramatsu M, Yoshikawa T, editors. Free radicals in brain physiology and disorders. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1996. p. 403­37 Mainen ZF, Sejnowski TJ. Influence of dendritic structure on firing pattern in model neocortical neurons. Nature 1996;382:363­ 6. Mattson MP. Calcium as sculptor and destroyer of neural circuitry. [review 90 refs] Exp Gerontol 1992;27:29 ­ 49. Mattson MP, Barger SW, Cheng B, Lieberburg I, Smith­Swintosky VL, Rydel RE. beta-Amyloid precursor protein metabolites and loss of neuronal Ca2 homeostasis in Alzheimer's disease. [review 70 refs] Trends Neurosci 1993;16:409 ­14. Mattson MP, Cheng B, Davis D, Bryant K, Lieberburg I, Rydel RE. beta-Amyloid peptides destabilize calcium homeostasis and render human cortical neurons vulnerable to excitotoxicity. J Neurosci 1992; 12:376 ­ 89. Mattson MP, Kater SB. Excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters in the generation and degeneration of hippocampal neuroarchitecture. Brain Res 1989;478:337­ 48. Murphy DD, Cole NB, Greenberger V, Segal M. Estradiol increases dendritic spine density by reducing GABA neurotransmission in hippocampal neurons. J Neurosci 1998a;18:2550 ­9. Murphy DD, Cole NB, Segal M. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor mediates estradiol-induced dendritic spine formation in hippocampal neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998b;95:11412­7. Murphy DD, Segal M. Regulation of dendritic spine density in cultured rat hippocampal neurons by steroid hormones. J Neurosci 1996;16:4059 ­ 68.

496 36. 37.

R.D. Brinton et al. / Neurobiology of Aging 21 (2000) 475­ 496 Paganini­Hill A, Henderson VW. Estrogen replacement therapy and risk of Alzheimer disease. Arch Intern Med 1996;156:2213­7. Perez VJ, Frantseva MV, Carlen PL. In vitro ischemia promotes glutamate-mediated free radical generation and intracellular calcium accumulation in hippocampal pyramidal neurons. J Neurosci 1997; 17:9085­94. Phillips SM, Sherwin BB. Effects of estrogen on memory function in surgically menopausal women. Psychoneuroendocrinology 1992a;17: 485­95. Phillips SM, Sherwin BB. Variations in memory function and sex steroid hormones across the menstrual cycle. Psychoneuroendocrinology 1992b;17:497­506. Posner MI, Petersen SE, Fox PT, Raichle ME. Localization of cognitive operations in the human brain. [review 45 refs] Science 1988; 240:1627­31. Shaywitz SE, Shaywitz BA, Pugh KR, et al. Effect of estrogen on brain activation patterns in postmenopausal women during working memory tasks. JAMA 1999;281:1197­202. Sherwin BB, Tulandi T. "Add-back" estrogen reverses cognitive deficits induced by a gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist in women with leiomyomata uteri. [see comments] J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1996;81:2545­9. Shumaker S, Rapp S. Hormone replacement therapy in dementia prevention: the Women's Health Initiative Memory Study. Neurobiol Aging 1996;17:534. Singer CA, Figueroa­Masot XA, Batchelor RH, Dorsa DM. The mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway mediates estrogen neuroprotection after glutamate toxicity in primary cortical neurons. J Neurosci 1999;19:2455­ 63. Singh M, Meyer EM, Millard WJ, Simpkins JW. Ovarian steroid deprivation results in a reversible learning impairment and compromised cholinergic function in female Sprague­Dawley rats. Brain Res 1994;644:305­12. Singh M, Setalo G Jr , Guan X, Warren M, Toran­Allerand CD. ´´ ´ Estrogen-induced activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase in cerebral cortical explants: convergence of estrogen and neurotrophin signaling pathways. J Neurosci 1999;19:1179 ­ 88. Solodkin A, Van Hoesen GW. Neuropathology and functional anatomy of Alzheimer's disease. In: Pharmacological treatment of Alzheimer's disease: molecular and neurobiological foundations. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997. p. 151­177. 48. Spruston N, Jaffe DB, Johnston D. Dendritic attenuation of synaptic potentials and currents: the role of passive membrane properties. [review 24 refs] Trends Neurosci 1994;17:161­ 6. 49. Tang MX, Jacobs D, Stern Y, et al Effect of oestrogen during menopause on risk and age at onset of Alzheimer's disease. [see comments] Lancet 1996;348:429 ­32. 50. Toran­Allerand CD. Organotypic culture of the developing cerebral cortex and hypothalamus: relevance to sexual differentiation. [review 96 refs] Psychoneuroendocrinology 1991;16:7­24. 51. United States Pharmacy Convention I. United States Pharmacopeia 1995, Reference Text, Conjugated Estrogens. In: United States Pharmacopeia 1995 (Anonymous pp. 627­9. Rand McNally, MA.: United States Pharmacy Convention, Inc, 1995. 52. Warren SG, Humphreys AG, Juraska JM, Greenough WT. LTP varies across the estrous cycle: enhanced synaptic plasticity in proestrus rats. Brain Res 1995;703:26 ­30. 53. Wong M, Moss RL. Long-term and short-term electrophysiological effects of estrogen on the synaptic properties of hippocampal CA1 neurons. J Neurosci 1992;12:3217­25. 54. Woolley CS, McEwen BS. Estradiol mediates fluctuation in hippocampal synapse density during the estrous cycle in the adult rat [published erratum appears in J Neurosci 1992 Oct;12(10): following table of contents]. J Neurosci 1992;12:2549 ­54. 55. Woolley CS, McEwen BS. Roles of estradiol and progesterone in regulation of hippocampal dendritic spine density during the estrous cycle in the rat. J Comp Neurol 1993;336:293­306. 56. Woolley CS, McEwen BS. Estradiol regulates hippocampal dendritic spine density via an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-dependent mechanism. J Neurosci 1994;14:7680 ­7. 57. Woolley CS, Weiland NG, McEwen BS, Schwartzkroin PA. Estradiol increases the sensitivity of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cells to NMDA receptor-mediated synaptic input: correlation with dendritic spine density. J Neurosci 1997;17:1848 ­59. 58. Wysowski DK, Golden L, Burke L. Use of menopausal estrogens and medroxyprogesterone in the United States, 1982­1992. Obstet Gynecol 1995;85:6 ­10.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

