Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17 ­ 35 http://www.elsevier.com/locate/bba

Review

SRP-mediated protein targeting: structure and function revisited
Joen Luirink a,*, Irmgard Sinning b
a

Department of Molecular Microbiology, Vrije Universiteit, De Boelelaan 1087, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands b Biochemie-Zentrum der Universitat Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 328, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany ¨ Received 13 January 2004; received in revised form 26 March 2004; accepted 26 March 2004 Available online 19 May 2004

Abstract The signal recognition particle (SRP) and its membrane-bound receptor (SR) deliver membrane proteins and secretory proteins to the translocation channel in the plasma membrane (or the endoplasmic reticulum). The general outline of the SRP pathway is conserved in all three kingdoms of life. During the past decade, structure determination together with functional studies has brought our understanding of the SRP-mediated protein transport to an almost molecular level. An impressive amount of new information especially on the prokaryotic SRP is integrated into the current picture of the SRP pathway. D 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: SRP; SRP receptor; E. coli; Protein targeting; Ribosome; Trigger factor

1. Introduction All cells, even the most primitive ones, offer a set of compartments for protein localization. Transport systems which act in a co- or posttranslational mode ensure that all proteins are targeted to the correct location. The signal recognition particle (SRP) mediates the transport of secretory and membrane proteins to the plasma membrane or the endoplasmic reticulum in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, respectively (review: Refs. [1,2]); (Fig. 1). SRP binds to a hydrophobic N-terminal signal sequence as it emerges from the ribosome. The SRP/RNC (ribosome nascent chain) complex interacts with the membrane-bound SRP Receptor (SR) and the delivery of the RNC to the translocation channel in the membrane finally leads to the dissociation of the SRP/SR complex. This process is controlled by GTPases present in SRP and SR which react to and undergo conformational changes induced by interaction with the ribosome, the presence of the translocation channel as well as the binding and release of the signal peptide (Fig. 1). Over the past few years, an impressive collection of structural data from the SRP system became available, which together with biochemical and genetic experiments has substantially increased our understanding
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +31-20-4447175; fax: +31-20-4447136. E-mail address: joen.luirink@falw.vu.nl (J. Luirink). 0167-4889/$ - see front matter D 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.bbamcr.2004.03.013

of the molecular mechanisms of SRP mediated protein transport. In this review, we concentrate first on novel structural data that are derived from eubacterial, archaeal and eukaryotic SRP/SR components. Given the conserved nature of the SRP and its receptor, this information provides the framework for the second part of the review that focuses on functional aspects of SRP-mediated protein targeting in E. coli.

2. Conservation of SRP SRP is a protein ­RNA complex present in all organisms but with different composition (review: Refs. [1,2]; Fig. 2). In Eubacteria, SRP consists of one protein (Ffh, SRP Fiftyfour homolog) [3,4] and a 4.5S RNA (Fig. 2). The most conserved part of the SRP RNA, the domain IV (helix 8 in eukaryotes), binds to Ffh (SRP54). Ffh consists of three domains, the N domain (a-helical domain), the G domain (nucleotide binding domain, GTPase with an insertion in the effector region) and the M domain (methionine rich, ahelical domain, RNA interaction and signal peptide binding). The protein FtsY has been identified as the SRP receptor (SR) in E. coli [5]. FtsY is the homolog of SRa in the mammalian SRP receptor (see below) and consists of three domains, an acidic domain at the N terminus (A domain) and the N and G domains that are homologous to

18

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the SRP cycle with four general steps. Protein transport starts with the recognition of the signal peptide (`SP') on the ribosome. The SRP/ribosome-nascent-chain complex is then binding to the SRP receptor (SR). For the formation of a stable SRP/SR complex, GTP has to be present in both, SRP (SRP54, Ffh) and the SR (FtsY, SRa). The signal peptide is transferred from SRP to the translocation channel. GTP hydrolysis in both, SRP and SR, leads to the dissociation of the SRP/SR complex. SRP is represented by a red sphere, the SRP receptor is in pink, the translocation channel in green and the ribosome in yellow. The signal peptide at the N-terminus of a nascent polypeptide is shown in blue.

the N and G domains of Ffh. FtsY associates with the plasma membrane and phospholipids have been shown to contribute to the activation of the GTPase [5 ­7]. In Archaea the SRP consists of a 7S RNA and two proteins, a homolog of SRP54 and SRP19. The SRP receptor is represented by a FtsY homolog (review: Ref. [8]). SRP19 binds to the so-called helix 6 of the SRP RNA. In Archaea SRP54 can bind to the SRP RNA in the absence of SRP19, although this incomplete SRP is not fully active [9,10]. In the mammalian SRP, SRP19 has to be bound prior to SRP54 (see below). The crystal structures of part of the M. jannaschii S domain (SRP19/helix 6 and helix 8; [11]) and the human one [12,13] show differences in the SRP19/ helix 6 interactions which might explain the differences in assembly [14,15]. The structure of the S-domain RNA alone is needed for both, the human and the archaeal SRP, in order to really understand the structural changes during SRP assembly. In mammals, SRP consists of six proteins (SRP9, 14, 19, 54, 68 and 72, named according to their molecular weights) and a 7S RNA (Fig. 2). SRP can be divided into two domains [16], the Alu domain with a function in the socalled elongation arrest [17 ­19] and the S domain which carries the binding site for the signal peptide and the interface for SR interaction. The Alu domain comprises a heterodimer of SRP9 and SRP14 as well as the 3V and 5V domains of the SRP RNA [20]. The S domain comprises the

remaining four proteins SRP19, SRP54, SRP68 and SRP72 as well as the major part of the SRP RNA. The most conserved part of SRP, namely SRP54 and helix 8 of the 7S RNA, are part of the S domain. In eukaryotes, the assembly of SRP takes place in two cellular compartments: the SRP RNA is transcribed in the nucleus whereas the protein components are synthesized in the cytoplasm and are then imported into the nucleus (except SRP54). They assemble on the SRP RNA into a pre-SRP, which is then exported to the cytoplasm. Binding of SRP54 completes the assembly of SRP [21,22]. Interestingly, the presence of SRP19 is a prerequisite for binding of SRP54 [21,23]. The structural basis for this intriguing observation begins to be revealed [12] and includes a structural change within the SRP RNA (review: Refs. [14,15]). Binding of SRP19 arranges the helices 6 and 8 of the SRP RNA side by side and thereby prepares the binding site for the M domain of SRP54. The reason for this controlled assembly might be simply an economical one as it might ensure that SRP54 only binds to a complete pre-SRP. Whether SRP19 serves an additional role, e.g. in interacting with other partners, is still not clear. The SRP receptor in mammals consists of two proteins, SRa and SRh [24 ­26] (Fig. 2), which are both GTPases. SRh is an integral membrane protein to which SRa is bound. The human SRh resembles the ARF and Sar GTPases [27] and the transmembrane (TM) domain of

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35

19

Fig. 2. Schematic representation of SRP and SR components in the three kingdoms of life: from Eubacteria on the top to Eukaryotes (e.g. human SRP) on the bottom. The colour code is blue (Ffh/SRP54; NG domain in dark blue, M domain in light blue), cyan (SRP19), grey (SRP68/72), green (SRP9/14), black (RNA). Structural motifs of the RNA (e.g. helices 2 ­ 8; domain IV) which are referred to in the text are marked. The SRP receptor is shown in pink (FtsY, SRa; NG domain in light pink, A domain in dark pink) and violet (SRh).

SRh is not essential for SR function [28]. SRa is the functional homolog of FtsY. It is still not entirely clear why in eukaryotes a third GTPase (SRh) is needed in the SRP system. One simple explanation would be that permanently anchoring of the SRP receptor at the ER membrane adds another level of control specific for eukaryotes. How-

ever, if this would be mainly a matter of anchoring, an additional GTPase activity would be unnecessary. Mutagenesis of SRh showed that GTPase activity is indeed needed for SR function [28]. The recent structure of SRh from yeast in complex with part of the N-terminal domain of SRa provided insight into the structural organization of part of

20

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35 Table 1 Structural data base of SRP components SRP component Alu domain SPR9/14 SRP9/14/RNA S domain Helix 6 Helix 6 (NMR) Helix 6/SRP19 Helix 6/Helix 8/ SRP19/ SRP54M Helix 6/Helix 8/ SRP19 SRP54M Eubacteria/Archaea Helix 6/helix 8/ SRP19 SRP19 (NMR) Helix 8/SRP54 SRP54 Ffh(M domain) Helix 8/FfhM Domain IV RNA (helix 8) Domain IV RNA (NMR) SRP and SR GTPases FfhNG apo FfhNG GDP/Mg, apo FfhNG GMP-PNP SRP54NG apo FtsY NG apo SRa X2/SRh FfhNG/FtsYNG/ GMP-PNP Source PDB entry code 1914 1E8O, 1E8S Reference

the SR complex [29] and spectroscopic data show that the h subunit of the translocation channel acts as a GEF ( guanine nucleotide exchange factor) for SRh in yeast [30]. In human SR, SRh in the GTP-bound state coordinates the release of the signal peptide from SPR54 with the insertion into the translocation channel [31]. SRa might be able to dissociate from SRh after GTP hydrolysis [29,32], which leaves the question of how the three GTPases in the eukaryotic SRP system are coordinated. There are also variations to the composition of SRP. For instance, in B. subtilis, a gram-positive bacterium, a histone-like protein is bound to a 7S RNA instead of SRP9 and SRP14 [33]. In chloroplasts, SRP (cpSRP) seems to be even more reduced (review: Refs. [34,35]). The SRP RNA is absent and SRP54 alone has been reported to be active in cotranslational transport [36]. A novel protein component, cpSRP43, is present when SRP is engaged in posttranslational transport of light-harvesting complexes (LHCPs) to the thylakoid membrane. Whether cpSRP43 serves its main function by interacting with a conserved L18 motif in the LHCPs [37], or whether in addition it mimicks the RNA, still needs to be established. The C-terminus of cpSRP54 is crucial for the interaction with cpSRP43 [38] and bears a high number of positively charged residues. In the mammalian SRP the C-terminus of SRP54, which is not present in the crystal structures, was shown to be important for signal peptide binding [39] and contains a high percentage of hydrophobic residues. Taking all these together, the most conserved part of SRP, the SRP core, is formed by SRP54 (Ffh) and helix 8 (domain IV) of the SRP RNA only.

human human

[160] [20]

human human human

1D4R 1L1W 1JID 1MFQ

[161] [162] [163] [12]

human/Archaea chimera human

1L9A 1QB2

[13] [82]

M. jannaschii A. fulgidus S. solfataricus S. solfataricus T. aquaticus E. coli E. coli E. coli

1LNG 1KVN, 1KVV 1QZW 1QZX 2FFH 1DUL, 1HQ1 1DUH 28SR, 28SP, 1CQ5, 1CQL

[11] [164] [50] [50] [49] [81,165] [166] [167,168]

T. aquaticus T. aquaticus T. aquaticus A. ambivalens E. coli S. cerevisiae T. aquaticus

3. Structural data base of SRP components High-resolution structures are available for most SRP components described above or at least for parts of them (summarized in Table 1). They have tremendously increased our knowledge of the SRP system, which in turn has stimulated biochemical experiments in new directions. Although none of the SRP systems has completely been structurally characterized, the high degree of evolutionary conservation allows e.g. the assembly of a model of an almost complete mammalian SRP from individual (homologous) structures. Only SRP68 and SRP72 remain as a challenge to structural biologists as so far. Until recently, only a low resolution envelope of mammalian SRP was available which is derived from electron microscopy [40]. The dimensions of this particle fit nicely to span the surface of the ribosome so that SRP54 could be positioned close to the exit tunnel and the Alu domain at the interface of the ribosomal subunits in agreement with the cross-link data using mammalian and E. coli SRP [41 ­ 44] (see: Role of the ribosome and

1FFH, 1LS1 1NG1, 2NG1, 3NG1, 1O87 1JPJ, 1JPN 1J8M, 1J8Y 1FTS 1NRJ 1OKK, 1RJ9

[59,62] [61,169] [170] [60] [58] [29] [46,47]

Ribosome ­ SRP complex RNC/SRP comdog SRP, wheat plex (EM) germ ribosome Translocation channel PCC M. jannaschii

1RY1, EMD-1063

[45]

1RHZ, 1RH5

[171]

trigger factor in protein targeting). The structure of mammalian SRP bound to a ribosome nascent-chain complex has recently been determined by cryo-electron microscopy [45]. In agreement with its function in elongation arrest, the Alu domain indeed binds to the interface of the ribosomal subunits and mimicks elongation factor binding. SRP54 binds close to the exit tunnel in agreement with its role in binding the signal peptide. A structural comparison of the `free' SRP and as part of the RNC/SRP complex should now allow to identify and analyse the structural changes upon RNC/SRP complex formation.

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35

21

Similarly, a structural comparison of the Ffh and FtsY GTPases as part of SRP/SR complex [46,47] with the structures of the individual GTPases in different nucleotide-bound states provides the basis for understanding the conformational changes that occur in the GTPases during the SRP cycle [46 ­ 48] (see: Regulation of protein transport by SRP GTPases).

5. Regulation of protein transport by SRP GTPases SRP54 (Ffh) and SRa (FtsY) are multidomain proteins and share two conserved domains, the so-called N and G domains (Fig. 2). Whereas the N domain consists of four ahelices, the G domain shows the classical GTPase fold and contains the conserved consensus regions (GI ­ GV) involved in nucleotide binding (Fig. 3a). The SRP GTPases form a distinct subfamily within the superfamily of small GTPases [54]. In contrast to the ``classical'' function of small GTPases as molecular switches (review: Ref. [55]), SRP GTPases act together in a heterodimer of two and in the eukaryotic system in a complex of even three GTPases. In contrast to other small G proteins, SRP GTPases are stable in the absence of the nucleotide although the relevance of the apo form in vivo is not clear. The binding affinities for the nucleotide are much lower than for other small GTPases [56,57]. Already when the first structures of SRP GTPases became available [58,59], it was evident that in structural terms they are more closely related to ATP binding proteins (e.g. nitrogenase iron protein, dithiobiotin synthetase) than to other small GTPases [60]. A special feature of the SRP GTPases is an insertion (IBD) in the effector region of the GTPase and a tight interface between the N and G domains (Fig. 3a). A highly conserved motif `DVN' within the N domain interacts closely with the so-called `DARGG' motif of the G domain. The interface between the N and G domain as well as the one between the IBD and the GTPase were proposed as regulatory elements in the Ffh (SRP54) and FtsY (SRa) GTPase cycle [56,60 ­ 62] (review: Refs. [2,14]). How are the two GTPases synchronized? Both respond to a number of external regulators, e.g. the ribosome, the translocation channel, the signal peptide and to complex formation between SRP and SR. GTP binding to SRP54 (Ffh) and SRa (FtsY) is a prerequisite for complex formation between SRP and SR, and GTP hydrolysis leads to the dissociation of the SRP/SR complex [63]. Judged from nucleotide cross-link data, the GTP binding affinity of SRP54 is increased upon interaction with the ribosome [64]. It has been proposed that binding of the signal peptide inhibits GTP hydrolysis in SRP54 (review: Ref. [2]) and SRP54 (Ffh) bound to a signal peptide at the ribosome is in an activated, GTP-bound form, primed for the interaction with SR. Likewise, FtsY (SRa) is primed for complex formation with SRP by interaction with membrane or translocon components [6,7,65]. Formation of the SRP/SR complex has been reported to induce nucleotide specificity in FtsY [66] and the SRP RNA plays a catalytic role in complex formation [67,68]. However, the two NG domains of Ffh and FtsY are sufficient to form a stable complex in the presence of non-hydrolysable nucleotide analogs, although with a slow kinetics [69]. The GTPases of Ffh and FtsY stimulate each other upon complex formation [70] and, therefore, they have been proposed to act as GTPase activating proteins (GAPs) for each other [71]. The recent crystal structure of the SRP/SR

4. The SRP core is dynamic The SRP core (SRP54/helix 8 of the SRP RNA) is the only part of SRP that is present in all SRPs (see above, Fig. 2). SRP54 (Ffh) is a multidomain protein (Fig. 2) and consists of a C-terminal M domain and a so-called NG domain at the N-terminus. The M domain contains the binding sites for the SRP RNA and the signal peptide, and the N and G domains comprise the conserved GTPase for regulation of protein transport and for the interaction with the SRP receptor (see below). Since these specific functions of SRP54 are localized in specialized domains, their arrangement and the communication between them are the basis for SRP function. In the structure of Ffh from Thermus aquaticus (without the RNA), the linker between the NG and M domains was disordered and therefore the domain arrangement remained obscure [49]. Recently, two structures of the SRP core (SRP54 with and without helix 8 of the SRP RNA) became available from the archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus which reveal the domain arrangement of the SRP54 and the position of the RNA with respect to the GTPase [50] (Fig. 3a). The structure of SRP54 has the shape of the letter `L' with the NG domain forming the long arm and the M domain the short arm of the `L'. A long linker helix (aML) connects the G and the M domains and a small but significant hydrophobic contact is formed between the N and M domain. The contact involves the distal end of the N domain (loop connecting the helices 3 and 4, LN34) and aM1b adjacent to the so-called `finger loop' (see: structural basis for signal sequence binding to the M domain). The linker helix participates in this contact that might be functionally relevant. Adjacent to the linker helix, a hinge region has been identified which allows for rearrangements within SRP54 by a `LGMGD' motif. Although this motif is almost identical in all SRP54 proteins, its functional relevance is not clear as it has been overlooked in previous studies. When the two structures of SRP54 from S. solfataricus (with and without the RNA) are compared, a 10j rotation of the M domain is observed around this hinge [50]. Since this movement might be restrained by crystal packing, the flexibility of SRP54 might be higher in vivo. A shape and charge complementarity between a surface region of the G domain and the phosphoribose backbone of the minor groove of the RNA is observed, which together with the flexibility of SRP54 might allow for a transient contact between the RNA and the G domain [50]. RNA protection assays and RNA binding data support this idea [51 ­ 53].

22

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35

Fig. 3. Structure of the SRP core and the SRP/SR complex. (a) The SRP core consisting of SRP54 and helix 8 of the SRP RNA is shown from the crenarchaeon S. solfataricus [50]. The binding site for the signal peptide is formed between the flexible and the rigid part of the M domain (MN and MC domain). The SRP54 domains are coloured in blue (NG domain, IBD in cyan), the rigid part of the M domain is in red (MC domain), the flexible part (MN domain) is in orange (linker helix aML, helices aM1 and aM1b) and in yellow (`finger loop'). The RNA is represented by a brown ribbon. The consensus elements for nucleotide binding are indicated in the G domain (green, numbers I ­ V), the conserved motifs `DVN' and `DARGG' in the NG domain interface are in violet and the loop of the N domain contacting the M domain (LN34) is labelled. Hinge regions (`GP/PG' tandem) and anchor points [50] for adjusting the binding site for the signal peptide in the M domain are indicated by orange spheres. The hinge between the G and the M domain with the `LGMGD' motif is indicated by a red sphere. Regions undergoing dramatic rearrangements upon SRP/SR complex formation are in light blue (aG5, aN1, see text) and the N-terminal end of the NG domain is labeled (`N'). The figure was created using the programs Molscript and Raster3D. (b) Ribbon representation of the structure of the SRP/SR complex from T. aquaticus [46]. The two NG domains of Ffh (blue) and FtsY (pink) are aligned almost in parallel. The active sites with the nucleotide (`GMP-PCP') are closely intertwined. The nucleotide is shown as atomic model and Mg2 + by a grey sphere. aG5 is highlighted as in (a), the P-loop (G1) in Ffh is highlighted in green. aN1 of the N domains has been displaced by aG5 and is missing compared to the structures of the individual NG domains (see also (a)). (c) Model for signal peptide binding to the M domain based on the structures from S. solfataricus (closed state, (a) [50]) and from T. aquaticus (open state, [49]) (see text). The structural changes upon signal peptide binding are restricted to the MN domain. The colour code is as in (a). The signal peptide (indicated by a grey rod with the N-terminal region in blue) is aligned almost parallel to the C-terminal helix (aM5).

heterodimer (complex of the NG domains of Ffh and FtsY from T. aquaticus) is a milestone towards an understanding of the coupling of the two GTPases [46,47] (Fig. 3b). The two GTPases are aligned almost parallel and display a quasi twofold symmetry. The active sites are so closely intertwined that the two nucleotides are hydrogen-bonded to each other. Besides changes in the active sites, the N domains are affected the most by complex formation,

triggered by the movement of the C-terminal a-helix of the G domain (aG5) which seems to displace the N-terminal a-helix (aN1). When the NG domain structures in Fig. 3a and b are compared, this change can be recognized by the ``loss'' of aN1 in the complex. The consequences of the rearrangements in the NG domain for the M domain/signal peptide interaction or for the membrane interaction of the A domain are not known as these domains are not part of the

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35

23

structure. Together with the different nucleotide-bound structures of the Ffh-NG domain (see Table 1), the structure of the SRP/SR heterodimer and the large number of mutants that have been analysed [46] brings us closer to a complete picture of the GTPase cycle of SRP GTPases. However, there are still quite a number of intriguing questions. For some of the ``classical'' GTPases, it has been shown that GAPs contribute arginine residues to the active site (`arginine finger') to stabilize the transition state during the hydrolysis of the g-phosphate and thereby increase the reaction rate [72]. SRP GTPases contain a number of conserved arginine residues in the active site that might play a similar role. In T. aquaticus Arg138 in Ffh and Arg142 in FtsY are discussed as possible candidates; however, based on structural and mutagenesis data, Egea et al. [46] discount this idea and propose a unique mechanism of GTPase activation that involves Asp135, Arg138 and Gln144 in Ffh and the corresponding Asp139, Arg142 and Gln148 in FtsY. Interestingly, the GI motif of SRP GTPases (P-loop) contains a conserved glutamine residue in Ffh (Gln107) and a conserved asparagine in FtsY (Asn111) which are not present in the GI motifs of other small GTPases. Both residues contact the nucleotide bound to the other GTPase in the SRP/SR heterodimer and might be important for specifying the order of nucleotide hydrolysis. In the SRP/SR complex, the two GTPases are in the GTP-bound state--but GTP hydrolysis must be blocked until the signal peptide is released in order to prevent dissociation of the SRP/SR complex prior to the delivery of the RNC to the translocon. Therefore, the occupancy of the signal peptide binding site in the M domain of Ffh has to be communicated to the GTPase. As the M domain of Ffh is not present in the structure of the SRP/SR complex [46,47], it is still not known how this information is transmitted. The interface between the N and G domain seems to play an important role (see above, Fig. 3a and b) since mutations in the `DARGG' motif reduce complex formation between SRP and SR [73] and mutants in the `DVN' motif lead to defects in signal peptide binding [74]. In the structure of the archaeal SRP core, a contact exists between the N and M domains, which, together with the linker region between the G and M domains, might be important for interdomain communication as recently proposed [50,172].

6. Structural basis for signal peptide binding to the M domain Signal sequences of target proteins are specifically recognized by SRP as they emerge from the ribosome. Typical signal sequences have a tripartite structure with a 9 ­ 12residue-long hydrophobic stretch in the middle [75] that adopts an a-helical conformation. Although for binding to the SRP the hydrophobic part of the signal peptide is crucial [76,77], the flanking regions may also contribute to the interaction [78] (see below). Based on cross-link and

mutagenesis data [39,79,80], the M domain of Ffh has been implicated in signal peptide binding with an unusually high number of methionine residues in the proposed binding site (review: Ref. [2]). The first crystal structures of the M domain alone or in complex with the RNA [49,81] indeed show the presence of such a hydrophobic pocket and a socalled ``finger loop'' which might act as a lid. In the structure of the M domain from T. aquaticus, the finger loop is ordered as it binds into the hydrophobic pocket of a neighboring M domain in the crystal [49]. Thereby the binding site is open and would be able to accommodate a signal peptide in an a-helical conformation. In the structure of the M domain of E. coli Ffh in complex with helix 8 of the SRP RNA, the finger loop is disordered [81]. It has been concluded that these differences reflect an intrinsic flexibility of the finger loop which might be the basis for binding a large variety of signal peptides. On the other hand, the presence of detergents in the crystallization conditions might account for at least part of these differences. In the crystal structures of the human M domain alone [82] or in complex with the RNA (as part of the ternary complex of SRP19, SRP54M and helices 6 and 8 of the RNA [12]), the M domain forms a dimer. The finger loop is ordered in both structures. However, helix aM1 of the M domain is ``swapped'' with a crystallographic neighbor. On the basis of this helix swap, an alternative model for signal peptide binding has been proposed [12,14,82]. Here, aM1 of one M domain was suggested to represent the signal peptide in the adjacent M domain, which would place the binding site different from the one derived from the structures described above. The structures of SRP54 from S. solfataricus alone and in complex with the RNA [50] agree with the binding site for signal peptides as derived from the E. coli and T. aquaticus structures. The C-terminal helix aM5 of the M domain, together with the helices aM1, aM1b and aM2, lines a hydrophobic pocket that is closed by the finger loop (Fig. 3a). In the S. solfataricus structure, the binding site is shielded from the aqueous environment by the closed conformation of the finger loop and may thus be stabilized in the absence of a signal peptide [50]. The M domain structures from T. aquaticus and S. solfataricus may represent two functionally relevant, extreme, conformations of the binding sitethe closed (empty) and the open (occupied with a signal peptide) state. A model for signal peptide binding is based on this idea (Fig. 3c). The base of the binding site formed by aM1 might adjust to signal peptide binding and the finger loop and the adjacent aM1b undergo a movement defined by conserved hinge regions. These involve a conserved tandem `GP/PG' motif [50]. The structural changes seem to be restricted to the N-terminal part of the M domain (MN domain) whereas the C-terminal part that binds the RNA seems to be rigid (MC domain). The signal peptide in this model is aligned almost parallel to aM5. The N-terminal region of the signal peptide contains positively charged residues that might contact a negatively

24

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35

charged region at the back part of the binding site, close to the SRP RNA. A more detailed description of the current model of signal peptide binding and the consequences on the GTPase is given elsewhere [172]. Whether or to which extent the linker helix aML between the G and M domains participates in the structural changes during the SRP cycle is not yet clear. However, the highly conserved linker region `LGMGD' adjacent to aML might act as a hinge between the G and the M domains and allow for significant rearrangements.

7. Selection of proteins for SRP-mediated targeting Mammalian SRP recognizes both cleavable signal peptides in secreted proteins and trans membrane (TM) segments in membrane proteins and is the only known dedicated targeting factor to guide nascent proteins to the Sec-translocon in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane (review: Ref. [2]). In S. cerevisiae, however, several secretory proteins are targeted to the ER via alternative posttranslational mechanisms that involve chaperones to maintain translocation competence [83,84]. In E. coli, SRP-independent posttranslational targeting or targeting at a late stage during translation appears to play an even more prominent role. Both SecB and SecA are dedicated chaperones that fulfill a role in the targeting of a subset of proteins to the Sec-translocon that is also approached via the SRP pathway (see Chapters 5 and 6). SecB and SecA have been selected in genetic screens devised to identify factors involved in the secretion of model periplasmic and outer membrane proteins. It should be noted that SecB is not an essential protein and that the effect of secB deletion has been demonstrated for only a limited subset of periplasmic and outer membrane proteins. Since these screens did not pick up SRP components, the later identification of the SRP and its receptor by sequence comparisons initially met with skepticism. A little later, two experimental approaches provided evidence for a role of the SRP in membrane targeting. First, cellular depletion of the SRP components Ffh and 4.5S RNA and the SRP receptor FtsY affected the export of several secreted proteins [5,85 ­ 87]. Second, cross-linking of nascent secretory proteins in a heterologous translation system revealed specific contacts with the SRP present in a crude extract of E. coli cells [88,89]. Subsequently, evidence accumulated that the SRP pathway is more specialized in the targeting of inner membrane proteins (IMPs). More careful in vivo analysis revealed that the targeting of IMPs is particularly sensitive to disruption of the SRP pathway [90 ­ 92]. The early and extensive effects observed might explain the relatively mild and late effects on the processing of secretory proteins that depend on several membrane integrated translocon components, such as SecY, for proper membrane insertion. Furthermore, the development of homologous systems to analyze inter-

actions of nascent chains in E. coli demonstrated a specific interaction of the SRP with TM segments of IMPs that are exposed outside the ribosome [77,93]. In addition, targeting of a nascent IMP to the inner membrane appeared to be dependent on the presence of the SRP in the in vitro system [94]. Also, an in vivo screening method based on the ability of randomly cloned factors to titrate the SRP and confer synthetic lethality, specifically selected a subset of IMPs [95]. Finally, a genetic approach designed to select mutants defective in IMP assembly yielded mutations in all components of the SRP targeting route [96,97]. Apparently, the SRP has a more specialized role in E. coli than the SRP in mammalian cells. How are proteins selected for either the SecB or SRP targeting pathways? In other words: how is the substrate specificity of the targeting pathways regulated? Several studies point to signal peptide hydrophobicity as an important determinant for interaction with and dependence on the SRP. Cross-linking of nascent PhoA-derivatives with mutations in the core region of the signal peptide revealed an almost linear correlation between hydrophobicity and SRP cross-linking [77]. Also, hydrophobic alterations in the signal peptide of SecB-dependent proteins rerouted these passenger proteins into the SRP pathway [76,98]. Even more strikingly, a single replacement of a helix-breaking glycine residue by a helix-promoting leucine residue in the hydrophobic core of the signal sequence of PhoE, a SecBdependent outer membrane protein, promoted SRP binding [99]. This suggests that the structure of the signal peptide may be relevant for SRP binding as well. The mutation conferred no absolute dependency on SRP in the presence of the cognate targeting factor SecB. Since TMs of IMPs usually have a higher average hydrophobicity than cleavable signal peptides of secretory proteins, this might explain the specificity of the SRP for binding to nascent IMPs. In contrast to the artificial constructs described above, most tested natural IMPs depend more strongly on the SRP for targeting indicating that SecB is unable to prevent their mislocalization. Apparently, secreted proteins can be directed into the SRP pathway by a more hydrophobic signal peptide but are there any natural secreted proteins that use this pathway? Recent evidence indicates that this might be the case. First, it was shown that the signal sequence of the periplasmic enzyme DsbA directs fused reporter proteins to the SRP pathway and enhances cotranslational processing [100]. This indicates that the relatively hydrophobic DsbA signal peptide interacts with SRP and promotes cotranslational translocation of DsbA although this was not demonstrated directly. Second, a secreted E. coli autotransporter protein with an unusually long but relatively hydrophilic signal sequence was shown to interact with the SRP [101]. Consistently, depletion of the SRP affected secretion of the autotransporter. However, a much stronger effect of Ffh depletion was observed in the absence of SecB, again suggesting an

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35

25

inherent flexibility of the targeting systems. It was suggested that characteristics of this signal peptide other than hydrophobicity, like its unusually basic N-terminus, may stimulate interaction with the SRP. Indeed, a more basic N-terminus was recently shown to facilitate SRP binding to signal peptides whose hydrophobicity is just below the threshold level for interaction with the SRP [78]. The crystal structure of the SRP has revealed an RNA ­ protein interface that is thought to constitute the signal peptide binding groove (Ref. [81]; see under: Structural basis for signal peptide binding to the M domain, Fig. 3c). Hence, the charged domain of the signal peptide might influence SRP binding directly via the formation of salt bridges between the SRP RNA and basic amino acids [78,101]. As mentioned above, the use of conditional mutants may not give definitive answers with respect to targeting pathway specificity. This is exemplified by h-lactamase, a SecBindependent periplasmic protein that shows a strong defect in processing upon depletion or inactivation of SRP-route components in vivo [5,85,87]. However, in vitro experiments using a partially purified translation system failed to indicate any interaction of the rather hydrophobic h-lactamase signal peptide with the SRP or any role of the SRP in in vitro translocation [102]. Rigorous in vivo analysis of the periplasmic, outer membrane and extracellular proteome upon inactivation of the SRP pathway should give more insight into the substrate specificity of the SRP in E. coli. The advances in proteomic methods (also for membrane proteins) in combination with improved temperature sensitive strains to quickly shut off SRP-mediated targeting will allow future analyses of this kind. As a complementary approach a completely reconstituted in vitro translation ­ translocation system will be instructive. An E. coli translation system entirely existing of purified components has been described [103]. This system could be combined with proteoliposomes consisting of E. coli phospholipids and translocon components [104,105]. The influence of adding purified targeting factors to reactions that synthesize the substrates of choice in such a pure system will allow a thorough functional assessment of the selective roles of SRP and SecB in targeting. It is likely that parameters other than signal peptide hydrophobicity and charge such as the rate of translation, folding characteristics of the nascent chain and interactions with other factors such as trigger factor (TF, see under: Role of the ribosome and trigger factor in protein targeting) may also influence interaction with the SRP but this has also not been investigated in any detail. One study indicates that in bitopic type II membrane proteins, the length of the periplasmic domain correlates with the extent of SRP dependence which may relate to the inclination of these domains to fold in the cytosol [106]. It should be stressed that only a few model substrates have been analyzed and a strict distinction in pathways and their substrates is not likely to hold.

8. FtsY, receptor of SRP or ribosome targeting factor? As with Ffh, the first hint that FtsY is involved in targeting of proteins to the E. coli inner membrane came from sequence comparison [3,4]. Functional studies then confirmed that FtsY represents the prokaryotic SRP receptor. FtsY was shown to interact with Ffh in reconstituted SRP in vitro in a reaction that is modulated by GTP and by the 4.5S RNA in the SRP complex [70,107] (see under: Regulation of protein transport by SRP GTPases). Depletion of FtsY compromised SRP-mediated targeting in vivo [5] and FtsY proved to be indispensable in a partially reconstituted in vitro targeting assay for nascent IMPs [108]. Despite the absence of evident targeting or membrane signals in either domain, part of FtsY was shown to colocalise with the inner membrane in immuno-EM and biochemical fractionation studies [5]. The membrane-associated form of FtsY is likely to link the RNC ­ SRP complex with the Sec-translocon in a conserved mechanism. The role of the cytosolic form of FtsY is less clear. It may already interact with RNC ­ SRP complexes in the cytosol which would suggest a membrane targeting function for FtsY [108]. Several studies have addressed the molecular basis for the observed membrane localization of FtsY in E. coli and the domains and signals involved. Both the A- and NGdomain were shown to have affinity for the inner membrane [6], whereas an independent study pointed to the AN region as primary membrane binding domain of FtsY [109]. Contact of FtsY with both lipids and protein components of the inner membrane has been inferred. Monolayer and liposome insertion studies suggested interaction of FtsY with (preferentially anionic) phospholipids involving two lipid-binding sites, one of which is located in the NG-domain [7]. Another study pointed to the importance of the zwitterionic PE for assembly of FtsY at the membrane [110]. In any case, a direct contact with lipids might explain the apparent absence of a homologue of SRh to tether FtsY to the membrane. On the other hand, the interaction of FtsY with the membrane appears to be saturatable [5]. Furthermore, in the absence of PE, a trypsin-sensitive component functions to tie FtsY to the membrane [110]. These latter observations suggest the presence of a membrane protein that is linked with FtsY. Possibly, FtsY targeting follows a two-step mechanism with an initial general targeting to the membrane via lipid contacts and a second targeting within the plane of the membrane towards the Sec-translocon to fulfill its function in nascent chain transfer. Interestingly, the mode of targeting and anchoring of FtsY may not be conserved between prokaryotes. Sequence analysis of FtsY homologues revealed putative TM regions in Mycobacterium and Streptomyces species [111]. Also, replacement of the A-domain of the E. coli FtsY by an unrelated TM segment renders a functional FtsY whereas the NG-domain expressed alone is not functional [112].

26

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35

These data suggest that the initial mode of FtsY targeting is irrelevant as long as it gets to the membrane. A completely different view on the role of FtsY in protein targeting has been presented by Bibi and co-workers (review: Ref. [113]). Rather than, or in addition to, a late role in nascent IMP transfer from the SRP to the Sec-translocon, it was proposed that FtsY functions in the targeting of ribosomes to the membrane. This idea is mainly based on the observation that membranes derived from FtsY-depleted cells are devoid of ribosomes [114]. Furthermore, FtsY was shown to interact with the membrane during translation in an uncharacterized targeting event that involves the Nterminal A-domain [115]. Thus, it has been hypothesized that nascent FtsY steers ribosomes to the membrane where their large subunit may remain bound after completion of translation of FtsY, ready to pick up a new mRNA. Assuming this mRNA encodes an IMP, SRP would bind to the nascent IMP and ensure rapid transfer to a Sectranslocon close by. Again, this latter step is not defined. In support of this scenario, it has been shown recently that depletion of Ffh or the Sec-translocon component SecE results in the accumulation of ribosomes that are associated with the inner membrane [116]. Presumably, these stalled ribosomes are unable to unload their cargo. Under these conditions, ribosome-containing intracellular membranes were detected that may have formed to accommodate stalled targeted ribosomes. Interestingly, in this respect, it has been shown recently that large ribosomal subunits remain temporarily bound to the ER membrane after completion of translation of secretory proteins [117]. It was proposed that these resting ribosomes may engage an mRNA encoding a secretory protein thus obviating the need for a membrane targeting event. Thus, despite a different mechanism of targeting, membrane-bound ribosomes may provide a short cut in the localization of IMPs.

9. The mode of SRP-mediated targeting in E. coli The timing of targeting and membrane insertion of IMPs (during or after completion of translation) is difficult to determine in vivo in E. coli since most IMPs lack a cleavable signal peptide. Also, E. coli IMPs are not glycosylated at the trans side of the membrane, a feature that has been most useful in studies on the mode of ER membrane protein insertion. Furthermore, the rapid translocation kinetics as compared to the speed of translation makes it very difficult to establish whether translocation under given conditions is truly cotranslational or merely linked with translation via the nascent chain on the translating ribosome that is rapidly pulled into the translocon [118]. Intuitively, exposure of highly hydrophobic TMs in the cytosol during or after synthesis is likely to trigger protein aggregation. Indeed, it was shown that mislocalization of IMPs under conditions of SRP depletion results in accumulation of aggregated protein [119]. The cell reacts to this

potentially toxic situation by increasing the levels of heat shock regulated proteases to dispose of accumulating IMPs. This observation is consistent with a role for SRP in the cotranslational delivery of IMPs at the inner membrane and might in part explain why the SRP is essential. Cross-link studies of in vitro synthesized nascent IMPs demonstrated cotranslational recognition of the TM segment in a short nascent IMP by the SRP [77,93]. When the in vitro translation system is supplemented with inverted membrane vesicles, the SRP is released from the nascent chain in a reaction that requires FtsY and GTP [108,120]. Upon release, the nascent chain contacts Sec-translocon components indicating that the posttranslational SecBpathway and the SRP-pathway converge at the Sec-translocon [93,108]. Both the interaction of the nascent chain with the SRP and the Sec-translocon depended on the context of the ribosome (i.e. interactions are lost upon release of the nascent chain with puromycin). These characteristics are reminiscent of the mechanism of SRPdriven targeting to the ER in mammalian cells, which appears to be strictly cotranslational (review: Ref. [2]). Nascent chains of different length have been used in in vitro cross-link studies to get a glimpse of the dynamics of the targeting and insertion process (order of interaction studies). Strikingly, contact with the SRP and with the Sec-translocon occurred simultaneously, and appeared very early in biosynthesis when the TM is not even fully exposed outside the ribosome (Refs. [121 ­ 123] and Houben, unpublished data). Nascent Lep that is only 50 amino acids long already contacts SecY and the Sec-associated YidC protein in the membrane upon transfer from the SRP (Ref. [122] and Houben, unpublished data). The SecY and YidC contacts were again ribosome-dependent. Considering the length of the nascent chain and the position of the crosslinker in the polypeptide, it was concluded that nascent Lep contacts SecY and YidC very close to the nascent chain exit site on the large subunit of the ribosome. Consequently, at this very initial stage of membrane insertion, both SecY and YidC must be associated with or at least be juxtaposed to the large ribosomal subunit. This presumption is consistent with the affinity of E. coli ribosomes for the E. coli inner membrane (Refs. [114,124,125]; see below). The SecYEG complex was proposed to function as the receptor for the ribosome as proteoliposomes that contain purified reconstituted SecYEG complex bind ribosomes with similar affinity [125]. These results suggest an evolutionary conserved mechanism of ribosome ­ translocon interaction that might involve conserved cytosolic loops of SecY/Sec61. On the other hand, these results are difficult to reconcile with earlier observations that bacterial membrane-associated ribosomes are solely linked via the nascent chain [126]. It remains to be established whether YidC that may have been co-purified with the SecYEG complex in these experiments does play any role in the interaction with ribosomes. Independent support for a cotranslational role of SRP was recently presented [98]. A hybrid LamB ­LacZ con-

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35

27

struct that is normally targeted via the SecB pathway and jams the Sec-translocon by posttranslational folding of the LacZ moiety was rerouted into the SRP-pathway by increasing the hydrophobicity of its signal peptide (see under: Selection of proteins for SRP-mediated targeting). The hydrophobic signal peptide provoked SRP-dependent, presumably cotranslational, secretion into the periplasm and thereby prevented lethal jamming of the Sec-translocon by the hybrid protein. Collectively, the data are suggestive of cotranslational targeting and membrane insertion of SRP-dependent IMPs.

11. Does E. coli SRP also act posttranslationally? At present, a posttranslational mechanism of SRP-dependent delivery at the membrane cannot be entirely excluded. A truncated membrane protein composed of a large N-terminal translocated domain of the E. coli IMP ProW and a C-terminal TM appeared dependent on the SRP for efficient membrane integration [136]. Surprisingly, this protein is not delivered at the Sec translocon but only requires YidC, suggestive of a novel targeting route from the SRP to the YidC-species that is not connected with the Sec-translocon. Very recent studies in mammalian cells have revealed that naturally occurring C-tail anchor proteins can also use an SRP-dependent targeting route (S. High, personal communication). Another precedent for a posttranslational role of the SRP is found in chloroplasts (review: Ref. [35]). A number of nuclear encoded thylakoid membrane proteins are imported across the chloroplast envelope into the stroma. These proteins are recognized by the cpSRP in a process that is by definition posttranslational. In addition, cpSRP assists in the cotranslational targeting of chloroplast-encoded thylakoid membrane proteins. How cpSRP accomplishes these diverse functions is not known (see: Conservation of SRP). Together, these recent data suggest that also the E. coli SRP might act after translation. Whether it does so for a limited number of membrane proteins or only when other targeting mechanisms are compromised remains to be determined.

10. Does E. coli SRP impose a translation arrest? In vitro assays have demonstrated that upon binding to RNCs, the eukaryotic SRP causes a temporary arrest in translation [17]. The arrest is relieved in a GTP-controlled reaction in which the SRP is released from the RNC after docking of SRP at the SRP receptor in the ER membrane [127,128]. This appears an attractive mechanism to avoid exposure of secretory and membrane proteins in the cytosol which might lead to aggregation of hydrophobic domains. Also, the delayed translation in combination with the association of RNCs with the Sec61 translocon provides a means to use the energy of translation as a driving force for translocation. However, it should be noted that the translational pause is not very pronounced in homologous vitro systems [129,130] and appears not essential for proper in vitro targeting [131]. In vivo, a defective translation arrest function has been shown to only slightly affect translocation in yeast [18] whereas the effect in higher eukaryotes has not been determined, which makes it difficult to assess the relevance of this property of the SRP. Since the E. coli SRP appears to lack SRP9/14 that are responsible for the in vitro arrest activity in mammalian SRP (Ref. [132]; see above), it has been suggested that E. coli SRP does not impose a translation arrest upon its interaction with nascent IMPs. Indeed, it was demonstrated recently that purified E. coli SRP is unable to arrest in vitro translation of a heterologous membrane protein although it does bind to its N-terminal signal TM sequence [133]. This simplification of the function of the SRP has been explained by the smaller size of the E. coli cell which implies that the ribosome is never far from the membrane and may even be connected with the membrane in existing ``transertome'' complexes [134]. Possibly, nascent prokaryotic IMPs are also more extensively chaperoned (f.i. by TF, see below) to avoid adverse effects of accumulation in the cytosol so a precise tuning of translation and translocation is less pertinent. On the other hand, indirect evidence has been presented recently that suggests the existence of SRP-mediated translation arrest in E. coli [135]. Rigorous testing of the effect of E. coli SRP on the translation rates of homologous cytosolic, secreted and membrane proteins will be required to settle this point.

12. Role of the ribosome and trigger factor in protein targeting TF is a mysterious cytosolic protein present in all eubacteria that plays an ill-defined role in both protein folding and protein targeting. Every few years, it makes a remarkable comeback in scientific interest. TF has been discovered by its ability to maintain pro-OmpA, a SecBdependent OMP, in a loosely folded conformation that permits posttranslational translocation in an in vitro translocation assay [137]. TF formed 1:1 complexes with OmpA upon dilution from denaturant. It was shown to be an abundant cytosolic protein of which a part is firmly associated with the large subunit of the ribosome, probably in a 1:1 ratio [137,138]. Surprisingly, at the time, depletion of TF using a conditional mutant failed to reveal any defect in protein translocation and did not affect cell growth, indicating TF is not essential [139]. Rather, a slight increase in the kinetics of OmpA processing was observed. Later, TF was found to cross-link to a variety of nascent chains, derived from proteins of different origin [77,89,93,140]. In vitro refolding assays demonstrated that TF has PPIase activity, suggesting it functions as a folding catalyst [141]. It is still unclear whether this function is relevant in vivo and whether it is executed at nascent chains. Strikingly, interaction with

28

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35

peptides does not depend on the presence of proline residues, suggesting an additional function for TF perhaps as a chaperone for nascent polypeptides [142]. Consistently, genetic studies point to a functional overlap between TF and DnaK, the major E. coli Hsp70 homologue that also associates with nascent chains [143,144]. Double TFÀ/ DnaKÀ mutants contain aggregates of nascent chains and are not viable under most conditions in contrast to the single mutants. Pepscan analysis indicated a similar substrate specificity of TF and DnaK for short hydrophobic motifs which might explain their functional redundancy in chaperoning nascent chains [142,145]. In addition to a role in protein folding, recent evidence from different experimental angles suggests a function for TF in protein targeting. Cross-link studies from the Mueller laboratory suggest a clear distinction between nascent chains of secretory proteins that primarily cross-link TF and SecA/B versus nascent IMPs that exclusively cross-link to SRP [93]. Based on this observation, TF has been assigned a decisive role in the selection of the targeting pathway. TF is proposed to bind to the early mature region of nascent secretory proteins, thus weakening the interaction of the signal peptide with the SRP. This latter interaction was recently shown to take place but only very early during biogenesis of the secretory protein when only the signal peptide itself is exposed outside the ribosome [146]. This mechanism would prevent cotranslational targeting and allow binding of SecB to longer nascent chains and completed polypeptides upon prolonged translation. However, other cross-link studies point to a more general affinity of TF for nascent chains [77,147] primarily determined by its location near the nascent chain exit site on the ribosome (see: Selection of proteins for SRP-mediated targeting). SRP would replace TF or bind adjacent to TF on nascent IMPs merely by its high affinity for particularly hydrophobic sequences (see above) and direct the nascent chain to the inner membrane before it has the chance to fold or interact with SecB. This latter model is supported by experiments of the Bernstein and Sihavy groups that suggest rerouting of secreted proteins via the SRP pathway when their signal peptide is made more hydrophobic but without changing anything in the mature domains that interact with TF [76,98]. Recently, analysis of the interplay between SRP and TF got new impetus by analysis of the binding sites for SRP and TF at the large ribosomal subunit. First, TF was crosslinked upon incubation with purified ribosomes. Both L23 and L29, which are located adjacent to the presumed nascent chain exit site on the large subunit of the E. coli ribosome, were identified as cross-linking partners by mass spectrometry [148]. In addition, TF could be co-purified with a tagged L23 version. The binding sites in TF and L23 could be accurately mapped by site-specific cross-linking to a conserved region in the N-terminal domain of TF and a surface exposed domain of L23, respectively. Second, two independent cross-link studies revealed interactions between

L23 and Ffh on vacant and translating ribosomes [42,43]. The role of L23 as a docking site for Ffh appears to be conserved as it has been shown earlier by Pool et al. [41] that the mammalian SRP54 interacts with L23a and L35, homologues of E. coli L23 and L29, respectively. When SRP54 contacts the SRP receptor, it moves away from L23a [41]. Although it has been speculated that the E. coli SRP receptor FtsY plays a similar role in the repositioning of Ffh on the ribosome during or after targeting, no such effect of FtsY has been detected yet [43]. The binding site in E. coli Ffh was mapped in the N-terminal domain of Ffh [43]. The cognate binding site in L23 has not been mapped but may overlap with the TF binding site in view of the observed competition between SRP and TF for binding with L23 on purified ribosomes [42]. Moreover, this site must be close to the emerging nascent chain as it is efficiently cross-linked to short nascent polypeptides [77,147]. Proper binding studies will be needed to determine the affinity and kinetics of binding of SRP and TF to L23 and how these parameters change in response to nascent chains of different origin (cytosolic, secreted and membrane proteins). The present data suggest a model in which SRP and TF alternate for binding to L23 to be rightly positioned for sampling nascent chains (Ref. [43], Fig. 4). Emergence of a sufficiently hydrophobic targeting sequence in the nascent chain will stabilize the binding of SRP at the expense of TF and initiate cotranslational targeting [42]. In the absence of particularly hydrophobic sequences, TF will remain dominantly adjacent to the nascent chain and may bind and remain bound to regions enriched in aromatic and basic amino acids that have been identified as preferential binding sites for TF [142]. Hence, longer nascent chains may be occupied with several TF molecules that prevent inadvertent

Fig. 4. Schematic representation of interactions at the nascent chain exit site. Both SRP and TF dock near L23 and L29 at the exit site. SRP recognizes particularly hydrophobic targeting sequences (in dark blue) whereas TF interacts with less hydrophobic targeting sequences (in light blue) by default. The model is further discussed in the text.

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35

29

intra- and intermolecular interactions. SecB and SecA may gain access to these nascent chains at regions which are not covered by TF in the nascent chain or upon release of the completed protein from the ribosome which causes the dissociation of most or all TF from the polypeptide. The situation may be even more complex. There is evidence that the nature of passing sequences is already sensed in the exit tunnel [149,150]. For instance, a TM sequence in a nascent membrane protein that is located in the ribosome only four residues from the peptidyltransferase center was shown to induce changes in the Sec-translocon [150]. Apparently, this structural information is sensed in the exit tunnel and transduced via conformational changes to the interacting translocon. In the same line of reasoning, it

seems conceivable that a TM in the exit tunnel causes conformational changes that are transduced to L23 and reduce its affinity for TF and/or increase its affinity for SRP. This may help to increase the local concentration of SRP which is not very abundant in E. coli cells. Also, SRP must bind to its substrate in a very narrow time window given the rapid translation kinetics. In this respect, it is of interest to note that the eukaryotic SRP has a higher affinity for active, translating ribosomes than for those that are inactive, even before the nascent chain emerges on the ribosomal surface [151]. As indicated above, the SecYEG complex might play an important role in the reception and fixation of the ribosome during cotranslational membrane insertion. It is

Fig. 5. The SRP and SecB targeting pathways in E. coli: SRP binds to a particularly hydrophobic targeting sequence in nascent proteins at L23 near the nascent chain exit site on the large subunit of the ribosome. TF, a cytosolic chaperone that also docks at L23, has a more general affinity for nascent proteins and may influence the interactions of the SRP. FtsY binds to the ribosome ­ SRP complex and supports targeting to the inner membrane through its affinity for lipids and, possibly, a proteinaceous membrane factor. The nascent protein is transferred to the Sec-translocon in a GTP-dependent reaction. SecB binds to the mature region of secretory proteins with a mildly hydrophobic signal peptide and guides this cargo to the Sec-translocon that is identical or similar to the translocon reached via the SRP-pathway. The model is not drawn to scale.

30

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35

not known how the ribosome connects to SecYEG at the molecular level. In vitro binding studies suggested an important role for the 23S rRNA in translocon binding [125]. On the other hand, structural data from yeast suggest four connections between the ribosome and the translocon, all of which involve ribosomal proteins [152]. Together, the connections seem to form a conduit to guide nascent secretory proteins from the exit tunnel directly into the pore of the translocon. The major connection is formed by homologues of L23 and L29. Given the conserved nature of the ribosomal proteins around the nascent chain exit site and of the Sec-translocon [152], it seems plausible that the situation is not very different in E. coli. This may imply that SRP and TF must be evacuated from L23 prior to the formation of a ribosome-translocon junction. Release of SRP from the ribosome ­ nascent IMP complex involves FtsY in a conserved GTP-dependent mechanism (see above). TF that is bound to L23 may ensure faithful targeting to the Sec-translocon by preventing membrane binding of those ribosomes that do not carry a nascent IMP. Thus, TF may play a regulatory role as a ribosome-binding prevention factor. A similar role has initially been assigned to the NAC complex in eukaryotes [153,154] although this notion is a matter of debate [155]. Like TF, NAC is a ribosome-bound factor that associates promiscuously with nascent chains at an early stage in translation even though it does not resemble TF in (primary) structure [156]. Although there is no experimental data to directly support such a role of TF, the effects of alteration of cellular levels of TF are significant in this respect. Deletion of TF was shown to accelerate protein secretion and to suppress the need for SecB in protein targeting of OmpA [157]. Notably, this effect did not result from rerouting of OmpA into the SRP-route. It seems conceivable that TF-free ribosomes that contain nascent OmpA are targeted directly to the Sec-translocon and do not require SecB to remain translocation-competent. Thinking along these lines, one might expect that nascent cytosolic proteins follow the same route in the absence of TF and obstruct the Sec-translocon which is likely to be detrimental. Possibly, nascent chains that do not possess a signal peptide are quickly rejected by the Sec-translocon. Such a proofreading activity has been demonstrated convincingly for the eukaryotic Sec-translocon [158,159]. Vice versa, overproduction of TF retards protein secretion which has been explained by more extensive binding of TF to nascent and even completed secretory proteins which would frustrate access to the SecB targeting pathway [157]. Elevated cellular levels of TF may also shift the equilibrium of TF/SRP binding at L23. It will be of interest to evaluate the effects of TF overproduction on IMP targeting. A schematic model for the main targeting pathways in E. coli that includes some of the considerations presented above is given in Fig. 5.

13. Outlook The dynamic changes of SRP upon interaction with a number of external partners as described here on the basis of biochemical and some structural data need to be established at a molecular level. Despite the increasing structural database of SRP and SR (FtsY), still quite a number of high-resolution X-ray structures are required to understand, e.g. the assembly and regulation of SRP. For the interaction with binding partners (e.g. the ribosome or the translocon), electron microscopy offers the possibility to gain insight in the organization of and the changes in these large complexes. Proteomic approaches and in vitro reconstitution studies will allow a rigorous assessment of the substrates that use the SRP pathway in prokaryotes and of the regulatory factors involved. A detailed analysis of the molecular events at the nascent chain exit site on the ribosome when nascent chains of different nature and future destination are synthesized will help to elucidate the issue of targeting pathway selection.

Acknowledgements We thank Klemens Wild, Edith Houben and Ronald Ullers for preparing the figures. We also acknowledge support by the EU-network grant QLK-C-T2000-00082 and by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft grant SFB 352.

References
[1] H. Lutcke, Signal recognition particle (SRP), a ubiquitous initiator of ¨ protein translocation, Eur. J. Biochem. 228 (1995) 531 ­ 550. [2] R.J. Keenan, D.M. Freymann, R.M. Stroud, P. Walter, The signal recognition particle, Ann. Rev. Biochem. 70 (2001) 755 ­ 775. [3] K. Romisch, J. Webb, J. Herz, S. Prehn, R. Frank, M. Vingron, B. ¨ Dobberstein, Homology of 54K protein of signal-recognition particle, docking protein and two E. coli proteins with putative GTPbinding domains, Nature 340 (1989) 478 ­ 482. [4] H.D. Bernstein, M.A. Poritz, K. Strub, P.J. Hoben, S. Brenner, P. Walter, Model for signal sequence recognition from amino-acid sequence of 54K subunit of signal recognition particle, Nature 340 (1989) 482 ­ 486. [5] J. Luirink, C.M. Ten Hagen-Jongman, C.C. Van der Weijden, B. Oudega, S. High, B. Dobberstein, R. Kusters, An alternative protein targeting pathway in Escherichia coli: studies on the role of FtsY, EMBO J. 13 (1994) 2289 ­ 2296. [6] E. de Leeuw, D. Poland, O. Mol, I. Sinning, C.M. ten Hagen-Jongman, B. Oudega, J. Luirink, Membrane association of FtsY, the E. coli SRP receptor, FEBS Lett. 416 (1997) 225 ­ 229. [7] E. deLeeuw, K.T. Kaat, C. Moser, G. Menestrina, R. Demel, B. de Kruijff, B. Oudega, J. Luirink, I. Sinning, Anionic phospholipids are involved in membrane association of FtsY and stimulate its GTPase activity, EMBO J. 19 (2000) 531 ­ 541. [8] J. Eichler, R. Moll, The signal recognition particle of Archaea, Trends Microbiol. 9 (2001) 130 ­ 136. [9] S.H. Bhuiyan, K. Gowda, H. Hotokezaka, C. Zwieb, Assembly of

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35 archaeal signal recognition particle from recombinant components, Nucleic Acids Res. 28 (2000) 1365 ­ 1373. I. Tozik, Q. Huang, C. Zwieb, J. Eichler, Reconstitution of the signal recognition particle of the halophilic archaeon Haloferax volcanii, Nucleic Acids Res. 30 (2002) 4166 ­ 4175. T. Hainzl, S. Huang, A.E. Sauer-Eriksson, Structure of the SRP19 RNA complex and implications for signal recognition particle assembly, Nature 417 (2002) 767 ­ 771. A. Kuglstatter, C. Oubridge, K. Nagai, Induced structural changes of 7SL RNA during the assembly of human signal recognition particle, Nat. Struct. Biol. 9 (2002) 740 ­ 744. C. Oubridge, A. Kuglstatter, L. Jovine, K. Nagai, Crystal structure of SRP19 in complex with the S domain of SRP RNA and its implication for the assembly of the signal recognition particle, Mol. Cell 9 (2002) 1251 ­ 1261. K. Nagai, C. Oubridge, A. Kuglstatter, E. Menichelli, C. Isel, L. Jovine, Structure, function and evolution of the signal recognition particle, EMBO J. 22 (2003) 3479 ­ 3485. A.E. Sauer-Eriksson, T. Hainzl, S-domain assembly of the signal recognition particle, Curr. Opin. Struck. Biol. 13 (2003) 64 ­ 70. E.D. Gundelfinger, E. Krause, M. Melli, B. Dobberstein, The organization of the 7SL RNA in the signal recognition particle, Nucleic Acids Res. 11 (1983) 7363 ­ 7374. P. Walter, G. Blobel, Translocation of proteins across the endoplasmic reticulum: III. Signal recognition protein (SRP) causes signal sequence-dependent and site-specific arrest of chain elongation that is released by microsomal membranes, J. Cell Biol. 91 (1981) 557 ­ 561. N. Mason, L.F. Ciufo, J.D. Brown, Elongation arrest is a physiologically important function of signal recognition particle, EMBO J. 19 (2000) 4164 ­ 4174. Y. Thomas, N. Bui, K. Strub, A truncation in the 14 kDa protein of the signal recognition particle leads to tertiary structure changes in the RNA and abolishes the elongation arrest activity of the particle, Nucleic Acids Res. 25 (1997) 1920 ­ 1929. O. Weichenrieder, K. Wild, K. Strub, S. Cusack, Structure and assembly of the Alu domain of the mammalian signal recognition particle, Nature 408 (2000) 167 ­ 173. J.C. Politz, S. Yarovoi, S.M. Kilroy, K. Gowda, C. Zwieb, T. Pederson, Signal recognition particle components in the nucleolus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97 (2000) 55 ­ 60. H. Grosshans, K. Deinert, E. Hurt, G. Simos, Biogenesis of the signal recognition particle (SRP) involves import of SRP proteins into the nucleolus, assembly with the SRP-RNA, and Xpo1p-mediated export, J. Cell Biol. 153 (2001) 745 ­ 762. P. Walter, G. Blobel, Disassembly and reconstitution of signal recognition particle, Cell 34 (1983) 525 ­ 533. D.I. Meyer, B. Dobberstein, A membrane component essential for vectorial translocation of nascent proteins across the endoplasmic reticulum: requirements for its extraction and reassociation with the membrane, J. Cell Biol. 87 (1980) 498 ­ 502. R. Gilmore, G. Blobel, P. Walter, Protein translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum: II. Isolation and characterization of the signal recognition particle receptor, J. Cell Biol. 95 (1982) 470 ­ 477. S. Tajima, L. Lauffer, V.L. Rath, P. Walter, The signal recognition particle receptor is a complex that contains two distinct polypeptide chains, J. Cell Biol. 103 (1986) 1167 ­ 1178. J.D. Miller, S. Tajima, L. Lauffer, P. Walter, The beta subunit of the signal recognition particle receptor is a transmembrane GTPase that anchors the alpha subunit, a peripheral membrane GTPase, to the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, J. Cell Biol. 128 (1995) 273 ­ 282. S.C. Ogg, W.P. Barz, P. Walter, A functional GTPase domain, but not its transmembrane domain, is required for function of the SRP receptor beta-subunit, J. Cell Biol. 142 (1998) 341 ­ 354. T. Schwartz, G. Blobel, Structural basis for the function of the beta subunit of the eukaryotic signal recognition particle receptor, Cell 112 (2003) 793 ­ 803.

31

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15] [16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23] [24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30] J. Helmers, D. Schmidt, J.S. Glavy, G. Blobel, T. Schwartz, The beta-subunit of the protein-conducting channel of the endoplasmic reticulum functions as the guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the beta-subunit of the signal recognition particle receptor, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 23686 ­ 23690. [31] T.A. Fulga, I. Sinning, B. Dobberstein, M.R. Pool, SR beta coordinates signal sequence release from SRP with ribosome binding to the translocon, EMBO J. 9 (2001) 2338 ­ 2347. [32] K.R. Legate, D. Falcone, D.W. Andrews, Nucleotide-dependent binding of the GTPase domain of the signal recognition particle receptor beta-subunit to the alpha-subunit, J. Biol. Chem. 275 (2000) 27439 ­ 27446. [33] K. Nakamura, S. Yahagi, T. Yamazaki, K. Yamane, Bacillus subtilis histone-like protein, HBsu, is an integral component of a SRP-like particle that can bind the Alu domain of small cytoplasmic RNA, J. Biol. Chem. 274 (1999) 13569 ­ 13576. [34] R.E. Dalbey, C. Robinson, Protein translocation into and across the bacterial plasma membrane and the plant thylakoid membrane, Trends Biochem. Sci. 24 (1999) 17 ­ 22. [35] L.A. Eichacker, R. Henry, Function of a chloroplast SRP in thylakoid protein export, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1541 (2001) 120 ­ 134. [36] R. Nilsson, J. Brunner, N.E. Hoffman, K.J. van Wijk, Interactions of ribosome nascent chain complexes of the chloroplast-encoded D1 thylakoid membrane protein with cpSRP54, EMBO J. 18 (1999) 733 ­ 742. [37] C.J. Tu, E.C. Peterson, R. Henry, N.E. Hoffman, The L18 domain of light-harvesting chlorophyll proteins binds to chloroplast signal recognition particle 43, J. Biol. Chem. 275 (2000) 13187 ­ 13190. [38] M.R. Groves, A. Mant, A. Kuhn, J. Koch, S. Dubel, C. Robinson, I. Sinning, Functional characterization of recombinant chloroplast signal recognition particle, J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 27778 ­ 27786. [39] H. Lutcke, S. High, K. Romisch, A.J. Ashford, B. Dobberstein, The ¨ ¨ methionine-rich domain of the 54 kDa subunit of signal recognition particle is sufficient for the interaction with signal sequences, EMBO J. 11 (1992) 1543 ­ 1551. [40] D.W. Andrews, P. Walter, F.P. Ottensmeyer, Structure of the signal recognition particle by electron microscopy, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 82 (1985) 785 ­ 789. [41] M.R. Pool, J. Stumm, T.A. Fulga, I. Sinning, B. Dobberstein, Distinct modes of signal recognition particle interaction with the ribosome, Science 297 (2002) 1345 ­ 1348. [42] R.S. Ullers, E.N. Houben, A. Raine, C.M. Ten Hagen-Jongman, M. Ehrenberg, J. Brunner, B. Oudega, N. Harms, J. Luirink, Interplay of signal recognition particle and trigger factor at L23 near the nascent chain exit site on the Escherichia coli ribosome, J. Cell Biol. 161 (2003) 679 ­ 684. [43] S.Q. Gu, F. Peske, H.J. Wieden, M.V. Rodnina, W. Wintermeyer, The signal recognition particle binds to protein L23 at the peptide exit of the Escherichia coli ribosome, RNA 9 (2003) 566 ­ 573. [44] L. Terzi, M.R. Pool, B. Dobberstein, K. Strub, Signal recognition particle Alu domain occupies a defined site at the ribosomal subunit interface upon signal sequence recognition, Biochemistry 43 (2004) 107 ­ 117. [45] M. Halic, T. Becker, M.R. Pool, C.M. Spahn, R.A. Grassucci, J. Frank, R. Beckmann, Structure of the signal recognition particle interacting with the elongation-arrested ribosome, Nature 427 (2004) 808 ­ 814. [46] P.F Egea, S.O. Shan, J. Napetschnig, D.F. Savage, P. Walter, R.M. Stroud, Substrate twinning activates the signal recognition particle and its receptor, Nature 427 (2004) 215 ­ 221. [47] P.J. Focia, I.V. Shepotinovskaya, J.A. Seidler, D.M. Freymann, Heterodimeric GTPase core of the SRP targeting complex, Science 303 (2004) 373 ­ 377. [48] E.C. Mandon, R. Gilmore, GTPase twins in the SRP family, Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 11 (2004) 115 ­ 116. [49] R.J. Keenan, D.M. Freymann, P. Walter, R.M. Stroud, Crystal struc-

32

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35 ture of the signal sequence binding subunit of the signal recognition particle, Cell 94 (1998) 181 ­ 191. K.R. Rosendal, K. Wild, G. Montoya, I. Sinning, Crystal structure of the complete core of archaeal signal recognition particle and implications for interdomain communication, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100 (2003) 14701 ­ 14706. J.L. Diener, C. Wilson, Role of SRP19 in assembly of the Archaeoglobus fulgidus signal recognition particle, Biochemistry 39 (2000) 12862 ­ 12874. T. Samuelsson, M. Olsson, GTPase activity of a bacterial SRP-Like complex, Nucleic Acids Res. 21 (1993) 847 ­ 853. G. Lentzen, H. Moine, B. Ehresmann, W. Wintermeyer, Structure of 4.5S RNA in the signal recognition particle of Escherichia coli as studied by enzymatic and chemical probing, RNA 2 (1996) 244 ­ 253. H.R. Bourne, D.A. Sanders, F. McCormick, The GTPase superfamily: a conserved switch for diverse cell functions, Nature 348 (1990) 125 ­ 132. S.R. Sprang, G proteins, effectors and GAPs: structure and mechanism, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 7 (1997) 849 ­ 856. C. Moser, O. Mol, R.S. Goody, I. Sinning, The signal recognition particle receptor of Escherichia coli (FtsY) has a nucleotide exchange factor built into the GTPase domain, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94 (1997) 11339 ­ 11344. J.R. Jagath, M.V. Rodnina, G. Lentzen, W. Wintermeyer, Interaction of guanine nucleotides with the signal recognition particle from Escherichia coli, Biochemistry 37 (1998) 15408 ­ 15413. G. Montoya, C. Svensson, J. Luirink, I. Sinning, Crystal structure of the NG domain from the signal-recognition particle receptor FtsY, Nature 385 (1997) 365 ­ 368. D.M. Freymann, R.J. Keenan, R.M. Stroud, P. Walter, Structure of the conserved GTPase domain of the signal recognition particle, Nature 385 (1997) 361 ­ 364. G. Montoya, K. Kaat, R. Moll, G. Schafer, I. Sinning, The crystal structure of the conserved GTPase of SRP54 from the archaeon Acidianus ambivalens and its comparison with related structures suggests a model for the SRP ­ SRP receptor complex, Struct. Fold. Des. 8 (2000) 515 ­ 525. D.M. Freymann, R.J. Keenan, R.M. Stroud, P. Walter, Functional changes in the structure of the SRP GTPase on binding GDP and Mg2 + GDP, Nat. Struct. Biol. 6 (1999) 793 ­ 801. U.D. Ramirez, G. Minasov, P.J. Focia, R.M. Stroud, P. Walter, P. Kuhn, D.M. Freymann, Structural basis for mobility in the 1.1 A crystal structure of the NG domain of Thermus aquaticus Ffh, J. Mol. Biol. 320 (2002) 783 ­ 799. T. Connolly, P.J. Rapiejko, R. Gilmore, Requirement of GTP hydrolysis for dissociation of the signal recognition particle from its receptor, Science 252 (1991) 1171 ­ 1173. G. Bacher, H. Lutcke, B. Jungnickel, T.A. Rapoport, B. Dobberstein, ¨ Regulation by the ribosome of the GTPase of the signal-recognition particle during protein targeting, Nature 381 (1996) 248 ­ 251. W. Song, D. Raden, E.C. Mandon, R. Gilmore, Role of Sec61alpha in the regulated transfer of the ribosome-nascent chain complex from the signal recognition particle to the translocation channel, Cell 100 (2000) 333 ­ 343. S.O. Shan, P. Walter, Induced nucleotide specificity in a GTPase, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100 (2003) 4480 ­ 4485. P. Peluso, D. Herschlag, S. Nock, D.M. Freymann, A.E. Johnson, P. Walter, Role of 4.5S RNA in assembly of the bacterial signal recognition particle with its receptor, Science 288 (2000) 1640 ­ 1643. P. Peluso, S.O. Shan, S. Nock, D. Herschlag, P. Walter, Role of SRP RNA in the GTPase cycles of Ffh and FtsY, Biochemistry 40 (2001) 15224 ­ 15233. I.V. Shepotinovskaya, P.J. Focia, D.M. Freymann, Crystallization of the GMPPCP complex of the NG domains of Thermus aquaticus Ffh and FtsY, Acta Crystallogr., D Biol. Crystallogr. 59 (2003) 1834 ­ 1837. [70] J.D. Miller, H.D. Bernstein, P. Walter, Interaction of E. coli Ffh/4.5S ribonucleoprotein and FtsY mimics that of mammalian signal recognition particle and its receptor, Nature 367 (1994) 657 ­ 659. [71] T. Powers, P. Walter, Reciprocal stimulation of GTP hydrolysis by two directly interacting GTPases, Science 269 (1995) 1422 ­ 1424. [72] M.R. Ahmadian, P. Stege, K. Scheffzek, A. Wittinghofer, Confirmation of the arginine-finger hypothesis for the GAP-stimulated GTPhydrolysis reaction of Ras, Nat. Struct. Biol. 4 (1997) 686 ­ 689. [73] Y. Lu, H.Y. Qi, J.B. Hyndman, N.D. Ulbrandt, A. Teplyakov, N. Tomasevic, H.D. Bernstein, Evidence for a novel GTPase priming step in the SRP protein targeting pathway, EMBO J. 20 (2001) 6724 ­ 6734. [74] J.A. Newitt, H.D. Bernstein, The N-domain of the signal recognition particle 54-kDa subunit promotes efficient signal sequence binding, Eur. J. Biochem. 245 (1997) 720 ­ 729. [75] G. von Heijne, Signal sequences. The limits of variation, J. Mol. Biol. 184 (1985) 99 ­ 105. [76] H.C. Lee, H.D. Bernstein, The targeting pathway of Escherichia coli presecretory and integral membrane proteins is specified by the hydrophobicity of the targeting signal, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 98 (2001) 3471 ­ 3476. [77] Q.A. Valent, J.-W.L. de Gier, G. van Heijne, D.A. Kendall, C.M. ten Hagen-Jongman, B. Oudega, J. Luirink, Nascent membrane and presecretory proteins synthesised in Escherichia coli associate with signal recognition particle and trigger factor, Mol. Microbiol. 25 (1997) 53 ­ 64. [78] J.H. Peterson, C.A. Woolhead, H.D. Bernstein, Basic amino acids in a distinct set of signal peptides promote interaction with the signal recognition particle, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 46155 ­ 46162. [79] K. Romisch, V. Ribes, S. High, H. Lutcke, D. Tollervey, B. Dobber¨ ¨ stein, Structure and function of signal recognition particle (SRP), Mol. Biol. Rep. 14 (1990) 71 ­ 72. [80] D. Zopf, H.D. Bernstein, A.E. Johnson, P. Walter, The methioninerich domain of the 54 kd protein subunit of the signal recognition particle contains an RNA binding site and can be cross-linked to a signal sequence, EMBO J. 9 (1990) 4511 ­ 4517. [81] R.T. Batey, R.P. Rambo, L. Lucast, B. Rha, J.A. Doudna, Crystal structure of the ribonucleoprotein core of the signal recognition particle, Science 287 (2000) 1232 ­ 1239. [82] W.M. Clemons Jr., K. Gowda, S.D. Black, C. Zwieb, V. Ramakrishnan, Crystal structure of the conserved subdomain of human protein SRP54M at 2.1 A resolution: evidence for the mechanism of signal peptide binding, J. Mol. Biol. 292 (1999) 697 ­ 705. [83] W.J. Chirico, M.G. Waters, G. Blobel, 70 K heat shock related proteins stimulate protein translocation into microsomes, Nature 332 (1988) 805 ­ 810. [84] R.J. Deshaies, B.D. Koch, M. Werner-Washburne, E.A. Craig, R. Schekman, A subfamily of stress proteins facilitates translocation of secretory and mitochondrial precursor polypeptides, Nature 332 (1988) 800 ­ 805. [85] G.J. Phillips, T.J. Silhavy, The E. coli ffh gene is necessary for viability and efficient protein export, Nature 359 (1992) 744 ­ 746. [86] M.A. Poritz, H.D. Bernstein, K. Strub, D. Zopf, H. Wilhelm, P. Walter, An E. coli ribonucleoprotein containing 4.5S RNA resembles mammalian signal recognition particle, Science 250 (1990) 1111 ­ 1117. [87] V. Ribes, K. Romisch, A. Giner, B. Dobberstein, D. Tollervey, E. ¨ coli 4.5S RNA is part of a ribonucleoprotein particle that has properties related to signal recognition particle, Cell 63 (1990) 591 ­ 600. [88] J. Luirink, S. High, H. Wood, A. Giner, D. Tollervey, B. Dobberstein, Signal sequence recognition by an Escherichia coli ribonucleoprotein complex, Nature 359 (1992) 741 ­ 743. [89] Q.A. Valent, D.A. Kendall, S. High, R. Kusters, B. Oudega, J. Luirink, Early events in preprotein recognition in E. coli: interactions of SRP and trigger factor with nascent polypeptides, EMBO J. 14 (1995) 5494 ­ 5505.

[50]

[51]

[52] [53]

[54]

[55] [56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66] [67]

[68]

[69]

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35 [90] J.W.L. de Gier, P. Mansournia, Q.A. Valent, G.J. Phillips, J. Luirink, G. von Heijne, Assembly of a cytoplasmic membrane protein in Escherichia coli is dependent on the signal recognition particle, FEBS Lett. 399 (1996) 307 ­ 309. [91] J. Mac Farlane, M. Muller, Functional integration of a polytopic ¨ membrane protein of E. coli requires the bacterial signal recognition particle, Eur. J. Biochem. 223 (1995) 766 ­ 771. [92] A. Seluanov, E. Bibi, FtsY, the prokaryotic signal recognition particle receptor homologue, is essential for biogenesis of membrane proteins, J. Biol. Chem. 272 (1997) 2053 ­ 2055. [93] K. Beck, L.F. Wu, J. Brunner, M. Muller, Discrimination between ¨ SRP- and SecA/SecB-dependent substrates involves selective recognition of nascent chains by SRP and trigger factor, EMBO J. 19 (2000) 134 ­ 143. [94] H.-G. Koch, T. Hengelage, C. Neumann-Haefelin, J. MacFarlane, H.K. Hoffschulte, K.-L. Schimz, B. Mechler, M. Muller, In vitro ¨ studies with purified components reveal signal recognition particle (SRP) and SecA/B as constituents of two independent protein-targeting pathways of Escherichia coli, Mol. Biol. Cell 10 (1999) 2163 ­ 2173. [95] N.D. Ulbrandt, J.A. Newitt, H.D. Bernstein, The E. coli signal recognition particle is required for the insertion of a subset of inner membrane proteins, Cell 88 (1997) 187 ­ 196. [96] H.P. Tian, D. Boyd, J. Beckwith, A mutant hunt for defects in membrane protein assembly yields mutations affecting the bacterial signal recognition particle and Sec machinery, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97 (2000) 4730 ­ 4735. [97] H.P. Tian, J. Beckwith, Genetic screen yields mutations in genes encoding all known components of the Escherichia coli signal recognition particle pathway, J. Bacteriol. 148 (2002) 111 ­ 118. [98] C.W. Bowers, F. Lau, T.J. Silhavy, Secretion of LamB ­ LacZ by the signal recognition particle pathway of Escherichia coli, J. Bacteriol. 185 (2003) 5697 ­ 5705. [99] H. Adams, P.A. Scotti, H. De Cock, J. Luirink, J. Tommassen, The presence of a helix breaker in the hydrophobic core of signal sequences of secretory proteins prevents recognition by the signal-recognition particle in Escherichia coli, Eur. J. Biochem. 269 (2002) 5564 ­ 5571. [100] C.F. Schierle, M. Berkmen, D. Huber, C. Kumamoto, D. Boyd, J. Beckwith, The DsbA signal sequence directs efficient, cotranslational export of passenger proteins to the Escherichia coli periplasm via the signal recognition particle pathway, J. Bacteriol. 185 (2003) 5706 ­ 5713. [101] R. Sijbrandi, M.L. Urbanus, C.M. ten Hagen-Jongman, H.D. Bernstein, B. Oudega, B.R. Otto, J. Luirink, Signal recognition particle (SRP)-mediated targeting and Sec-dependent translocation of an extracellular Escherichia coli protein, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 4654 ­ 4659. [102] D. Beha, S. Deitermann, M. Muller, H.G. Koch, Export of beta¨ lactamase is independent of the signal recognition particle, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 22161 ­ 22167. [103] Y. Shimizu, A. Inoue, Y. Tomari, T. Suzuki, T. Yokogawa, K. Ueda, T. Ueda, Cell-free translation reconstituted with purified components, Nat. Biotechnol. 19 (2001) 751 ­ 755. [104] A.J.M. Driessen, W. Wickner, Solubilization and functional reconstitution of the protein-translocating enzymes of Escherichia coli, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 87 (1990) 3107 ­ 3111. [105] J. Akimura, S.-I. Matsuyama, H. Tokuda, S. Mizushima, Reconstitution of a protein translocation system containing purified SecY, SecE and SecA from Escherichia coli, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 88 (1991) 6545 ­ 6549. [106] J.A. Newitt, N.D. Ulbrandt, H.D. Bernstein, The structure of multiple polypeptide domains determines the signal recognition particle targeting requirement of Escherichia coli inner membrane proteins, J. Bacteriol. 181 (1999) 4561 ­ 4567. [107] R. Kusters, G. Lentzen, E. Eppens, A. van Geel, C.C. van der Weijden, W. Wintermeyer, J. Luirink, The functioning of the SRP

33

[108]

[109]

[110]

[111]

[112]

[113]

[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118] [119]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]

[125]

receptor FtsY in protein-targeting in E. coli is correlated with its ability to bind and hydrolyse GTP, FEBS Lett. 372 (1995) 253 ­ 258. Q.A. Valent, P.A. Scotti, S. High, J.-W.L. de Gier, G. von Heijne, G. Lentzen, W. Wintermeyer, B. Oudega, J. Luirink, The E. coli SRP and SecB targeting pathways converge at the translocon, EMBO J. 17 (1998) 2504 ­ 2512. J.S. Millman, D.W. Andrews, A site-specific, membrane-dependent cleavage event defines the membrane binding domain of FtsY, J. Biol. Chem. 274 (1999) 33227 ­ 33234. J.S. Millman, H.Y. Qi, F. Vulcu, H.D. Bernstein, D.W. Andrews, FtsY binds to the Escherichia coli inner membrane via interactions with phosphatidylethanolamine and membrane proteins, J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 25982 ­ 25989. E. Bibi, A.A. Herskovits, E.S. Bochkareva, A. Zelazny, Putative integral membrane SRP receptors, Trends Biochem. Sci. 26 (2001) 15 ­ 16. A. Zelazny, A. Seluanov, A. Cooper, E. Bibi, The NG domain of the prokaryotic signal recognition particle receptor, FtsY, is fully functional when fused to an unrelated integral membrane polypeptide, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94 (1997) 6025 ­ 6029. A.A. Herskovits, E.S. Bochkareva, E. Bibi, New prospects in studying the bacterial signal recognition particle pathway, Mol. Microbiol. 38 (2000) 927 ­ 939. A.A. Herskovits, E. Bibi, Association of Escherichia coli ribosomes with the inner membrane requires the signal recognition particle receptor but is independent of the signal recognition particle, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97 (2000) 4621 ­ 4626. A.A. Herskovits, A. Seluanov, R. Rajsbaum, C.M. ten Hagen-Jongman, T. Henrichs, E.S. Bochkareva, G.J. Phillips, F.J. Probst, T. Ehrmann, M. Ehrmann, J. Luirink, E. Bibi, Evidence for coupling of membrane targeting and function of the signal recognition particle (SRP) receptor FtsY, EMBO Rep. 2 (2001) 1040 ­ 1046. A.A. Herskovits, E. Shimoni, A. Minsky, E. Bibi, Accumulation of endoplasmic membranes and novel membrane-bound ribosome ­ signal recognition particle receptor complexes in Escherichia coli, J. Cell Biol. 159 (2002) 403 ­ 410. R.M. Seiser, C.V. Nicchitta, The fate of membrane-bound ribosomes following the termination of protein synthesis, J. Biol. Chem. 275 (2000) 33820 ­ 33827. A.P. Pugsley, The complete general secretory pathway in gram-negative bacteria, Microbiol. Rev. 57 (1993) 50 ­ 108. K.D. Bernstein, J.B. Hyndman, Physiological basis for conservation of the signal recognition particle targeting pathway in Escherichia coli, J. Bacteriol. 183 (2001) 2187 ­ 2197. C. Neumann-Haefelin, U. Schafer, M. Muller, H.G. Koch, SRP-dependent co-translational targeting and SecA-dependent translocation analyzed as individual steps in the export of a bacterial protein, EMBO J. 19 (2000) 6419 ­ 6426. M.L. Urbanus, P.A. Scotti, L. Froderberg, A. Saaf, J.W.L. de Gier, J. ¨ Brunner, J.C. Samuelson, R.E. Dalbey, B. Oudega, J. Luirink, Secdependent membrane protein insertion: sequential interaction of nascent FtsQ with SecY and YidC, EMBO Rep. 6 (2001) 524 ­ 529. E.N.G. Houben, M.L. Urbanus, M. van der Laan, C.M. ten Hagen-Jongman, A.J.M. Driessen, J. Brunner, B. Oudega, J. Luirink, YidC and SecY mediate membrane insertion of a type I transmembrane domain, J. Biol. Chem. 39 (2002) 35880 ­ 35886. K. Beck, G. Eisner, D. Trescher, R.E. Dalbey, J. Brunner, M. Muller, ¨ YidC, an assembly site for polytopic Escherichia coli membrane proteins located in immediate proximity to the SecYE translocon and lipids, EMBO Rep. 2 (2001) 709 ­ 714. L.L. Randall, Translocation of domains of nascent periplasmic proteins across the cytoplasmic membrane is independent of elongation, Cell 33 (1983) 231 ­ 240. A. Prinz, C. Behrens, T.A. Rapoport, E. Hartmann, K.U. Kalies, Evolutionarily conserved binding of ribosomes to the translocation channel via the large ribosomal RNA, EMBO J. 19 (2000) 1900 ­ 1906.

34

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35 [145] S. Rudiger, L. Germeroth, J. Schneider-Mergener, B. Bukau, Substrate specificity of the DnaK chaperone determined by screening cellulose-bound peptide libraries, EMBO J. 16 (1997) 1501 ­ 1507. [146] G. Eisner, H.G. Koch, K. Beck, J. Brunner, M. Muller, Ligand ¨ crowding at a nascent signal sequence, J. Cell Biol. 163 (2003) 35 ­ 44. [147] M.L. Urbanus, L. Froderberg, D. Drew, P. Bjork, J.W.L. de Gier, J. ¨ Brunner, B. Oudega, J. Luirink, Targeting, insertion, and localization of Escherichia coli YidC, J. Biol. Chem. 277 (2002) 12718 ­ 12723. [148] G. Kramer, T. Rauch, W. Rist, S. Vorderwulbecke, H. Patzelt, A. Schulze-Specking, N. Ban, E. Deuerling, B. Bukau, L23 protein functions as a chaperone docking site on the ribosome, Nature 419 (2002) 171 ­ 174. [149] H. Nakatogawa, K. Ito, The ribosomal exit tunnel functions as a discriminating gate, Cell 108 (2002) 629 ­ 636. [150] S. Liao, J. Lin, H. Do, A.E. Johnson, Both lumenal and cytosolic gating of the aqueous ER translocon pore are regulated from inside the ribosome during membrane protein integration, Cell 90 (1997) 31 ­ 41. [151] J.J. Flanagan, J.C. Chen, Y. Miao, Y. Shao, J. Lin, P.E. Bock, A.E. Johnson, Signal recognition particle binds to ribosome-bound signal sequences with fluorescence-detected subnanomolar affinity that does not diminish as the nascent chain lengthens, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 18628 ­ 18637. [152] R. Beckmann, C.M. Spahn, N. Eswar, J. Helmers, P.A. Penczek, A. Sali, J. Frank, G. Blobel, Architecture of the protein-conducting channel associated with the translating 80S ribosome, Cell 107 (2001) 361 ­ 372. [153] B. Lauring, G. Kreibich, M. Wiedmann, The intrinsic ability of ribosomes to bind to endoplasmic reticulum membranes is regulated by signal recognition particle and nascent-polypeptide-associated complex, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 92 (1995) 9435 ­ 9439. [154] B. Lauring, H. Sakai, G. Kreibich, M. Wiedmann, Nascent polypeptide-associated complex protein prevents mistargeting of nascent chains to the endoplasmic reticulum, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 92 (1995) 5411 ­ 5415. [155] S. Rospert, Y. Dubaquie, M. Gautschi, Nascent-polypeptide-associated complex, Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 59 (2002) 1632 ­ 1639. [156] B. Wiedmann, H. Sakai, T.A. Davis, M. Wiedmann, A protein complex required for signal-sequence-specific sorting and translocation, Nature 370 (1994) 434 ­ 440. [157] H.C. Lee, H.D. Bernstein, Trigger factor retards protein export in Escherichia coli, J. Biol. Chem. 277 (2002) 43527 ­ 43535. [158] B. Jungnickel, T.A. Rapoport, A posttargeting signal sequence recognition event in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, Cell 82 (1995) 261 ­ 270. [159] D. Belin, S. Bost, J.D. Vassalli, K. Strub, A two-step recognition of signal sequences determines the translocation efficiency of proteins, EMBO J. 15 (1996) 468 ­ 478. [160] D.E. Birse, U. Kapp, K. Strub, S. Cusack, A. Aberg, The crystal structure of the signal recognition particle Alu RNA binding heterodimer, SRP9/14, EMBO J. 16 (1997) 3757 ­ 3766. [161] K. Wild, O. Weichenrieder, G.A. Leonard, S. Cusack, The 2 A structure of helix 6 of the human signal recognition particle RNA, Struct. Fold. Des. 7 (1999) 1345 ­ 1352. [162] T. Sakamoto, S. Morita, K. Tabata, K. Nakamura, G. Kawai, Solution structure of a SRP19 binding domain in human SRP RNA, J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 132 (2002) 177 ­ 182. [163] K. Wild, I. Sinning, S. Cusack, Crystal structure of an early protein ­ RNA assembly complex of the signal recognition particle, Science 294 (2001) 598 ­ 601. [164] O.N. Pakhomova, S. Deep, Q. Huang, C. Zwieb, A.P. Hinck, Solution structure of protein SRP19 of Archaeoglobus fulgidus signal recognition particle, J. Mol. Biol. 317 (2002) 145 ­ 158. [165] R.T. Batey, M.B. Sagar, J.A. Doudna, Structural and energetic analysis of RNA recognition by a universally conserved protein from the signal recognition particle, J. Mol. Biol. 307 (2001) 229 ­ 246.

[126] W.P. Smith, P.-C. Tai, B.D. Davis, Nascent peptide as sole attachment of polysomes to membranes in bacteria, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 75 (1978) 814 ­ 817. [127] R. Gilmore, G. Blobel, P. Walter, Protein translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum: I. Detection in the microsomal membrane of a receptor for the signal recognition particle, J. Cell Biol. 95 (1982) 463 ­ 469. [128] D.I. Meyer, E. Krause, B. Dobberstein, Secretory protein translocation across membranes--the role of ``docking protein'', Nature 297 (1982) 647 ­ 650. [129] S. Prehn, M. Wiedmann, T.A. Rapoport, C. Zwieb, Protein translocation across wheat germ microsomal membranes requires an SRPlike component, EMBO J. 6 (1987) 2993 ­ 2999. [130] S.L. Wolin, P. Walter, Signal recognition particle mediates a transient elongation arrest of preprolactin in reticulocyte lysate, J. Cell Biol. 109 (1989) 2617 ­ 2622. [131] V. Siegel, P. Walter, Elongation arrest is not a prerequisite for secretory protein translocation across the microsomal membrane, J. Cell Biol. 100 (1985) 1913 ­ 1921. [132] K. Strub, J. Moss, P. Walter, Binding sites of the 9- and 14-kilodalton heterodimeric protein subunit of the signal recognition particle (SRP) are contained exclusively in the Alu domain of SRP RNA and contain a sequence motif that is conserved in evolution, Mol. Cell. Biol. 11 (1991) 3949 ­ 3959. [133] A. Raine, R. Ullers, M. Pavlov, J. Luirink, J.E. Wikberg, M. Ehrenberg, Targeting and insertion of heterologous membrane proteins in E. coli, Biochimie 85 (2003) 659 ­ 668. [134] C.L. Woldringh, The role of co-transcriptional translation and protein translocation (Transertion) in bacterial chromosome segregation, Mol. Microbiol. 45 (2002) 17 ­ 29. [135] O.N. Avdeeva, A.G. Myasnikov, P.V. Sergiev, A.A. Bogdanov, R. Brimacombe, O.A. Dontsova, Construction of the `minimal' SRP that interacts with the translating ribosome but not with specific membrane receptors in Escherichia coli, FEBS Lett. 514 (2002) 70 ­ 73. [136] L. Froderberg, E. Houben, J.C. Samuelson, M. Chen, S.K. Park, G.J. ¨ Phillips, R. Dalbey, J. Luirink, J.W. de Gier, Versatility of inner membrane protein biogenesis in Escherichia coli, Mol. Microbiol. 47 (2003) 1015 ­ 1027. [137] E. Crooke, B. Guthrie, S. Lecker, R. Lill, W. Wickner, ProOmpA is stabilized for membrane translocation by either purified E. coli trigger factor or canine signal recognition particle, Cell 54 (1988) 1003 ­ 1011. [138] R. Lill, E. Crooke, B. Guthrie, W. Wickner, The ``trigger factor cycle'' includes ribosomes, presecretory proteins, and the plasma membrane, Cell 54 (1988) 1013 ­ 1018. [139] B. Guthrie, W. Wickner, Trigger factor depletion or overproduction causes defective cell division but does not block protein export, J. Bacteriol. 172 (1990) 5555 ­ 5562. [140] T. Hesterkamp, B. Bukau, Identification of the prolyl isomerase domain of Escherichia coli trigger factor, FEBS Lett. 385 (1996) 67 ­ 71. [141] G. Stoller, K.P. Rucknagel, K.H. Nierhaus, F.X. Schmid, G. Fischer, J.U. Rahfeld, A ribosome-associated peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase identified as the trigger factor, EMBO J. 14 (1995) 4939 ­ 4948. [142] H. Patzelt, S. Rudiger, D. Brehmer, G. Kramer, S. Vorderwulbecke, E. Schaffitzel, A. Waitz, T. Hesterkamp, L. Dong, J. Schneider-Mergener, B. Bukau, E. Deuerling, Binding specificity of Escherichia coli trigger factor, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 98 (2001) 14244 ­ 14249. [143] S.A. Teter, W.A. Houry, D. Ang, T. Tradler, D. Rockabrand, G. Fischer, P. Blum, C. Georgopoulos, F.U. Hartl, Polypeptide flux through bacterial Hsp70: DnaK cooperates with trigger factor in chaperoning nascent chains, Cell 97 (1999) 755 ­ 765. [144] E. Deuerling, A. Schulze-Specking, T. Tomoyasu, A. Mogk, B. Bukau, Trigger factor and DnaK cooperate in folding of newly synthesized proteins, Nature 400 (1999) 693 ­ 696.

J. Luirink, I. Sinning / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1694 (2004) 17­35 [166] L. Jovine, T. Hainzl, C. Oubridge, W.G. Scott, J. Li, T.K. Sixma, A. Wonacott, T. Skarzynski, K. Nagai, Crystal structure of the ffh and EF-G binding sites in the conserved domain IV of Escherichia coli 4.5S RNA, Struct. Fold. Des. 8 (2000) 527 ­ 540. [167] U. Schmitz, S. Behrens, D.M. Freymann, R.J. Keenan, P. Lukavsky, P. Walter, T.L. James, Structure of the phylogenetically most conserved domain of SRP RNA, RNA 5 (1999) 1419 ­ 1429. [168] U. Schmitz, T.L. James, P. Lukavsky, P. Walter, Structure of the most conserved internal loop in SRP RNA, Nat. Struct. Biol. 6 (1999) 634 ­ 638. [169] P.J. Focia, H. Alam, T. Lu, U.D. Ramirez, D.M. Freymann, Novel

35

protein and Mg2+ configurations in the Mg2 + GDP complex of the SRP GTPase Ffh, Proteins 54 (2004) 222 ­ 230. [170] S. Padmanabhan, D.M. Freymann, The conformation of bound GMPPNP suggests a mechanism for gating the active site of the SRP GTPase, Structure 9 (2001) 859 ­ 867. [171] B. Van den Berg, W.M. Clemons Jr., I. Collinson, Y. Modis, E. Hartmann, S.C. Harrison, T.A. Rapoport, X-ray structure of a proteinconducting channel, Nature 427 (2004) 36 ­ 44. [172] K. Wild, K.R. Rosendal, I. Sinning, A structural step into the SRP cycle, Mol. Microbiol. (2004) (in press).

