Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Structure and chemistry of 4-methylideneimidazole-5-one containing enzymes
Heather A Cooke, Carl V Christianson and Steven D Bruner
The prosthetic group 4-methylideneimidazole-5-one (MIO) is the catalytic component of the ammonia lyase class of enzymes. This family is responsible for the processing of amino acids in a variety of metabolic pathways through the elimination of ammonia to form unsaturated products. Recently, new chemistry has been attributed to this family with the discovery of MIO-based aminomutases. The mechanism of electrophilic chemistry catalyzed by MIO-based enzymes has been investigated for several decades. Recent X-ray crystal structures of members of the family have provided novel insight into the molecular basis for catalysis and substrate recognition. In addition, the inclusion of aminomutases in natural product biosynthetic pathways has spurned recent advances toward rational engineering and chemoenzymatic applications.
Address Department of Chemistry, Boston College, Merkert Chemistry Center, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467, United States Corresponding author: Bruner, Steven D (bruner@bc.edu)

diverse natural products (Figure 1c). In this review, we will discuss recent efforts toward elucidating the mechanism of these enzymes and summarize their use in chemoenzymatic applications.

MIO-based ammonia lyases
The chemical mechanism of ammonia lyases has been under investigation since the middle part of the last century [5]. It was originally postulated that electrophilic catalysis was promoted through an active site dehydroalanine moiety [6]. Early biochemical investigations supported a mechanism where the a-amine of the substrate added into the dehydroalanine and the elimination of bound ammonia occurred through an E1-cB mechanism (Figure 2a) [7,8]. In 1999, the first X-ray crystal structure of an ammonia lyase revealed that the active site moiety was not dehydroalanine, but was the novel prosthetic group 4-methylideneimidazole-5-one (MIO, Figure 1b) [9]. The MIO is derived from autocatalytic condensation of an Ala-Ser-Gly motif and is structurally similar to the well-characterized green fluorescence protein (GFP) chromophore [10]. The mechanistic conclusions proposed for dehydroalanine are largely transferable to MIO as both are nonaromatic electrophilic species. The discovery of this novel chemical entity produced renewed interest in the study of this enzyme class and resulted in additional investigations into an alternative mechanism that proceeds via electrophilic activation (Friedel­Crafts-type) of the substrate aryl side chain (Figure 2b) [2,11]. Among the data used to support this mechanism are isotope effects consistent with hydrogens on the aromatic ring being directly involved in the reaction pathway [12], the activity of alternate substrates with substitutions on the aromatic ring [11,13] and designed small molecule model systems [14].

Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2009, 13:460­468 This review comes from a themed issue on Mechanisms Edited by Catherine L. Drennan and Joseph T. Jarrett Available online 19th July 2009 1367-5931/$ ­ see front matter # 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. DOI 10.1016/j.cbpa.2009.06.013

Introduction
Electrophilic catalysis by enzymes often requires small molecule cofactors or metal ions as the functional group repertoire of proteins is limited. Flavins, pyridoxal phosphate, and chelated metals are representative of electrophilic cofactors employed in diverse, well-characterized enzymes. The ammonia lyase class of enzymes are unique members of this family, carrying out chemistry without a metal or common cofactor (Figure 1a) [1,2,3]. The family catalyzes the elimination of ammonia from L-amino acids to generate unsaturated products, functioning in a variety of biological pathways from amino acid catabolism to the generation of intermediates in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites. In 2003, an enzyme with aminomutase activity, highly homologous to ammonia lyases, was described [4]. This expanding subfamily is responsible for the biosynthesis of b-amino acids in structurally
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2009, 13:460­468

MIO-based aminomutases
In 2003, new chemistry for the MIO-based ammonia lyase family was described with the characterization of a novel class of aminomutases [4,15]. b-Amino acids are typically prepared enzymatically from the corresponding Lamino acid via a 2,3-amine shift [16,17]. Members of the enediyne antitumor/antibiotic class of natural products often contain a functionalized b-tyrosine moiety (see Figure 1c) [18]. Analysis of the biosynthetic gene cluster for the enediyne C-1027, produced by Streptomyces globisporus, did not reveal a gene homologous to previously characterized 2,3-aminomutases. There was, however, a gene with high sequence homology to MIO-dependent ammonia lyases and, indeed, the purified enzyme,
www.sciencedirect.com

Structure and chemistry of MIO containing enzymes Cooke, Christianson and Bruner 461

Figure 1

The chemistry of MIO-based enzymes. (a) Summary of chemical reactions catalyzed by MIO-based ammonia lyases and aminomutases. The currently known amino acid substrates for each class are listed. (b) The structure of 4-methylideneimidazole-5-one (MIO) generated by the autocatalytic condensation of an Ala-Ser-Gly motif. (c) Examples of natural products containing b-amino acid moieties (highlighted) derived from MIO catalysis.

SgTAM, was shown to convert L-tyrosine to (S)-b-tyrosine [4]. The enzyme exhibits biochemical characteristics consistent with an active site MIO and, after extended reaction times, the lyase product (4-hydroxycinnamate) predominates. SgTAM can catalyze the reverse reaction (b-amino acids to L-amino acids) as well as the addition of ammonia into cinnamates. These findings, along with the high sequence homology, suggests that the chemical mechanism of MIO-based aminomutases is similar to that of lyases and that the former may have evolved from the latter.
www.sciencedirect.com

In addition to the C-1027 enediyne, the biosynthetic pathway to the anticancer therapeutic paclitaxel, isolated from the yew tree, also utilizes an MIO-based aminomutase [19]. The first biosynthetic step to the paclitaxelsidechain is the preparation of (R)-b-phenylalanine by an L-phenylalanine specific aminomutase. Characterization of this enzyme suggested an MIO-based mechanism similar to SgTAM except generated the opposite stereochemistry. Unlike SgTAM, there is no scrambling of the stereochemistry of b-amino acid products over extended reaction times [15]. Recently, additional MIO-based
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2009, 13:460­468

462 Mechanisms

Figure 2

Proposed chemical mechanisms for MIO utilizing enzymes. Two mechanisms are illustrated with L-tyrosine as an example substrate. In a lyase enzyme, the cinnamate product will be released while a mutase will catalyze the conjugate addition as illustrated.

aminomutases have been described from biosynthetic gene clusters including the enediyne maduropeptin [20], antibiotic andrimid [21,22], and the chondramides [23]. The chemical mechanism for aminomutases was originally suggested to be an extension of the Friedel­Craftstype mechanism proposed for ammonia lyases but with an additional step involving conjugative addition of ammonia to yield the b-amino acid (see Figure 2b) [4]. However, with this mechanism the role of the MIO in the conjugate addition was not clear and the observed reversibility of the reaction was difficult to rationalize.

Structural characterization of MIO-based ammonia lyases
The first X-ray crystal structure of an MIO-containing enzyme was histidine ammonia lyase from Pseudomonas putida, which revealed the chemical nature of the active site electrophile [9]. The overall structure is composed of multiple parallel a-helices forming a tetramer arranged as a dimer of head-to-tail dimers. The active site is located at the monomer interface with amino acid side chains from three subunits comprising the active site region around each MIO prosthetic group (Figure 3). Subsequent crystal structures of phenylalanine and tyrosine ammonia lyases provided a structural basis for additional substrate specificity [24,25]. The combined work demonstrated that the class has significant structural
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2009, 13:460­468

homology, particularly around the active site. One common structural feature is that a large number (typically six) of the protein a-helices direct the positive end of their helix dipoles toward the active site [24]. The culmination of these dipoles results in a significant positive charge in the active site, which would favor a reaction pathway with negatively charged intermediates as in the E1-cB elimination. In order to probe the nature of substrate recognition, previous structures of the histidine and phenylalanine ammonia lyases were used as a guide to rationally switch the substrate specificity in a tyrosine ammonia lyase from Rhodobacter sphaeroides (RsTAL) to favor L-phenylalanine [25,26]. A single point mutation in the active site was made (His89Phe) at a position that forms a hydrogen bond with the substrate phenol. Modeling the substrate into the active site showed that an amine adduct with the MIO would place ° the phenol of tyrosine 2.4 A away from His89, supporting an amine activation mechanism [25]. Additional support for the amino-MIO adduct mechanism comes from recent structures of the phenylalanine ammonia lyases from Anabaena variabilis and Nostoc punctiforme [27­29]. A double mutant of AvPAL was used to generate crystals with ordered electron density around the active site, including loops that are typically disordered in other lyase structures, resulting in an improved view of the active site. Catalytic residues can also be identified by the proximity of inherently bound cinnamic acid, including Tyr78, which is positioned appropriately to act as the
www.sciencedirect.com

Structure and chemistry of MIO containing enzymes Cooke, Christianson and Bruner 463

Figure 3

Example X-ray crystal structures of MIO-ammonia lyases and aminomutases. The protein monomers (shown) form biologically relevant tetramers where the active site is protected by inner and outer loop regions. The PDB codes are 1B8F, P. putida; 1T6J, R. toruloides; 2O6Y, R. sphaeroides, and 2OHY, S. globisporus.

enzymatic base. Docking studies were also used to show that the binding of substrate and product is consistent with a carbanion elimination mechanism.

Structural basis for MIO aminomutase activity
In 2007, the first structure of an MIO-based aminomutase was determined with the solution of the tyrosine aminomutase SgTAM [30]. The structure is highly homologous to ammonia lyases, in particular to the tyrosine ammonia lyase, RsTAL [9,25]. One feature shared between the two structures is that the active site loops were in an ordered, `closed' conformation around the MIO prosthetic group. A conserved tyrosine residue (Tyr63 in SgTAM) resides on the inner loop in close proximity to the MIO. Modeling of a substrate into the active site placed this residue in the proper position to act as a general enzymatic base. Indeed, mutation of this residue to a phenylalanine results in complete loss of activity, an observation also seen in RsTAL [31,32]. With available structures of both an L-tyrosine specific ammonia lyase and aminomutase, the basis for the different chemistries can be explored. Comparison of the active
www.sciencedirect.com

sites of SgTAM and RsTAL showed similar positions and identities of side chains around the MIO [30]. Only one obvious difference is observed at a site adjacent to the selectivity switch (His93). At this position, RsTAL has a valine residue (Val409), and SgTAM has a tyrosine (Tyr415). A difference of solvent accessibility to the MIO in the active site was also noted. In the ammonia lyase, an open channel leads to the active site and no such channel was present in SgTAM. This could enable mutases to sequester the substrate and ammonia in the active site, favoring the conjugate addition to form the bamino acid.

Small molecule probes into the mechanism of MIO-enzymes
Earlier work characterized the mode of irreversible inhibition of histidine ammonia lyase by the amino acid Lcysteine in the presence of molecular oxygen. Tanner and coworkers isolated and structurally characterized the adduct formed, showing that L-cysteine is bound to the MIO through the a-amine [33]. Heteroaryl-acrylate and alanine analogs were demonstrated to be inhibitors of both histidine and phenylalanine ammonia lyases, a result
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2009, 13:460­468

464 Mechanisms

Figure 4

Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2009, 13:460­468

www.sciencedirect.com

Structure and chemistry of MIO containing enzymes Cooke, Christianson and Bruner 465

that was proposed to support a Friedel­Crafts-type mechanism [34,35]. An additional synthetic inhibitor is a conformationally restrained substrate analog, 2-aminoindan2-phosphonate (AIP) [36]. The specificity mutant (His89Phe) of RsTAL, as described above, was cocrystallized with AIP to form an approximation of the substrate complex [25]. In this structure, the a-amine of AIP formed a covalent adduct with the MIO (Figure 4). A variety of cocomplex crystal structures were obtained with the wild-type enzyme, the His89Phe mutant and product 4-hydroxycinnamate or cinnamate. The transalkene of the products is positioned directly over the MIO, maintaining the interactions between residue 89 and the aryl ring as predicted. In addition, in the absence of substrate/product analogs, the electron density maps show the MIO covalently modified by a small molecule, possibly ammonia. This work provides further evidence for the ordered release of products from the active site of lyases, as biochemically demonstrated [37]. An analogous approach using cocrystallization with small molecule probes was applied to the tyrosine aminomutase SgTAM. Exploiting the reversibility of the chemistry, a stable analog of the product, a,a-difluoro-(S)-b-tyrosine, was used to assign key residues (Figure 4) [32]. As with the lyase/AIP structure, the amine of the product analog is covalently attached to the MIO. The general base Tyr63 is well positioned to deprotonate at the a-position and bposition and eliminate MIO-bound ammonia through an antiperiplanar mechanism. In addition, cinnamate epoxides were designed and synthesized to mimic the coumarate intermediate in the reaction, while providing a reactive moiety that could act as a mechanistic `trap' [38]. When incubated with SgTAM, the epoxide was converted to the 2,3-diol and the cocrystal structures showed the analog bound to the MIO through the 2-hydroxyl group, forming a complex that mimics an enzyme­substrate complex.

rotation, the amine can be repositioned for addition into the b-position. The b-amino acid is then released, regenerating the MIO. The amino-MIO adduct mechanism accounts for the observed kinetic isotope effects [7], the ordered release of products [12], and the characterization of intermediates and products of the reaction [15]. Recent work by Walker and coworkers has provided biochemical insights into the mechanism. Deuterium labeling studies were used to demonstrate that the amine and the benzylic hydrogen atom trade positions with facial selectivity in paclitaxel PAM [39]. They proposed a syn-configuration for the unsaturated intermediate, which would be the only way for the amine and proS hydrogen to maintain facial selectivity without the substrate rotating during the reaction sequence. This general mechanistic proposal involving retention of the anitrogen and b-nitrogen was also supported by studies on the tyrosine aminomutase from andrimid biosynthesis [40]. An amine-adduct mechanism does not, by itself, fully resolve the difficulty of deprotonating a benzylic hydrogen. However, the extensively electropositive active site formed by a-helical dipoles can stabilize the benzylic anion generated through an E1-cB mechanism, effectively lowering the pKa. In addition, cocomplex structures indicate that the enzyme binds substrate in a conformation favoring orbital alignment for a periplanar elimination. A recent publication by Bartsch and Bornscheuer suggests that perhaps different mechanisms may occur depending on the nature of the substrate [41]. For PAL, the substrate would undergo a Friedel­Crafts-like mechanism, while for TAL the substrate would go through the amino-MIO adduct mechanism. Their reasoning is based on a conserved glutamate in the active site for PAL and PAM enzymes, which acts by blocking binding of the amino group to the MIO; an asparagine is conserved at this position for TAL and TAM enzymes, which would allow the MIO to bind to the amino group on the substrate. These assumptions are supported via mutations of a single residue (Glu484Asn) and the resulting activity toward tyrosine and phenylalanine. It is uncommon for homologous members of the same enzyme class to utilize drastically different chemical mechanisms based on the nature of the substrate.

Unified mechanism for MIO-based enzymes
The recent structural characterization of multiple MIOenzymes supports an elimination/conjugate addition mechanism (Figure 5). In this cycle, the a-amine of the substrate amino acid forms a covalent adduct with the exocyclic alkene of the MIO prosthetic group. The bound amino acid is then deprotonated at the benzylic position by an enzymatic base: a tyrosine side chain possibly in the phenolate ionization state. Upon loss of ammonia from the substrate, the cinnamic acid is sequestered in the active site in the case of aminomutases, and released in the case of lyases. For aminomutases, the ammonia remains bound to the MIO and, by simple bond

Utilization of MIO-aminomutases in chemoenzymatic synthesis applications
The chemistry of MIO-dependent aminomutases has led to attempts to exploit substrate promiscuity for the production of novel b-amino acids. Walker and coworkers

( Figure 4 Legend ) Active site structures of MIO-ammonia lyases and aminomutases with bound small molecule probes. Enzyme residues (gray) in proximity to the MIO (red) are illustrated along with the observed small molecule (teal). The PDB codes are 2O7E, R. sphaeroides: AIP; 2O7B, R. sphaeroides: HO-cinnamate; and 2QVE, S. globisporus: a,a-diF-b-tyrosine. www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2009, 13:460­468

466 Mechanisms

Figure 5

Unified mechanistic proposal for MIO-based ammonia lyase and aminomutase enzymes. The substrate `Ar' corresponds to imidazole, phenyl, or 4hydroxyphenyl.

have shown that paclitaxel PAM catalyzes the isomerization of diverse arylalanine substrates to the corresponding (R)-b-arylalanines [42]. Both fluorinated phenylalanines and phenylalanines substituted with electron-donating groups were turned over with increased efficiency over the natural substrate. Interestingly, (S)-styrylalanine was converted to (R)-b-styrylalanine, although at a significantly lower reaction rate. Janssen and coworkers illustrated another chemoenzymatic application by demonstrating that PAM can aminate functionalized (E)-cinnamic acids to produce both a-amino acids and b-amino acids with high enantiomeric excess [43]. It was found that electronic effects influenced the regioselectivity of the reaction with electron-donating groups on the aryl ring favoring b-amino acids and, conversely,
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2009, 13:460­468

electron-withdrawing groups preferentially generating a-amino acids. For example, in the case of the (E)methyl-cinnamate and (E)-nitrocinnamate, amination occurred almost exclusively at the b-position and aposition, respectively. As opposed to the high substrate tolerance shown with PAM, the tyrosine aminomutase SgTAM has significantly tighter selectivity [15].

Rational engineering of lyase and aminomutase activity
While some enzymes from this class show a considerable amount of flexibility for substrates, the products are generally fixed in terms of lyase and mutase paths. Lyases produce elimination products (cinnamates) while mutases primarily produce one b-amino acid enantiomer.
www.sciencedirect.com

Structure and chemistry of MIO containing enzymes Cooke, Christianson and Bruner 467

With the high degree of homology shared between lyases and mutases, determining the molecular basis for the two distinct activities poses a significant challenge. Theoretically, an ammonia lyase could be mutated into an aminomutase and vice versa, the latter of which would seem facile since mutases already exhibit lyase activity. Also, one could envision changing the stereoselectivity of mutases to produce different b-amino acids. Toward ¨ these ends, Krug and Muller recently reported the effects of a variety of mutations of CmdF, which is responsible for the production of (R)-b-tyrosine for incorporation into the chondramide family of natural products [44]. Attempts to engineer CmdF into an ammonia lyase by exchanging conserved sequence motifs from lyases resulted in no activity or substantially reduced activity with retained mutase activity. One successful mutant was an exchange of a sequence in CmdF for a homologous region in MdpC4 (the tyrosine aminomutase found in maduropeptin biosynthesis [20]), which surprisingly did exhibit a shift from aminomutase activity to ammonia lyase activity. Additionally, a mutation (Glu399Lys) led to an increase in enantioselectivity as compared to the wild-type enzyme. On the basis of these and other studies, it appears that this family of enzymes is quite sensitive to changes in and around the active site and that engineering novel activity will not be straightforward. The MIO cofactor is a chemically reactive species and even conservative mutations to the active site structure results in the abolishment of activity. This could stem from exposure of the active site to external nucleophiles or from possible disruption of the quaternary structure by interfering with the tetramer interface.

Acknowledgement
The authors are grateful to Eric Dimise for critical reading of this manuscript.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have been highlighted as:  of special interest  of outstanding interest 1. 2.  Poppe L: Methylidene-imidazolone: a novel electrophile for substrate activation. Curr Opin Chem Biol 2001, 5:512-524.

Poppe L, Retey J: Friedel­Crafts-type mechanism for the enzymatic elimination of ammonia from histidine and phenylalanine. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2005, 44:3668-3688. A comprehensive review article covering work on ammonia lyases and a thorough discussion of mechanistic implications of research before 2005. 3. MacDonald MJ, D'Cunha GB: A modern view of phenylalanine ammonia lyase. Biochem Cell Biol 2007, 85:273-282.

4. 

Christenson SD, Liu W, Toney MD, Shen B: A novel 4methylideneimidazole-5-one-containing tyrosine aminomutase in enediyne antitumor antibiotic C-1027 biosynthesis. J Am Chem Soc 2003, 125:6062-6063. This paper reports the initial characterization of the first MIO-dependent aminomutase, an enzyme in the biosynthetic gene cluster for the enediyne C-1027 in Streptomyces globisporus. Evidence for an active site MIO came from chemical inactivation as well as site-directed mutagenesis. 5. Tabor H, Mehler AH, Hayaishi O, White J: Urocanic acid as an intermediate in the enzymatic conversion of histidine to glutamic and formic acids. J Biol Chem 1952, 196:121-128. Wickner RB: Dehydroalanine in histidine ammonia lyase. J Biol Chem 1969, 244:6550-6552. Hermes JD, Weiss PM, Cleland WW: Use of nitrogen-15 and deuterium isotope effects to determine the chemical mechanism of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase. Biochemistry 1985, 24:2959-2967. Peterkofsky A: The mechanism of action of histidase: aminoenzyme formation and partial reactions. J Biol Chem 1962, 237:787-795.

6. 7.

8.

Conclusions
Recent structural biology efforts have provided insight into the chemistry of enzymes dependent on the MIO prosthetic group. The use of small molecule probes, along with biochemical studies, is consistent with a mechanism where the electrophilic MIO reacts with the amino acid and the enzyme orients the bound complex for an E1-cB elimination. The recently described aminomutase subfamily diverts the lyase intermediate toward b-amino acid products, resulting in an overall 2,3-amino shift. These investigations have provided a structural basis for substrate specificity and defined key residues involved in catalysis. Further mechanistic work is necessary to resolve ambiguities in the chemical mechanism, particularly in defining the precise role the MIO prosthetic group plays in facilitating the catalytic cycle. Members of this enzyme family are important catalysts in the production of secondary metabolites and are rapidly expanding in both number and scope. b-Amino acids are biosynthetic building blocks in a variety of natural products. The unique chemistry of MIO-based enzymes has the potential to be used in the preparation of chiral building blocks and in biosynthetic engineering approaches toward novel therapeutics.
www.sciencedirect.com 9. 

Schwede TF, Retey J, Schulz GE: Crystal structure of histidine ammonia-lyase revealing a novel polypeptide modification as the catalytic electrophile. Biochemistry 1999, 38:5355-5361. This paper reports the first X-ray structure of an MIO-dependent enzyme and established the chemical structure of the active site moiety. 10. Ormo M, Cubitt AB, Kallio K, Gross LA, Tsien RY, Remington SJ: Crystal structure of the Aequorea victoria green fluorescent protein. Science 1996, 273:1392-1395. 11. Langer M, Pauling A, Retey J: The role of dehydroalanine in catalysis by histidine ammonia lyase. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 1995, 34:1464-1465. 12. Furuta T, Takahashi H, Shibasaki H, Kasuya Y: Reversible stepwise mechanism involving a carbanion intermediate in the elimination of ammonia from L-histidine catalyzed by histidine ammonia-lyase. J Biol Chem 1992, 267:12600-12605. 13. Schuster B, Retey J: The mechanism of action of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase: the role of prosthetic dehydroalanine. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995, 92:8433-8437. 14. Rettig M, Sigrist A, Retey J: Mimicking the reaction of phenylalanine ammonia lyase by a synthetic model. Helv Chim Acta 2000, 83:2246-2265. 15. Christenson SD, Wu W, Spies MA, Shen B, Toney MD: Kinetic  analysis of the 4-methylideneimidazole-5-one-containing tyrosine aminomutase in enediyne antitumor antibiotic C-1027 biosynthesis. Biochemistry 2003, 42:12708-12718. Detailed biochemicall characterization and substrate scope are described for this novel member of the aminomutase family of enzymes. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2009, 13:460­468

468 Mechanisms

16. Frey PA, Reed GH: Radical mechanisms in adenosylmethionine- and adenosylcobalamin-dependent enzymatic reactions. Arch Biochem Biophys 2000, 382:6-14. 17. Wetmore SD, Smith DM, Radom L: Enzyme catalysis of 1,2amino shifts: the cooperative action of B6, B12, and aminomutases. J Am Chem Soc 2001, 123:8678-8689. 18. Liu W, Christenson SD, Standage S, Shen B: Biosynthesis of the enediyne antitumor antibiotic C-1027. Science 2002, 297:11701173. 19. Walker KD, Klettke K, Akiyama T, Croteau R: Cloning,  heterologous expression, and characterization of a phenylalanine aminomutase involved in Taxol biosynthesis. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:53947-53954. This paper describes the cloning, expression, and characterization of the PAM from Taxus cuspidata. This aminomutase produces (R)-b-phenylalanine via exchange of the pro-3S hydrogen and amino group in a reversible reaction. 20. Van Lanen SG, Oh TJ, Liu W, Wendt-Pienkowski E, Shen B: Characterization of the maduropeptin biosynthetic gene cluster from Actinomadura madurae ATCC 39144 supporting a unifying paradigm for enediyne biosynthesis. J Am Chem Soc 2007, 129:13082-13094. 21. Jin M, Fischbach MA, Clardy J: A biosynthetic gene cluster for the acetyl-CoA carboxylase inhibitor andrimid. J Am Chem Soc 2006, 128:10660-10661. 22. Magarvey NA, Fortin PD, Thomas PM, Kelleher NL, Walsh CT: Gatekeeping versus promiscuity in the early stages of the andrimid biosynthetic assembly line. ACS Chem Biol 2008, 3:542-554. 23. Rachid S, Krug D, Weissman KJ, Muller R: Biosynthesis of (R)-btyrosine and its incorporation into the highly cytotoxic chondramides produced by Chondromyces crocatus. J Biol Chem 2007, 282:21810-21817. 24. Calabrese JC, Jordan DB, Boodhoo A, Sariaslani S, Vannelli T:  Crystal structure of phenylalanine ammonia lyase: multiple helix dipoles implicated in catalysis. Biochemistry 2004, 43:11403-11416. The first structure of a PAL, from Rhodosporidium toruloides, is reported. Catalysis is proposed to be influenced by the six alpha-helices contributing to a positively charged active site. Support for an amino-MIO adduct intermediate is given. 25. Louie GV, Bowman ME, Moffitt MC, Baiga TJ, Moore BS, Noel JP:  Structural determinants and modulation of substrate specificity in phenylalanine­tyrosine ammonia-lyases. Chem Biol 2006, 13:1327-1338. The crystal structure of TAL from R. sphaeroides is reported unliganded and bound to p-coumarate and caffeate. His89 is identified as the specificity determinant and mutation switches the substrate. Cocomplex structures with cinnamate and the inhibitor AIP are also reported, supporting the assignment of active site residues. 26. Watts KT, Mijts BN, Lee PC, Manning AJ, Schmidt-Dannert C:  Discovery of a substrate selectivity switch in tyrosine ammonia-lyase, a member of the aromatic amino acid lyase family. Chem Biol 2006, 13:1317-1326. Identification of His89 as an active site residue important for substrate selectivity in RsTAL. Mutational analysis demonstrated a change in substrate selectivity to phenylalanine. 27. Wang L, Gamez A, Archer H, Abola EE, Sarkissian CN, Fitzpatrick P, Wendt D, Zhang Y, Vellard M, Bliesath J et al.: Structural and biochemical characterization of the therapeutic Anabaena variabilis phenylalanine ammonia lyase. J Mol Biol 2008, 380:623-635. 28. Xiang L, Moore BS: Biochemical characterization of a prokaryotic phenylalanine ammonia lyase. J Bacteriol 2005, 187:4286-4289. 29. Moffitt MC, Louie GV, Bowman ME, Pence J, Noel JP, Moore BS: Discovery of two cyanobacterial phenylalanine ammonia lyases: kinetic and structural characterization. Biochemistry 2007, 46:1004-1012. 30. Christianson CV, Montavon TJ, Van Lanen SG, Shen B, Bruner SD:  The structure of L-tyrosine 2,3-aminomutase from the C-1027

enediyne antitumor antibiotic biosynthetic pathway. Biochemistry 2007, 46:7205-7214. This paper reports the first structure of an MIO-aminomutase, showing high homology to lyases. Structural comparisons are made in order to define a structural basis for the difference in chemistries. 31. Schroeder AC, Kumaran S, Hicks LM, Cahoon RE, Halls C, Yu O, Jez JM: Contributions of conserved serine and tyrosine residues to catalysis, ligand binding, and cofactor processing in the active site of tyrosine ammonia lyase. Phytochemistry 2008, 69:1496-1506. 32. Christianson CV, Montavon TJ, Festin GM, Cooke HA, Shen B,  Bruner SD: The mechanism of MIO-based aminomutases in bamino acid biosynthesis. J Am Chem Soc 2007, 129:1574415745. The utilization of a designed mechanistic probe to elucidate the active site structure of an aminomutase is described. This allowed the assignment of catalytic residues and provided a structural basis for the chemistry. 33. Galpin JD, Ellis BE, Tanner ME: The inactivation of histidine ammonia-lyase by L-cysteine and oxygen: modification of the electrophilic center. J Am Chem Soc 1999, 121:10840-10841. 34. Katona A, Tosa MI, Paizs C, Retey J: Inhibition of histidine ammonia lyase by heteroaryl-alanines and acrylates. Chem Biodivers 2006, 3:502-508. 35. Paizs C, Katona A, Retey J: The interaction of heteroarylacrylates and alanines with phenylalanine ammonia-lyase from parsley. Chemistry 2006, 12:2739-2744. 36. Zon J, Miziak P, Amrhein N, Gancarz R: Inhibitors of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL): synthesis and biological evaluation of 5-substituted 2-aminoindane-2-phosphonic acids. Chem Biodivers 2005, 2:1187-1194. 37. Givot IL, Smith TA, Abeles RH: Studies on the mechanism of action and the structure of the electrophilic center of histidine ammonia lyase. J Biol Chem 1969, 244:6341-6353. 38. Montavon TJ, Christianson CV, Festin GM, Shen B, Bruner SD: Design and characterization of mechanism-based inhibitors for the tyrosine aminomutase SgTAM. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 2008, 18:3099-3102. 39. Mutatu W, Klettke KL, Foster C, Walker KD: Unusual mechanism  for an aminomutase rearrangement: retention of configuration at the migration termini. Biochemistry 2007, 46:9785-9794. This paper provides detailed biochemical characterization of PAM showing the retention of configuration at both migration termini. During the reaction, the intermediate takes on a syn-periplanar configuration to allow retention of configuration. 40. Fortin PD, Walsh CT, Magarvey NA: A transglutaminase homologue as a condensation catalyst in antibiotic assembly lines. Nature 2007, 448:824-827. 41. Bartsch S, Bornscheuer UT: A single residue influences the reaction mechanism of ammonia lyases and mutases. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2009, 48:3362-3365. 42. Klettke KL, Sanyal S, Mutatu W, Walker KD: b-Styryl- and b-aryl b-alanine products of phenylalanine aminomutase catalysis. J Am Chem Soc 2007, 129:6988-6989. A variety of a-amino acids are analyzed for activity with PAM. PAM is shown to catalyze the production of b-styryl and b-aryl-alanines from these diverse substrates. PAM exhibits significant flexibility for substitutions on the aryl ring. 43. Wu B, Szymanski W, Wietzes P, de Wildeman S, Poelarends GJ,  Feringa BL, Janssen DB: Enzymatic synthesis of enantiopure alpha- and beta-amino acids by phenylalanine aminomutasecatalysed amination of cinnamic acid derivatives. Chembiochem 2009, 10:338-344. PAM is shown to catalyze the amination of a variety of functionalized cinnamate derivatives, producing a-amino acids and b-amino acids with high enantioselectivity. 44. Krug D, Muller R: Discovery of additional members of the  tyrosine aminomutase enzyme family and the mutational analysis of CmdF. Chembiochem 2009, 10:741-750. The authors describe several additional members of the aminomutase enzyme family and by comparing sequences were able to rationally perturb the activity of the tyrosine aminomutase CmdF.

Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2009, 13:460­468

www.sciencedirect.com

