doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2009.04.001

J. Mol. Biol. (2009) 389, 134­145

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Crystal Structure of the Multidrug Exporter MexB from Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Gaby Sennhauser, Magdalena A. Bukowska, Christophe Briand and Markus G. Grütter
Department of Biochemistry, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zürich, Switzerland Received 19 December 2008; received in revised form 29 March 2009; accepted 1 April 2009 Available online 8 April 2009 We report here the crystal structure of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa multidrug exporter MexB, an intensively studied member of the resistance­nodulation­cell division family of secondary active transporters, at 3.0 Å. MexB forms an asymmetric homotrimer where each subunit adopts a different conformation representing three snapshots of the transport cycle similar to the recently determined structures of its close homologue AcrB from Escherichia coli, so far the sole structurally characterized member of the superfamily. As for AcrB, the conformations of two subunits can be clearly assigned to either the binding step or the extrusion step in the transport process. Unexpectedly, a remarkable conformational shift in the third subunit is observed in MexB, which has potential implications for the assembly of the tripartite MexAB­OprM drug efflux system. Furthermore, an n-dodecyl-D-maltoside molecule was found bound to the internal multidrug-binding cavity, which might indicate that MexB binds and transports detergent molecules as substrates. As the only missing piece of the puzzle in the MexAB­OprM system, the X-ray structure of MexB completes the molecular picture of the major pump mediating intrinsic and acquired multidrug resistance in P. aeruginosa.
© 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Edited by J. Bowie

Keywords: X-ray structure; membrane protein; antibiotic resistance; transport; Pseudomonas aeruginosa

Introduction
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic human pathogen that causes severe infections. Its intrinsic resistance to multiple clinically relevant antibiotics and its ability to acquire high-level resistance make this bacterium particularly difficult to combat.1 The resistance mainly results from the synergy of a lowpermeability outer membrane and the expression of drug efflux systems.2 Typically, such efflux systems consist of an inner-membrane component belonging to the resistance­nodulation­cell division (RND) superfamily of secondary transporters, a channel*Corresponding author. E-mail address: gruetter@bioc.uzh.ch. Present address: G. Sennhauser, Molecular Partners AG, Wagistrasse 14, 8952 Schlieren, Switzerland. Abbreviations used: RND, resistance­nodulation­cell division; OMF, outer-membrane factor; MFP, membrane fusion protein; PDB, Protein Data Bank; TM, transmembrane -helix; DDM, n-dodecyl-D-maltoside.

forming outer-membrane factor (OMF), and a periplasmic membrane fusion protein (MFP) to achieve the direct extrusion of substrates across the two membranes of the Gram-negative bacteria. To date, several tripartite systems participating in drug efflux have been identified in P. aeruginosa. From these, the MexAB­OprM tripartite system was the first to be identified;3 as a major system contributing to intrinsic multidrug resistance in this organism, it is, by far, the best characterized. The inner-membrane component MexB is responsible for substrate specificity4,5 and energy of the transport process.6 Characteristic of the RND transporter family, MexB transports its substrates using a proton electrochemical gradient and can accommodate a very broad range of substrates such as antibiotics, biocides, dyes, organic solvents, and detergents. Furthermore, the transporter may also have some other export functions as, for instance, the export of virulence factors that are important for the colonization and infection of host cells.7 MexB is closely related to its Escherichia coli counterpart AcrB (69.8% identity and 83.2% similarity in a sequence of 1046

0022-2836/$ - see front matter © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

The Crystal Structure of MexB

135 membrane component MexB at 3.0 Å resolution. The structure confirms the asymmetric fold observed recently for AcrB, but also shows altered relative orientations of the subunits, particularly of the subunit whose role in the transport process remained somewhat unclear. Furthermore, the positive density observed in the periplasmic domain of one subunit, most probably due to a bound detergent molecule, supports the idea of a large multidrugbinding cavity with different residues involved in binding different substrates.

amino acid residues). The substrate specificities of the two efflux pumps are very similar; however, when expressed in the same genetic background in E. coli, the resistance pattern of the MexAB­OprM system differs substantially from the one attributed to AcrAB­TolC.4 The MexAB­OprM complex provides resistance to higher concentrations of cinoxacin, but protects less efficiently against ethidium bromide and the macrolide antibiotics oleandomycin and erythromycin.4 Intriguingly, despite the high degree of identity between AcrB and MexB, it is not possible to interchange the two proteins with regard to their interaction partners without losing activity,4,8 even though their cognate OMFs TolC and OprM are both multispecific per se, working with multiple RND transporters.9 For TolC, this is even the case with members of the ATP-binding cassette superfamily or the major facilitator superfamily. In addition, AcrA was also reported to function with several RNDs.5 Completion of the atomic resolution models of the MexAB­OprM drug export system components would allow a detailed comparison with the extensively studied E. coli AcrAB­TolC system in order to investigate the specificity determinants of the respective MFPs and OMFs to gain a deeper insight into the assembly of those two tripartite efflux systems. The only member of the RND transporter family whose high-resolution structure could be determined so far is E. coli AcrB. Several 3-fold symmetric X-ray structures of the trimeric AcrB provided information regarding the general architecture of this family of proteins.10­12 In all these structures, however, a mechanism for multidrug transport remained elusive. Recently, three independent structures of AcrB provided novel insights into the mechanism by which RND transporters work.13­15 All these structures displayed an overall asymmetric shape of the trimeric protein where each subunit adopted a different conformation, interpreted as consecutive snapshots of the transport process. This finally led to the proposal of a novel mechanism of drug transport in which each subunit cycles through the three conformations such that, at any given time, each conformation is adopted only by one subunit. A channel leading through the periplasmic domain of the protein most likely forms the pathway for substrates, with alternate openings in one subunit to the periplasm/outer leaflet of the inner membrane and in another subunit towards the OMF. Protonation of charged residues within the transmembrane region most probably induces the opening and closing of the channel entrance and exit via conformational changes in a polypeptide stretch connecting the transmembrane domain and the periplasmic domain. Importantly, further studies showed that the asymmetry exists not only in the crystal structure but also in vivo and in solution.15,16 Crystal structures have been reported for the tripartite efflux pump components MexA17,18 and OprM19 and for all three proteins of the homologous E. coli AcrAB­TolC system.10,20,21 In this study, we have determined the X-ray structure of the inner-

Results
General fold P. aeruginosa MexB was overexpressed in E. coli and purified from the membrane fraction, and crystals belonging to space group P1 were grown. The structure was solved at 3.0 Å resolution by molecular replacement using the homologous asymmetric AcrB structure [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 2J8S] as search model. Data collection and refinement statistics are summarized in Table 1. The asymmetric unit contained two almost structurally identical trimers (chains ABC and DEF), with a rootmean-square deviation (rmsd) of 0.1 Å for the two trimer main chains. The final model was refined to R-factors of R = 24.3% and Rfree = 28.7%, applying 2-fold noncrystallographic symmetry restraints for each chain. Small breaks in electron density were observed and not included in the final structure: residues 1­3, 500­511 [loop between transmembrane -helix (TM) 6 and the cytoplasmic horizontal
Table 1. Data collection and refinement statistics
Data collection and processing Wavelength (Å) Space group Unit cell parameters a, b, c (Å) Unit cell parameters , ,  (°) Resolution (Å) Total reflections Unique reflections Completeness (%) Rsym I/(I) Refinement Resolution (Å) R/Rfree (%)b Number of atoms Number of detergent molecules B-factors rmsd Bond length (Å) Bond angle (°) Ramachandran plot Most favored region (%) Allowed region (%)
a b

0.9196 P1 125.05, 134.58, 151.02 86.99, 69.70, 88.16 50.00­3.0 (3.1­3.0)a 419,193 176,904 (15,057) 95.7 (87.0) 0.041 (0.70) 15.26 (1.73) 50­3.0 24.3/28.7 46,628 8 88.33 0.005 0.965 82.7 16.4

Values in parentheses are for the highest-resolution shell. R = |Fobs - Fcal|/Fobs. The formula for Rfree is the same as that for R, except that it is calculated with a portion of the structure factors that had not been used for refinement.

136 helix], and 673­677 (loop connecting PC1 and PC2) in chain A; residues 253­261 (loop in the DN domain at the periplasmic end of the protein), 500­511, and 670­675 in chain D; and residues 669­680 and 990­ 995 (loop connecting TM11 and TM12) in chain E. The global fold of MexB is similar to that of AcrB,10 which is not surprising given their high level of identity (Fig. 1). These RND transporters are organized as trimers, where each monomer exhibits a complex topology consisting of 12 TMs (TM1­TM12) and an extensive periplasmic domain formed by two long loops between TM1 and TM2, and between TM7 and TM8, respectively (Fig. 2). These periplas-

The Crystal Structure of MexB

mic domains fold into six subdomains: PN1, PN2, PC1, and PC2, which build the pore domain, and DN and DC, which build the docking domain to the OMF. The DN subdomain further exhibits an elongated -sheet that protrudes into the next subunit, thereby interlocking the subunits and stabilizing the trimer. In the transmembrane region, a pseudo-2-fold symmetry is observed, with TM1­ TM7 related to TM8­TM12. TM4 and TM10 are surrounded by other TMs and harbor well-conserved charged residues, among them Asp407, Asp408 (TM4), and Lys939 (940 in AcrB) (TM10), which most probably mediate proton translocation and have

Fig. 1. Sequence alignment of the P. aeruginosa MexB sequence with its close homologue E. coli AcrB. The secondary structure elements are indicated above the sequence (based on subunit C of the MexB crystal structure). The subdomains are individually colored and labeled according to Fig. 2. This figure was prepared with ESPript [http://espript.ibcp.fr].

The Crystal Structure of MexB

137

Fig. 2. Structure and architecture of MexB. Ribbon diagram of the overall MexB trimer viewed in the membrane plane. The locations of the three prominent domains and the approximate position of the inner membrane are indicated. One monomer is colored according to its subdomains, with subdomains labeled and with -helices numbered. The common terms for the naming of the three subunits are listed.13­15 All figures of the molecular models were generated with PyMol [www.pymol.org].

Fig. 3. Comparison of MexB and AcrB structures. The MexB trimer is superimposed with the AcrB trimer (PDB code 2J8S) based on their transmembrane helices (see Fig. 1 for corresponding sequences). For clarity, the subunits are individually represented in the same orientation. The Fo - Fc electron density (contoured at 2.5) observed in the binding cavity in subunit B is shown as a purple mesh. The right panel shows a close-up view of the structural differences occurring in the pore domain. The lower panel shows a close-up view of the TM domains illustrating the side-chain conformations in the putative proton translocation site.

138 been shown to be indispensable for the proper function of the protein, since the mutation of these residues leads to a complete loss of drug resistance.22 MexB contains 1046 amino acids compared to 1049 amino acids of AcrB and has two internal amino acid residue deletions at position 711 (located in a loop in PC2) and position 955 (located in the cytoplasmic loop connecting TM10 and TM11) of the AcrB sequence, respectively. Comparison with the asymmetric AcrB structure A close structural relationship between P. aeruginosa MexB and E. coli AcrB is observed. The overall superposition of MexB and a recently determined asymmetric AcrB structure15 results in an rmsd of 1.4 Å for 2990 C positions. Figure 3 shows a comparison of MexB superimposed with the homologous structure of AcrB. As the transmembrane part is responsible for proton translocation and is likely to be similar in all RND family transporters, we analyzed the differences between MexB and AcrB based on superpositions of the transmembrane domains. Indeed, this region is very well conserved in the sequence (Fig. 1). Strikingly, almost all residues in the two central TMs (TM4 and TM10) are conserved between MexB and AcrB, including the two aspartates and the lysine in the putative proton translocation site (Fig. 4a). In both MexB and AcrB, Lys939 (940 in AcrB) of TM10 is engaged in a salt­ bridge interaction with two aspartate residues of TM4 (Asp407 and Asp408) in subunits A and B (Fig. 3). In subunit C, however, the lysine is tilted towards Thr976 (978 in AcrB) of TM11. This movement implicates a rigid-body shift of TM5 towards TM4 and TM10 and conformational changes in TM8. The N-terminal end of TM8, which connects the transmembrane with the PC2 subdomain, adopts different conformations in the subunits and is believed to be the trigger for the large conformational changes observed in the pore domains that finally lead to the export of substrates (Fig. 3). This stretch varies in AcrB from a random-coil conformation with only a partially defined electron density in subunit A to a fully -helical conformation in subunit C. Surprisingly, in MexB, the conformation of TM8 in subunit B resembles more the conformation in subunit C, in which it is fully helical. Inspection of the MexB and AcrB structures reveals noncontinuous channels located in the periplasmic domain, reaching halfway from the periplasm to a large cavity formed by the four pore domain subdomains in the binding monomer (subunit B) or from this cavity to the OMF docking domain at the periplasmic tip of the protein in the extrusion monomer (subunit C) (Fig. 5a and b). The channels are large enough (the diameter is 19 Å) to accommodate the common substrates proposed to be transported by these transporters. As observed in the asymmetric AcrB structures, conformation B exhibits a channel that is open to the periplasm and could probably capture the substrates from the periplasm, whereas the channel in conformation C opens towards the

The Crystal Structure of MexB

Fig. 4. Structural alignment of MexB and AcrB. (a) Conservation in the transmembrane domain of AcrB. The TMs of subunit B are shown in ribbon representation, and charged residues in the putative translocation site are shown as sticks. (b) Surface representation of the aligned structures. The protein surface of AcrB is colored according to sequence conservation with the homologous MexB. Nonidentical residues are depicted in red. The sequence differences are mainly located in the periplasmic domain. This image was prepared with ProtSkin [http://www. mcgnmr.ca/ProtSkin/intro/index.html].

TolC protein, allowing substrates to be released into the external medium. These two subunits are oriented very similarly compared to the AcrB structure (rmsd of 1.0 Å each) (Fig. 3). The portal from the membrane bilayer leading to the channel of subunit B found in MexB is more constricted than the one observed in AcrB, most likely due to a more helical conformation of the N-terminal part of TM8, as mentioned before (Fig. 3). The most striking difference between MexB and AcrB, however, is the conformation of subunit A (rmsd of 1.6 Å). Subunit A shows deviations between the two structures particularly in TM6­TM12, and remarkable shifts occur in the pore domain, most notably in the PC2 subdomain. Subdomain PC2 is significantly shifted towards the transmembrane domain and towards PC1. These conformational shifts result in a contraction of the

The Crystal Structure of MexB

139

Fig. 5. Stereo view of the channels leading to the drug-binding cavity. (a) The channels detected in MexB are shown as blue surfaces. The subunits are individually colored: green (subunit A), blue (subunit B), and cyan (subunit C). The channels were calculated using the program CAVER [http://loschmidt.chemi. muni.cz/caver]. (b) Channels detected in AcrB (PDB code 2J8S). The subunits are individually colored: yellow (subunit A), orange (subunit B), and red (subunit C).

entrance channel formed by the PC domains (Fig. 5a). In AcrB, there is an opening between PC2 and PC1, extending to the proposed binding cavity similar to the conformation seen in subunit B (Fig. 5b), while in MexB, this channel seems to be closed. The structures of the docking domains of MexB and AcrB, to which the corresponding OMFs have been shown to associate, are very similar, each consisting of two subdomains. One of the two subdomains forms a long protruding loop that inserts into the docking domain of the neighboring subunit. Since OprM and TolC are not interchangeable between the MexAB and AcrAB systems,4 this observation is somewhat surprising, but consistent with the finding that OMFs and RNDs interact transiently and with a rather low affinity.23 The high specificity seems, therefore, more likely to rely on the MFP. Substrate binding by multidrug transporters The structure presented here was solved using crystals grown in the presence of the nonionic detergent n-dodecyl-D-maltoside (DDM) to keep the membrane protein in solution. Detergents are known to be transported by multidrug transporters,24 and it has been speculated that substrate-free structures

of AcrB might actually be detergent-bound forms.25 Unexpectedly, positive electron density was observed within one of the subunits in the MexB trimer (Figs. 3 and 6a). Consistent with the previously determined AcrB­substrate complex structures,13 the density was only visible in the binding subunit B and could be observed in both trimers in the asymmetric unit. As the crystallization buffer did not contain any known substrates of RND transporters, we interpreted the density as maltoside rings belonging to a DDM molecule cocrystallizing with the transporter and placed the maltoside part in an orientation that fits the density. The maltoside binds in a voluminous binding cavity created by the -sheets of the pore domain to a region rich in polar amino acid residues (Fig. 6a). The binding cavity is accessible only in the binding subunit of the asymmetric trimer. Residues in close proximity (b 4 Å) are Val47, Ser48, and Gln125 of PN1; Val177, Gly179, and Ser180 of PN2; and Gln273 and Arg620 of PC1. These residues interact with the substrate presumably via hydrogen-bonding and van der Waals interactions. Not surprisingly, no clear density for the C12­carbohydrate tail was observed, presumably because of its high mobility. This behavior can be observed for most of the three

140

The Crystal Structure of MexB

Fig. 6. The multidrug-binding pocket of AcrB­MexB. (a) Stereo view of the binding cavity, with the Fo - Fc map contoured at 2.5. Minocycline- and doxorubicinbinding sites in AcrB are shown as yellow and gray sticks, respectively. The view is as for the individual subunits in Fig. 2, with PC subdomains omitted for clarity. The subunits are colored as in Fig. 5. (b) Comparison of the electrostatic surface potential of the binding pockets of MexB and AcrB (calculated with APBS). The upper panel has the same orientation as (a) and (c). The view in the lower panel is from the PN2 and PC1 domains. The surface is shown in blue for potentials N 10 kT e-1 and in red for potentials b -10 kT e-1. DDM and minocycline are shown as green and yellow sticks, respectively. (c) Localization of the binding pocket in the overall structure. The magenta oval shows the region that is enlarged in (a) and (b) (upper panel) with the same orientation.

ordered detergents bound to the transmembrane helices of the protein as well. The usage of different sets of residues for binding of structurally diverse substrates was demonstrated

earlier in structures of the transcription repressor QacR harboring various cationic lipophilic drugs, which explained the difference in substrate-specific binding. 26 The observed multispecific binding

The Crystal Structure of MexB

141 Phe178. Asn274 is tilted against the drug to form a hydrogen bond with the 12-hydroxy group (Murakami et al.13 and unpublished results). Together, despite the chemical differences of the three substrates, they all bind in the binding cavity of the pore domain using a different but overlapping set of

seems equally valid for multidrug transporters. The binding site of the DDM bound to MexB corresponds to the minocycline- and doxorubicin-binding sites of AcrB (Fig. 6a). There, the minocycline is bound to residues of the PC1 and PC2 subdomains. The D-ring is wedged between Ile277, Phe615, and

Fig. 7. Packing of MexB in the crystal. (a) Representation of several asymmetric units. The individual subunits are colored as follows: green, blue, and cyan for subunits A, B, and C, and lighter colors for subunits D, E, and F, respectively. (b) Ribbon representation of the individual subunits of MexB. Structural segments involved in crystal contacts are shown in red and were calculated using the Protein Interfaces, Surfaces, and Assemblies service [www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/ prot_int/pistart.html].

142 residues. The nature of this binding cavity seems to be conserved among the two homologues, exhibiting many polar residues at the distal end and more aromatic residues at the proximal end. Even though the substrate specificity of MexB strongly resembles that of AcrB, to date, we have not been able to obtain good-quality MexB crystals in the presence of minocycline and likewise AcrB crystals harboring a tightly bound DDM molecule in the binding cavity. This fact raises a question about the structural features that underlie this difference. One of the most obvious possibilities would be differences within the substrate-binding sites. The size and residues that define the binding cavity are not dramatically different in the two transporters (Fig. 6b). The recent mutational analysis of the AcrB­MexB hybrid pocket revealed that a single position (616) is responsible for determination of resistance against macrolides.27 We calculated the electrostatic surface potential of the binding cavity in MexB, and it seems to be slightly more positive than in AcrB due to two exposed arginine residues (Fig. 6b). Since minocycline is positively charged in our crystallization conditions (pH 4.5), the positive electrostatic potential of the MexB-binding pocket might explain difficulties in obtaining crystals of MexB­minocycline complexes. Based on these findings, one might conclude that the altered substrate specificity of MexB and AcrB results from the subtle differences in their binding pockets. Crystal packing The reason for the large conformational differences in subunit A is unclear. The most obvious reason, however, could be the arrangement of the MexB molecules in the crystal (Fig. 7a). The two trimers of MexB in the asymmetric unit of the crystal pack together in a head-to-head manner, substantially involving the periplasmic part. Notably, the two trimers associate through extensive contacts involving mainly the PC2 subdomain of subunit A. Approximately 700 Å2 of surface area per molecule is buried at this interface. Thus, the observed altered conformation of subunit A could simply be a result of this crystal contact (Fig. 7b). However, there is evidence that the differences are functionally significant. First, the symmetry-related trimer in the asymmetric unit has an identical conformation despite the fact that the contacts between subunit B and subunits B (E) and C (F) of the second molecule cover a smaller surface area (around 450 Å2). Second, there was a triclinic P1 crystal form reported for AcrB, where the molecules also pack headto-head with their periplasmic part, exhibiting essentially the same conformation as the other asymmetric AcrB structures.14 Finally, the smallest sequence conservation between the transporters is seen in the PC1 and PC2 domains (Fig. 1), suggesting that the difference of these domains could be an intrinsic property of MexB and, thus, could be functionally important. Therefore, it is likely that subunit A of MexB represents a naturally occurring alter-

The Crystal Structure of MexB

native state of subunit A; however, the observed conformation might be influenced by crystal packing effects.

Discussion
In this study, we have solved the 3.0-Å crystal structure of MexB from P. aeruginosa. This trimeric protein is part of the multicomponent pump MexAB­ OprM that confers P. aeruginosa resistance to several dyes, detergents, and clinical relevant antibiotics. As expected, MexB shares the same overall fold as its close homologue AcrB. MexB adopts an asymmetric conformation where each subunit adopts a slightly different conformation, therefore confirming the asymmetric conformation of the RND-type transport proteins and supporting the general transport model for this family of multidrug transporters derived from the AcrB structures. The high structural similarity between the transmembrane parts of MexB and AcrB is not surprising, since residues in the transmembrane region are responsible for proton translocation. Therefore, the consistency of TMs is in accordance with high sequence conservation. The similarity of the domain interacting with the OMF supports the finding that RND transporters seem to interact only transiently with the OMFs and that this interaction is probably not responsible for the specificity of the tripartite components. It seems more likely that the specificity is determined by the MFPs. The structural differences observed in the pore domain of one subunit of MexB are consistent with this. Compared to AcrB, a shift of the PC2 subdomain results in closure of the periplasmic portal in this subunit; therefore, no access to the binding cavity was observed in this subunit. It is known that RND transporters interact with their cognate MFPs most probably via the pore domain. A chimeric analysis of MexB and AcrB indicated that residues 589­612 are involved in MFP specificity.4 Consistently, a study identified the nearby mutation T578I in MexB, which compromised the transporters' contribution to antibiotic resistance most likely by impairing its interaction with MexA.28 These residues are all located in the PC1 subdomain of the pore domain. Therefore, the altered conformation of MexB may indicate structural flexibility. The remarkable flexibility was noted before for AcrB based on the diversity of conformations adopted by AcrB in crystal structures, together with data obtained from cross-linking experiments.29 This feature might be critical for the function of RND transporters and might have an impact on the association of the tripartite complex. Structural flexibility has been found also in the MexA homologue AcrA,20 and the interactions between tripartite components were shown to be transient.8 It is likely, therefore, that subunit A presents an intermediate conformational state between the extrusion and the binding of the substrates, which can perhaps accommodate a certain degree of flexibility that could be necessary for a stable association

The Crystal Structure of MexB

143
Bacteria were grown to an absorbance of 0.8 at 600 nm in the presence of 50 mg l- 1 kanamycin at 37 °C and induced with 1 mM isopropyl-D-thiogalactopyranoside for 4 h at 30 °C. Cells were centrifuged and lysed by French press in 20 mM Tris­HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, DNase I, 1 mM PMSF, and complete protease inhibitor cocktail. The membranes were collected for 1 h at 100,000g and solubilized in buffer A composed of 20 mM Tris­HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, 1 mM PMSF, and 10% glycerol containing 1% (wt/vol) DDM (D310LA Anagrade; Anatrace) for 2 h at 4 °C. The solubilized protein was centrifuged for 1 h at 100,000g, and the supernatant was loaded onto a Ni-NTA affinity column (Qiagen) equilibrated with buffer A containing 0.03% DDM. The column was washed using this buffer and 30 mM imidazole, respectively, and the desired protein was eluted with 200 mM imidazole. Crystal preparation To obtain crystals of MexB, the protein was concentrated and further purified on a Tricorn Superdex 200 size-exclusion column (Amersham Biosciences) equilibrated in 20 mM Tris­HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, and 10% glycerol containing 0.03% (wt/vol) DDM. The peak corresponding to the MexB trimer was concentrated, exchanged into 10 mM Hepes (pH 7.5) and 50 mM NaCl buffer containing 0.03% (wt/vol) DDM, and finally concentrated to 20­25 mg ml- 1. Initial crystallization screening was performed in 96well sitting-drop crystallization plates (Greiner Bio-One). The crystal used for data collection appeared within 20 days in 30% polyethylene glycol 400, 50 mM Na-acetate (pH 4.5), and 230 mM NaCl in a sitting-drop vapor-diffusion experiment at 20 °C. For cryoprotection, the crystals were soaked in two steps in mother liquor containing 35% polyethylene glycol 400 and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. The identity of the crystals was confirmed by mass spectrometry analysis. Crystals were melted and, upon tryptic digestion, subjected to tandem mass spectrometry analysis. The measured peptide mass fingerprint fitted to the MexB sequence and did not contain a single peptide that would match the AcrB sequence (data not shown). Structure determination Data were collected at the Swiss Light Source beamline PX on a PILATUS detector (Dectris). The data were indexed, integrated, and scaled with XDS. The crystal belonged to space group P1, with a Matthews coefficient of 3.65 Å3 Da-1 corresponding to an estimated solvent content of 66.0%. The crystal structure was solved by molecular replacement with Phaser31 using the asymmetric crystal structure of AcrB (PDB code 2J8S) as search model. Refinement of the structure was carried out through multiple cycles of manual adjustments and rebuilding using Coot,32 and refinement was carried out using PHENIX,33 resulting in a final model with an R-factor of 24.3 and an Rfree factor of 28.7%. Accession numbers The atomic coordinates and structure factors have been deposited in the PDB (PDB code 2V50).  www.pdb.org

with the corresponding tripartite components. The noncontinuous channels identified clearly assign the binding and extrusion conformation to the conformation seen in subunits B and C, respectively. One might also speculate that conformation A represents a state in between in which a substrate is fully captured, since two detected channels in a trimer per se do not unambiguously determine the direction of the rotation. But as we do not see a substrate bound in this subunit, we exclude this possibility. The progression of a subunit through the three individual conformations is therefore rather ABC than BAC. The reason for the high specificity of the individual pump components remains uncertain. Analysis of the AcrA­MexB­TolC chimeric system revealed partial activity of the hybrid in E. coli cells.8 Consequently, interactions between the components of the tripartite system seem to accommodate a certain degree of flexibility. The transport efficiency and specificity of the hybrid system, which was attributed to the functional misalignment between MexB and the noncognate MFP component AcrA, were significantly impaired, however. Therefore, small structural misalignments between interacting components could significantly affect the transport properties of the tripartite systems. The DDM molecule bound in subunit B, together with the recently solved AcrB­substrate structures and the structural studies on multidrug-binding regulatory proteins, expanded knowledge on the capability to accommodate numerous structurally diverse compounds. The general properties of a multidrug-binding cavity seem to be reiterative. All these protein­substrate complexes possess a large drug-binding cavity that is rich in polar and aromatic residues, providing several partially overlapping binding sites. The binding mode of the maltoside group of the DDM is reminiscent of other sugarbinding transporters, where binding often involves aspargines and serines, which form hydrogen bonds to some hydroxy groups of the sugar.30 However, no aromatic residue stacking was observed in MexB, which might result in weaker binding and lower specificity and thereby reflect the fundamental differences of specific versus multidrug transporters. Taken together, the observation that both AcrB and MexB adopt an asymmetric conformation suggests that bacterial RND transporters share a common mechanism of coupling proton transport to substrate translocation. Furthermore, the mechanistic mobility of the system is reflected in the conformational flexibility of the individual subunits.

Materials and Methods
Protein preparation MexB, amplified from P. aeruginosa strain PAO1 genomic DNA (ATCC 47085) using PCR, was cloned into a pET28 vector using NdeI and XhoI restriction sites, and the protein was expressed with a C-terminal hexahistidine tag in E. coli strain C43 (DE3; Novagen/EMD Biosciences).

144

The Crystal Structure of MexB multidrug efflux pump: a crystallographic and sitedirected mutagenesis study. J. Bacteriol. 187, 6804­6815. Murakami, S., Nakashima, R., Yamashita, E., Matsumoto, T. & Yamaguchi, A. (2006). Crystal structures of a multidrug transporter reveal a functionally rotating mechanism. Nature, 443, 173­179. Seeger, M. A., Schiefner, A., Eicher, T., Verrey, F., Diederichs, K. & Pos, K. M. (2006). Structural asymmetry of AcrB trimer suggests a peristaltic pump mechanism. Science, 313, 1295­1298. Sennhauser, G., Amstutz, P., Briand, C., Storchenegger, O. & Grütter, M. G. (2007). Drug export pathway of multidrug exporter AcrB revealed by DARPin inhibitors. PLoS Biol. 5, e7. Seeger, M. A., von Ballmoos, C., Eicher, T., Brandstätter, L., Verrey, F., Diederichs, K. & Pos, K. M. (2008). Engineered disulfide bonds support the functional rotation mechanism of multidrug efflux pump AcrB. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 15, 199­205. Higgins, M. K., Bokma, E., Koronakis, E., Hughes, C. & Koronakis, V. (2004). Structure of the periplasmic component of a bacterial drug efflux pump. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 9994­9999. Akama, H., Matsuura, T., Kashiwagi, S., Yoneyama, H., Narita, S., Tsukihara, T. et al. (2004). Crystal structure of the membrane fusion protein, MexA, of the multidrug transporter in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 25939­25942. Akama, H., Kanemaki, M., Yoshimura, M., Tsukihara, T., Kashiwagi, T., Yoneyama, H. et al. (2004). Crystal structure of the drug discharge outer membrane protein, OprM, of Pseudomonas aeruginosa: dual modes of membrane anchoring and occluded cavity end. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 52816­52819. Mikolosko, J., Bobyk, K., Zgurskaya, H. I. & Ghosh, P. (2006). Conformational flexibility in the multidrug efflux system protein AcrA. Structure, 14, 577­587. Koronakis, V., Sharff, A., Koronakis, E., Luisi, B. & Hughes, C. (2000). Crystal structure of the bacterial membrane protein TolC central to multidrug efflux and protein export. Nature, 405, 914­919. Guan, L. & Nakae, T. (2001). Identification of essential charged residues in transmembrane segments of the multidrug transporter MexB of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J. Bacteriol. 183, 1734­1739. Touzé, T., Eswaran, J., Bokma, E., Koronakis, E., Hughes, C. & Koronakis, V. (2004). Interactions underlying assembly of the Escherichia coli AcrAB­ TolC multidrug efflux system. Mol. Microbiol. 53, 697­706. Srikumar, R., Kon, T., Gotoh, N. & Poole, K. (1998). Expression of Pseudomonas aeruginosa multidrug efflux pumps MexA­OprM and MexC­MexD­OprJ in a multidrug-sensitive Escherichia coli strain. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 42, 65­71. Murakami, S. (2008). Multidrug efflux transporter, AcrB--the pumping mechanism. Curr. Opin. Struct Biol. 18, 459­465. Schumacher, M. A., Miller, M. C., Grkovic, S., Brown, M. H., Skurray, R. A. & Brennan, R. G. (2001). Structural mechanisms of QacR induction and multidrug recognition. Science, 294, 2158­2163. Wehmeier, C., Schuster, S., Fähnrich, E., Kern, W. V. & Bohnert, J. A. (2008). Site-directed mutagenesis reveals amino acid residues in the Escherichia coli RND efflux pump AcrB that confer macrolide resistance. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 53, 329­330. Middlemiss, J. K. & Poole, K. (2004). Differential impact of MexB mutations on substrate selectivity of the

Acknowledgements
We thank the beamline staff at the Swiss Light Source beamline X06SA for excellent support, Dr. Peter Hunziker of the Functional Genomics Center Zurich for help with mass spectrometry data analysis, and Dr. Oliv Eidam for crystallographic advice. This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation in the framework of the National Center of Competence in Research, Structural Biology.
13.

14.

15.

Supplementary Data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j. jmb.2009.04.001

16.

17.

References
1. Poole, K. & Srikumar, R. (2001). Multidrug efflux in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: components, mechanisms and clinical significance. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 1, 59­71. 2. Nikaido, H. (2001). Preventing drug access to targets: cell surface permeability barriers and active efflux in bacteria. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 12, 215­223. 3. Poole, K., Krebes, K., McNally, C. & Neshat, S. (1993). Multiple antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: evidence for involvement of an efflux operon. J. Bacteriol. 175, 7363­7372. 4. Tikhonova, E. B., Wang, Q. & Zgurskaya, H. I. (2002). Chimeric analysis of the multicomponent multidrug efflux transporters from Gram-negative bacteria. J. Bacteriol. 184, 6499­6507. 5. Elkins, C. A. & Nikaido, H. (2002). Substrate specificity of the RND-type multidrug efflux pumps AcrB and AcrD of Escherichia coli is determined predominantly by two large periplasmic loops. J. Bacteriol. 184, 6490­6498. 6. Zgurskaya, H. I. & Nikaido, H. (1999). Bypassing the periplasm: reconstitution of the AcrAB multidrug efflux pump of Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 96, 7190­7195. 7. Piddock, L. J. (2006). Multidrug-resistance efflux pumps--not just for resistance. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 4, 629­636. 8. Krishnamoorthy, G., Tikhonova, E. B. & Zgurskaya, H. I. (2008). Fitting periplasmic membrane fusion proteins to inner membrane transporters: mutations that enable Escherichia coli AcrA to function with Pseudomonas aeruginosa MexB. J. Bacteriol. 190, 691­698. 9. Aires, J. R., Kohler, T., Nikaido, H. & Plesiat, P. (1999). Involvement of an active efflux system in the natural resistance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to aminoglycosides. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 43, 2624­2628. 10. Murakami, S., Nakashima, R., Yamashita, E. & Yamaguchi, A. (2002). Crystal structure of bacterial multidrug efflux transporter AcrB. Nature, 419, 587­593. 11. Yu, E. W., McDermott, G., Zgurskaya, H. I., Nikaido, H. & Koshland, D. E., Jr. (2003). Structural basis of multiple drug-binding capacity of the AcrB multidrug efflux pump. Science, 300, 976­980. 12. Yu, E. W., Aires, J. R., McDermott, G. & Nikaido, H. (2005). A periplasmic drug-binding site of the AcrB

18.

19.

20. 21.

22.

23.

24.

25. 26.

27.

28.

The Crystal Structure of MexB MexAB­OprM multidrug efflux pump of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J. Bacteriol. 186, 1258­1269. 29. Pos, K. M. (2009). Drug transport mechanism of the AcrB efflux pump. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1794, 782­793. 30. Oldham, M. L., Khare, D., Quiocho, F. A., Davidson, A. L. & Chen, J. (2007). Crystal structure of a catalytic intermediate of the maltose transporter. Nature, 450, 515­521. 31. McCoy, A. J., Grosse-Kunstleve, R. W., Adams, P. D., Winn, M. D., Storoni, L. C. & Read, R. J. (2007). Phaser

145
crystallographic software. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 40, 658­674. 32. Emsley, P. & Cowtan, K. (2004). Coot: model-building tools for molecular graphics. Acta Crystallogr. Sect. D, 60, 2126­2132. 33. Adams, P. D., Grosse-Kunstleve, R. W., Hung, L. W., Ioerger, T. R., McCoy, A. J., Moriarty, N. W. et al. (2002). PHENIX: building new software for automated crystallographic structure determination. Acta Crystallogr. 58, 1948­1954.

