proteins
STRUCTURE O FUNCTION O BIOINFORMATICS

SHORT COMMUNICATION

In meso crystal structure and docking simulations suggest an alternative proteoglycan binding site in the OpcA outer membrane adhesin
Vadim Cherezov,1 Wei Liu,2,3 Jeremy P. Derrick,4 Binquan Luan,5 Aleksei Aksimentiev,5 Vsevolod Katritch,6 and Martin Caffrey1,2,3,7*
1 Department of Chemistry, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210 2 Department of Chemical and Environmental Sciences, Materials and Surface Science Institute, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland 3 Department of Biophysics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210 4 Manchester Interdisciplinary Biocentre, Faculty of Life Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester M1 7ND, United Kingdom 5 Department of Physics, Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801 6 Molsoft LLC, La Jolla, California 92037 7 Department of Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210

ABSTRACT OpcA is an integral outer membrane adhesin protein from Neisseria meningitidis, the causative agent of meningococcal meningitis and septicemia. It binds to sialic acid (SA)-containing polysaccharides on the surface of epithelial cells. The crystal structure of OpcA showed that the protein adopts a 10-stranded b-barrel structure, with five extensive loop regions on the extracellular side of the membrane. These form a crevice structure, lined with basic residues, which was hypothesized to act as the binding site for polysaccharide ligands. In the current study, a distinctly different OpcA

structure has been obtained using crystals grown from a lipidic mesophase. Comparison of the two structures shows that the largest loop (L2), which closes over the end of the b-barrel in the original crystal form, adopts a much more extended structure by reaching outward and away from the protein. The difference in conformation may be attributable to the absence of zinc ions from the crystallization conditions for the in meso crystal form: in the original structure, two zinc ions were bound to the external loops. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations performed on the two OpcA models in a lipid bilayer environment demonstrated pronounced loop mobility. These observations support the view

The Supplementary Material referred to in this article can be found online at http://www.interscience.wiley.com/jpages/0887-3585/suppmat/ Abbreviations: bromo-MAG, 2,3-dihydroxypropyl (7Z)-9,10-dibromooctadecanoate; DDM, n-dodecyl-b-D-maltoside; MD, molecular dynamics; SA, sialic acid. Grant sponsor: Science Foundation Ireland; Grant number: 02-IN1-B266; Grant sponsor: National Institutes of Health; Grant numbers: GM61070, GM75915; Grant sponsor: National Science Foundation; Grant number: IIS-0308078; Grant sponsor: Wellcome Trust, UK; Grant sponsor: National Institutes of Health; Grant number: PHS 5 P41 RR05969; Grant sponsors: Department of Physics at UIUC, National Center for Supercomputer Applications and Pittsburgh Supercomputer Center; Grant number: LRAC MCA05S028; Grant sponsor: National Science Foundation; Grant number: DMR 0225180; Grant sponsor: National Institutes of Health (National Center for Research Resources); Grant number: RR-01646. Vadim Cherezov's current address is Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037. *Correspondence to: Martin Caffrey, Department of Chemical and Environmental Sciences, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland. E-mail: martin.caffrey@ul.ie Received 12 May 2007; Revised 14 August 2007; Accepted 11 September 2007 Published online 12 December 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/prot.21841

24

PROTEINS

C V 2007 WILEY-LISS, INC.

Sialic Acid Binding in the Adhesin OpcA

that the loop regions of OpcA are capable of a high degree of conformational flexibility. The original binding site for polysaccharide is not present in the in meso crystal form, and is disrupted during MD simulations. Docking analysis suggests a putative alternative location for the SA ligand in the new crystal form of OpcA.

C V 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

Proteins 2008; 71:24­34.

Key words: lipidic cubic phase; membrane protein crystallization; molecular dynamics; sialic acid; X-ray diffraction.

INTRODUCTION The causative agent of meningococcal meningitis and septicemia in humans is the gram-negative bacterium Neisseria meningitidis. OpcA is an integral, outer membrane protein which promotes adhesion of meningococci to epithelial cells through interaction with proteoglycan surface receptors.1,2 It therefore plays a role in the close attachment phase of Neisseria to the epithelial cell,3 a function which it shares with the opacity (Opa) proteins.4 It has also been shown that bactericidal antibodies against OpcA (formerly called Opc) are raised in the human host, and it is therefore a potential vaccine component.5 The crystal structure of OpcA has been determined to ° 2.0 A resolution.6 In common with other outer membrane proteins, OpcA adopts a b-barrel structure with an apolar exterior surface which anchors it in the membrane. The extracellular end of the barrel, located above the predicted membrane surface, is terminated by five loops that extend from the barrel staves. Together the loops form a crevice, lined with positively charged residues, which was proposed to be the site for recognition of heparin and proteoglycan ligands identified by de Vries et al.1 More recently, fluorescence-based binding studies have refined the binding preference of OpcA. Specifically, Moore et al.7 have shown that OpcA binds sialic acid (SA) and several mono- and oligosaccharides with dissociation constants in the micromolar range. The binding of highly charged polysaccharide ligands appears to be nonspecific and mutation of residues around the binding site proposed by Prince et al.6 produced little change in binding constants for SA.7 There are indications, therefore, that the binding site suggested by Prince et al.6 may not apply to the simpler pyranose monosaccharide ligands identified by Moore et al.7 The physiological significance of these findings was highlighted when SA was shown to partially inhibit the binding of meningococci to epithelial cells. One residue, Tyr169, located toward the extracellular end of the barrel, was shown to be responsible for most of the protein's intrinsic fluorescence which was specifically quenched on SA binding. This, and other evidence, suggested that the loop regions play a key role in the recognition of saccharide ligands by OpcA. The original structure6 was solved using crystals of OpcA grown by the traditional, surfactant-based vapor

diffusion method. The inclusion of zinc ions was mandatory for crystal formation, and solution of the crystal structure revealed that two zinc ions were bound to residues from the loop regions. The conformation of the loops could therefore be partly dictated by crystal packing interactions and binding to zinc ions. The in meso method which makes use of a lipidic mesophase,8,9 is a very different approach for growing crystals, and has been successfully applied to b-barrel proteins.10,11 Accordingly, in the current investigation trials were conducted using this alternative method with a view to crystallizing OpcA in a form different from that produced by the original, so-called in surfo method. Here, we report the determination of the crystal structure of OpcA to ° 1.95 A resolution, by the in meso method. We find that the barrel region of the protein is virtually identical in the in meso and in surfo models. However, the structures differ dramatically in the loop regions; in particular, the longest external loop region, L2, has moved out of and away from the barrel. This has effectively removed the original proposed binding pocket for proteolglycan. Docking simulations, carried out on the in meso structure, suggested a possible binding site for SA at the base of the loop regions and adjacent to Tyr169. The two contrasting crystal structures highlight the considerable range of motion available to the extracellular loops that may play a role in ligand binding by induced fit. These conclusions are corroborated by molecular dynamics (MD) simulations performed on the crystal-derived models in a lipid bilayer environment. This study underscores the benefit of having multiple crystal forms of a protein with which to evaluate structure­function relationships.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Small-angle X-ray diffraction

Hydrated lipid samples were prepared in 1 mm diameter quartz capillaries (Hampton Research, Aliso Viejo, CA) at room temperature using a home-built mechanical syringe mixer12,13 at 60% (w/w) buffer or protein solution and $10 mg of lipid. Nickel-filtered copper Ka Xy

For additional details, see Supplemental Materials.

PROTEINS

25

V. Cherezov et al.

rays from a rotating anode generator (RU-300, Rigaku, Danvers, MA) were used to make low- and wide-angle diffraction measurements, as described.14 The sample-todetector distance, $300 mm, was calibrated using silver behenate.15 Samples were mounted in a temperaturecontrolled beryllium holder.16 Diffraction patterns were recorded on image plates (Fuji HR-IIIN, Fuji Medical Systems USA, Stamford, CT) and were analyzed for d-spacing information using the program Fit2D,17 as described.18
Spectroscopy

an AVIV CD Spectrometer (Model 202, Protein Solutions, Lakewood, NJ). Measurements in solution were performed using 1 mm path length quartz cuvettes. Because of the high absorbance of monoolein in the UVregion, the bulk of the cubic phase data was acquired using 0.1 mm path length cuvettes, which were loaded as described previously.19 All measurements were made after a 1 h equilibration at 208C. For the bulk of the spectroscopic measurements described earlier, samples were prepared and analyzed in triplicate.
Ligand binding

UV­visible absorption

Spectra were recorded with a Uvikon XL dual beam spectrophotometer (Research Instruments Intl., San Diego, CA) and with air as the reference, as described.10 The absorbance spectrum of a lipid/protein solution cubic phase dispersion or buffer alone in a 3 mm quartz cuvette (Hellma) recorded against air was subtracted from the protein-containing sample spectra as appropriate.
Fluorescence

Emission spectra were recorded using an SFM3 fluorimeter (Bio-Logic Science Instruments, Claix, France). Light intensity was measured with a photomultiplier tube (Bio-Logic PMT 200) and an integration time of 100 ms. Emission spectra from samples in 3 mm quartz cuvettes were recorded with an excitation wavelength of 280 nm and 305 nm over a limited wavelength range from 360 to 320 nm. The inner filter correction was applied to all spectra, as described.19
Fluorescence quenching

Quenching of tryptophan fluorescence by bromine labeled lipid (bromo-MAG) was used to demonstrate insertion of OpcA into the lipid bilayer of the cubic phase. For this purpose, bromo-MAG was mixed with molten monoolein at concentrations from 0 (pure monoolein) to 100 mol% (pure bromo-MAG) and the mixtures were used to prepare OpcA-containing cubic phase samples for fluorescence quenching measurements. That all bromo-MAG/monoolein mixtures form the cubicPn3m phase was confirmed by small-angle X-ray diffraction, as described.19 Background correction was done using control samples with the same bromo-MAG/monoolein ratios that lacked OpcA.
Circular dichroism

Binding of SA to OpcA reconstituted into the fully hydrated cubic-Pn3m phase of monoolein was determined by monitoring the ligand-induced reduction in the intrinsic fluorescence of the protein. The procedure is essentially that used to quantify vitamin B12 binding to the outer membrane receptor, BtuB.10 Briefly, the protein was reconstituted into the cubic phase using a solution consisting of OpcA (0.3 mg protein/mL) in 0.1% (w/v) n-octyl-b-D-glucopyranoside (OG), and 50 mM bis-tris propane buffer, pH 7.0. The cubic phase was then combined by mechanical mixing with a solution containing 0­800 lM SA under conditions that ensured optical transparency. Fluorescence measurements were made as described earlier. Control data were collected with OpcA in OG detergent solution, as described.10 The dissociation constant, Kd, was calculated by Scatchard analysis. To this end, the fractional saturation of OpcA with ligand (m) was determined based on a normalized fluorescence. Normalization was done using fluorescence values recorded in the absence of ligand, and under saturating ligand conditions (800 lM). Free ligand concentration, [SA]f, was calculated based on the known total concentration of ligand and protein, and on m. A Scatchard plot of m/[SA]f versus m has an ordinate intercept of 1/Kd and a slope of 21/Kd from which the binding constant is obtained. The extent of quenching observed upon ligand saturation was $20% for protein dispersed in detergent solution and in the cubic phase.
Crystallization

The conformation of OpcA in detergent solution and reconstituted into the lipidic cubic phase was determined by circular dichroism (CD). Spectra were recorded using

Expression and purification of recombinant OpcA was performed as described by Prince et al.20 After the last purification step the protein was precipitated in ethanol and stored in small aliquots at 2208C. Before crystallization, a vial of the protein-in-ethanol suspension was centrifuged for 15 min at 14,000g. Ethanol was removed and the pellet was dissolved in 0.1% (w/v) n-dodecyl-b-Dmaltoside (DDM), 50 mM bis-tris propane pH 7.0 to 0.2 mg protein/mL. The protein was then concentrated using a Microcon spin concentrator (Millipore, 30 kDa cut off) to $12 mg/mL.

26

PROTEINS

Sialic Acid Binding in the Adhesin OpcA

Table I
Data Collection and Refinement Statistics

A. Data Collection Space group Unit-cell parameters () X-ray source Wavelength () Resolution limits () Unique reflections Redundancy Completeness (%) I/r Rsym (%)b B. Refinement Refinement resolution () R-factor (%) Rfree (%) (5% data) Number of protein atoms Number of water molecules RMSD bond length () RMS bond angles (8) ML coordinate error () Ramachandran plot statistics (%)c (excl. Gly, Pro) Most favored regions Additionally allowed regions Generously allowed regions Disallowed regions
a b c

P212121 a 5 37.86, b 5 42.50, c 5 150.30 CHESS F1 0.9176 20­1.95 (2.06­1.95)a 18,131 4.8 (4.7)a 98.8 (99.8)a 13.1 (2.7)a 9.9 (48.7)a 10­1.95 (2.00­1.95)a 22.4 (22.4)a 27.2 (30.5)a 1,767 120 0.007 1.15 0.135

94.1 5.3 0.5 0

Numbers in parentheses refer to the highest resolution shell. Rsym5 ShklSsym|I2hIi|/ShklI. From PROCHECK.22

as a starting model. Following an initial round of refinement using REFMAC524 from the CCP4 suite,25 SigmaA weighted 2Fo­Fc and Fo­Fc maps were calculated. The following loop regions were deleted from the model, either because they gave a poor fit to the density, or density was weak or absent for them: residues 22­27, 60­83, 126­128, 175­184, and 226­233. Alternate cycles of refinement with REFMAC5 and model building, were used to extend and modify the model, particularly for the external loop regions. It was clear that the L2 loop had changed conformation radically, and the new structure was built incrementally, adding a few residues at a time. In the latter stages of refinement, a strong feature in the electron density was apparent, adjacent to Thr101, which was modeled as a sulfate ion. Density for an aliphatic hydrocarbon chain was also found in a hydrophobic pocket between Phe212 and Ile251: this was modeled as octane in the structure and may derive from DDM or monoolein. TLS-based refinement was used, as for the original OpcA structure.6 The final model omitted the following residues within the loop regions, due to density being weak or absent: 124­129, 174­180, 203­204, 226­ 232. Assessment of the stereochemical quality of the model by PROCHECK22 showed that it is at least as good, or better, than other structures that have been determined at this resolution. Structure factors and coordinates have been submitted to the Protein Data Bank under the accession number--2VDF.
MD simulations

In meso crystallization was performed with monoolein as the host lipid. Full details of the crystallization trials are described in Supplemental Materials. The best crystals were obtained in 18% (v/v) PEG400, 0.1M potassium sulfate, 0.05M Hepes, pH 7.0 at 208C. Crystals grew to their full size of 25 3 25 3 70 lm3 in 20­30 days (Supplemental Fig. S1). Harvesting was done after 24 days using Hampton cryo-loops (0.05­0.1 mm diameter) and crystals were cryocooled and stored in liquid nitrogen. Crystals were harvested directly from the cubic phase and were frozen immediately without further treatment.

Structure solution and refinement

Diffraction measurements on in meso-grown crystals were performed on the F1 beamline at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS, Ithaca, NY) using a ° 100 lm diameter and 0.9124 A wavelength beam, and an ADSC Quantum-4 detector. A complete dataset was recorded on a single crystal at a sample-to-detector distance of 180 mm using a 1.08 oscillation and a 40 s exposure per image. Data reduction and scaling were performed with MOSFLM.21 Data collection and refinement statistics are summarized in Table I. The structure was solved by molecular replacement using MOLREP23 and the previously reported OpcA structure6 (PDB ID 1K24)

Three microscopic models of OpcA in a lipid bilayer membrane were constructed. For the first model, the atomic coordinates of the protein were taken from the in meso structure reported in this article. The two others were built using the atomic coordinates of the in surfo structure (PDB ID 1K24). The first in surfo model contained all three zinc ions resolved in the X-ray structure; in the second the zinc ions were removed. Missing residues in loops L3, L4, and L5 of the in meso structure were modeled using fragments of the in surfo structure. In addition to the water molecules resolved in the X-ray structures, the Dowser26 and Solvate programs27 were used to place extra water inside and outside the protein, respectively. The protein was then merged with a palmitoyloleoylphosphatidylcholine lipid bilayer, according to the Orientations of Proteins in Membranes database.28 The protein­lipid complex was solvated in a rectangular volume of TIP3P29 water molecules, and sodium and chloride ions were added to create a 0.12M solution. The ° final systems measured 76 3 76 3 104 A3 and included over 58,000 atoms. All MD simulations were performed using the program NAMD,30 the CHARMM27 force field,31 periodic boundary conditions, and particle-mesh Ewald full electrostatics.32 The temperature was kept at 310 K by
PROTEINS

27

V. Cherezov et al.

applying Langevin forces.33 Equilibration in the NpT en´ semble was performed using Nose-Hoover Langevin piston pressure control34 at 1 bar. Van der Waals energies ° were calculated using a smooth (10­12 A) cutoff.

Table II
Effect of PEG 400 on the Phase Properties of Hydrated Monoolein at 208C

PEG 400 [% (v/v)]a 0 18 30 45
a

Phase identity Pn3m Pn3m Pn3m Sponge

Lattice parameter ()b 103 114 120 122

Binding pocket prediction and docking simulations

The molecular modeling package ICM-Pro (Molsoft LLC, La Jolla, CA) was used to predict potential binding pockets and to perform the docking simulation. The icmPocketFinder algorithm35 does not require prior knowledge of the ligand molecule and relies on a transformation of the Lennard-Jones potential calculated from a three-dimensional protein structure to predict pockets optimal for small molecule binding. The algorithm was validated on a large data set of both liganded and unliganded (apo) structures from the Protein Data Bank, showing correct pocket predictions in 96.8% and 95.0% cases, respectively.35 Flexible docking of SA was performed with the ICM docking procedure36,37 as follows. First, the in meso crystal structure of OpcA was converted into an ICM model, which includes optimal assignment of polar hydrogens. Second, a large rectangular box was selected so that it covers fully the extracellular half of OpcA, including the predicted binding pocket. Receptor potential maps based on ECEPP/3 energy terms38 were calculated on a fine grid inside the rectangular box. Third, the ligand was randomly placed inside the box and the ICM Monte-Carlo Minimization (MCM) procedure in the internal coordinate space39 was run to find the global minimum of the energy function. Each step of the algorithm consists of a random change of either torsional or positional coordinates, followed by local minimization. A torsional move involves randomization of a single arbitrarily chosen torsion angle in the ligand, while positional moves allow pseudo-Brownian translation and rotation of the ligand as a whole.39 ICM uses an analytical gradient minimization, which quickly finds the local minima of the energy function. To verify convergence of the optimization procedure, multiple MCM runs from several starting positions were performed. The fourth and the final step of the ICM docking procedure calculates the ligand binding score, which consists of the internal force-field energy of the ligand and the ligand/ receptor interaction energy. The latter includes van der Waals terms, a hydrophobicity term based on the solvent accessible surface buried upon binding, an electrostatic solvation term calculated using a boundary-element solution of the Poisson equation, hydrogen-bond interaction terms, and an entropic term proportional to the number of flexible torsions in the ligand.37 The algorithm has shown high docking accuracy in recent benchmark studies.40,41

Refers to the PEG 400 concentration in 0.1M potassium sulfate, 0.05M Hepes pH 7.0 buffer solution used to form the cubic phase. b ° The lattice parameter values reported are accurate to Æ3 A.

RESULTS
In meso OpcA structure Preliminary characterization

The in meso method begins with what is assumed to be a reconstitution of the protein into the lipid bilayer of the cubic phase. Evidence in support of this assumption follows. To begin with, the protein is combined with the lipid, monoolein, in a ratio that should produce the cubic phase provided the detergent concentration of the protein solution is not too high.42 When this was done with the OpcA preparation, the cubic-Pn3m phase was formed as evidenced by small-angle X-ray diffraction (data not shown). The lattice parameter of the cubic ° phase was 104 A, which is similar to the value observed ° with a control monoolein/buffer sample (103 A). Upon addition of precipitant solution to trigger nucleation and crystal growth, the cubic phase swelled (Table II). It is from the slightly swollen, bicontinuous mesophase that the crystals of OpcA were harvested. Higher concentrations of the precipitant solution induced sponge phase formation (Table II), as has been observed with other precipitants.43 Spectroscopic measurements were made to determine the state of the protein while reconstituted in the cubic phase. The UV­visible spectra of the OpcA preparation in a detergent solution [0.1% (w/v) DDM] and in meso are shown in Figure 1(A). Within experimental error, the spectral properties are the same regardless of the protein dispersion state. CD spectra showed that the gross secondary structure was insensitive to whether the protein was in solution or in a bilayer environment [Fig. 1(B)]. Quenching of tryptophan fluorescence by a lipid with a dibrominated acyl chain (bromo-MAG) has been used to demonstrate reconstitution of gramicidin19 and the vitamin B12 (cobalamin) transporter/receptor, BtuB,10 in the lipidic mesophase. This same approach was employed with OpcA and the data are shown in Figure 1(C). OpcA has four tryptophans [Fig. 2(A)], three of which should be accessible directly to quenching by bromo-MAG provided the protein is reconstituted into the lipid bilayer of

28

PROTEINS

Sialic Acid Binding in the Adhesin OpcA

Figure 1
Spectrophotometric properties of OpcA in detergent solution and in the cubic phase. (A) UV­visible absorbance spectra of OpcA in detergent solution and in the cubicPn3m phase and fluorescence spectra of OpcA in the cubic-Pn3m phase in the presence and absence of SA. (B) CD spectra of OpcA in detergent solution and in the cubic phase. The region of the cubic phase spectrum below $208 nm is not reliable because of strong background absorption by the lipid, as described.19 (C) Quenching of OpcA intrinsic fluorescence by bromo-MAG in the cubic phase of hydrated monoolein. Fluorescence intensity, Fc, was normalized to the value recorded in the absence of quenching lipid, F0. Values reported are the average of at least triplicate sample preparations. (D) Scatchard analysis for the binding of SA to OpcA in detergent solution and in the cubic phase.

the cubic phase. The extent of quenching observed ($80%) is consistent with this expectation [Fig. 1(C)] and supports the view that OpcA is reconstituted prior to crystallization. We also wished to determine if the protein retained ``functionality'' in meso prior to crystallization. This was examined by measuring SA binding to OpcA reconstituted into the cubic phase. Association was demonstrated by a reduction in the intrinsic fluorescence of the reconstituted protein excited at 280 nm, but not at 305 nm [Fig. 1(A)]. Scatchard analysis showed that OpcA in the cubic phase bound ligand with a Kd of 0.4 lM [Fig. 1(D)]. The corresponding value measured with the protein dispersed in noctyl-b-D-OG detergent was 0.6 lM [Fig. 1(D)], consistent with the literature value of 0.3 lM.7 Taken together, these data support the view that the protein reconstitutes into the bilayer of the cubic phase in an active form prior to in meso crystallization.

Molecular structure

Crystals of OpcA, grown in meso using monoolein as ° the hosting lipid, diffracted to 1.95 A resolution. The structure was solved by molecular replacement using the original in surfo OpcA structure as a search model. The data collection and refinement statistics are reported in Table I. The structure of the protein obtained using in meso-grown crystals is, in general, similar to that of crystals grown by the in surfo method. Briefly, it is a 10° stranded, anti-parallel b-barrel $45 A long, which, when viewed end on, has an oval shape (see Fig. 2). The periplasmic end of the barrel is relatively flat and uniform. It is made up of the N- and C-termini and four short turns created by b-strands extending from the sides of the barrel. In contrast, the extracellular end of the barrel is irregularly shaped. It includes five loops that connect adjacent b-strands emanating from the barrel, three of
PROTEINS

29

V. Cherezov et al.

bility of the loop regions. Computed against the X-ray coordinates, the average RMSD of the barrel's backbone ° is only 1 A while the average RMSD of the loops exceeds ° 5 A. During the course of a 22 ns simulation, L2 goes from a position where it is folded out and away from the center of the barrel to being aligned almost directly over the staves [Fig. 3(A­C)]. With time, L2 pulls away from the barrel in the direction it came from but does not return to its original position. An animation illustrating the simulation trajectory is available (Supplemental Movie 1). In contrast, L3 pulls away from the barrel and ends up with its tip oriented perpendicular to the barrel surface having started out parallel to it. L4 begins in the starting structure bent slightly away from the barrel surface; it then fluctuates and eventually makes its way toward the barrel interior. L5 starts out in line with the barrel wall, and then slowly reaches over the pore, and at one point extends well past the middle of the barrel. During its sojourn it contacts L4 and caps the barrel. L1 remains in its original position, with very little motion throughout the simulation. In contrast to the loops, the distance traveled by the periplasmic turns during the simulation is slight, with most of the motion involving fluctuations about a mean position. The N-terminus is highly flexible, as expected.
Figure 2
The in meso model of OpcA viewed from within (A­C) and from outside the membrane (D). The hydrophobic boundaries, as defined by the distribution of tryptophans and tyrosines in the model, and by transfer free energy ° calculations,28 are shown as horizontal lines spaced 25.2 A apart (A­C). In (A), the backbone is transparent gray so that tryptophans (red) and tyrosines (blue) can be seen clearly. In (B) the in surfo model (1K24) in blue is overlaid on the in meso model shown in red. In (C) and (D), a cartoon representation of secondary structure elements (a-helix, red; b-strand, yellow) in the model is shown with tryptophans (purple), hydrocarbon (gray), and sulfate ion (sulfur, yellow; oxygen, and red) in van der Waals sphere representation. The view in (D) is from the extracellular medium. The blue and red horizontal lines in (A­C) represent the periplasmic and extracellular membrane boundaries, respectively.

OpcA in surfo

The original structure of OpcA was solved using crystals grown in surfo. Zinc was required for crystallogen-

which are of approximately equal size. Loops 2 (L2) and 5 (L5) are somewhat longer and project above the upper surface created by L1, L3, and L4. While L5 extends parallel to the barrel core, in the in meso structure, L2 projects away from the center of the barrel. Thus, the protein takes on the appearance of open barrel with two handles (L2, L5) on opposite sides of its upper rim. It is in the loop regions that the in meso and in surfo structures differ dramatically, as will be discussed.
MD simulations OpcA in meso

Figure 3
Views from the extracellular medium of the in meso and in surfo OpcA models based on molecular dynamics simulations. (A) X-ray structure of the in meso model. Loops 3, 4, and 5 were rebuilt using the corresponding fragments in the in surfo model. (B, C) Intermediate and final states in the simulation of the in meso model. (D) X-ray structure of the in surfo model. (E, F) Intermediate and final states in the simulation of the in surfo model without zinc ions. Loops from L1 to L5 are colored cyan, red, orange, green, and blue, respectively. The three zinc ions in (D) are shown as gray spheres.

The MD simulations performed on the in meso form of OpcA highlight the contrasting rigidity of the barrel portion of the protein and the comparatively high flexi-

30

PROTEINS

Sialic Acid Binding in the Adhesin OpcA

esis and three zinc ions were incorporated into the model [Fig. 3(D)]. One of the ions interacts with loops L2, L3, and L4, and we speculate that it likely contributes to creating the putative ligand-binding pocket described by Prince et al.6 It was considered worthwhile, therefore, to perform the MD simulations with and without zinc. When the zinc ions were omitted from the structure, the three previously anchored loops moved apart. In time, L2 migrated across whilst L1 moved toward the centre of the barrel. The two loops approached one another and occluded the putative ligand-binding pocket [Fig. 3(E)]. The average RMSD of L2, L3, and L4 from their X-ray coordinates were ° 4.5, 2.5, and 6 A, respectively. An animation illustrating the simulation trajectory is available (Supplemental Movie 2). In the presence of zinc, the loops fluctuated about a mean position held in place by the zinc ions. The corresponding average RMSD values for L2, L3, ° and L4 were 3.5, 2.5, and 2.2 A, respectively. Over the course of the simulation, the binding pocket associated with these loops adjusted in size by a small amount (data not shown). Together, these observations suggest that the conformation observed in the published 1K24 structure corresponds to one of the many short-lived conformations that the mobile loops sample naturally. The conformation found in 1K24 is one that happens to become immobilized and incorporated into the lattice by a zinc ion in the precipitant solution that bathes the nascent crystal.

Figure 4
Docking of SA in the newly proposed binding pocket of OpcA. (A) Side view of the predicted optimal binding pockets. Both small (green) and large pocket (tan) are located in the transmembrane channel of OpcA. The smaller pocket can accommodate the SA ligand. (B) SA docked into the smaller of the two pockets in the in meso OpcA structure. The ligand is shown in thick stick representation with yellow carbon atoms. OpcA residues have light gray carbon atoms. The original position of Arg23 in the in meso model is indicated by thin magenta sticks. The conformation of Arg23 shown in medium stick representation is predicted by flexible docking simulations. Hydrogen bonds are shown by chains of aquamarine spheres. Relevant amino acids are identified by their one-letter code and sequence position. The 2-hydroxyl of SA is labeled. The blue and red horizontal lines in (A) represent the periplasmic and extracellular membrane boundaries, respectively.

DISCUSSION
Comparison with known structures

Binding pocket prediction and molecular docking

Modeling of SA docking into pockets in the barrel region of OpcA was carried out as described under Materials and Methods. A well-defined pocket [green cloud in Fig. 4(A)] was found toward the extracellular end of the b-barrel channel. The predicted size of the pocket ($280 ° A3) is slightly smaller than the molecular volume of SA ° ($344 A3). A second larger pocket was found which corresponds to the wider, mid-section of the transmembrane channel [brown cloud in Fig. 4(A)]. It was included in the docking exercise but the better fit was observed with the smaller pocket. The best fit conformation [Fig. 4(B)] includes a network of at least seven hydrogen bonds between the SA and the receptor (acceptor-proton distan° ces <2.5 A). Two additional hydrogen bonds can form; one each to Tyr169 and Tyr219 with acceptor-proton dis° tances of 2.6 and 2.9 A, respectively. The only steric clash was found between the carboxylate of the ligand and the side chain of Arg23. Electron density and additional modeling indicated that the latter is highly flexible; presumably it can move to avoid overlap and to optimize the interaction between its guanidinium group and the ligand carboxylate.

As noted, the structure of OpcA obtained using in meso- and in surfo-grown crystals are by and large very similar. This is revealed by overlaying the two structures in Figure 2(B) and by comparing the backbone RMSD between the two models in Supplemental Figure S2. The staves of the barrel and the periplasmic turns all coincide remarkably well indicating little, if any, difference between the two structures. However, there are pronounced differences in the extracellular loop region. In the in surfo structure, L2 is folded over the middle of the barrel and is surrounded by the other four loops. In the in meso form, by contrast, it has peeled off the top of the protein and away from the barrel core. The backbone RMSD between the two structures in the vicinity of L2 is ° 30 A (Supplementary Fig. S2). Taken with the MD simulations, these observations suggest that L2 is capable of a large range of motion. The position of L1 is also significantly different between the two structures. Comment on the disparities between the two models at the other loop locations is not possible because of weak and untraceable density, likely due to flexibility, in the in meso maps in those regions. The in surfo model revealed the presence of a crevice lined with positively charged residues on the extracellular surface of OpcA. This was proposed to be the proteoglycan-binding pocket of the protein.6 The pocket is formed
PROTEINS

31

V. Cherezov et al.

by L3, L4, and L5 on one side, L1 on the other with L2 crossing between the two sets of loops and across the mid-section of the barrel. In this conformation, the barrel is closed at its extracellular end by L2. By contrast, in the in meso model, L2 is no longer centrally located but rather projects away from the barrel core. As a result, the ligand-binding site, as envisioned for the in surfo model, no longer exists. With L2 pointing away from the core, the barrel in the in meso model becomes an ``open'' ° channel with a limiting diameter of $2 A (Supplemental Fig. S3). We propose that the extracellular end of this channel at the top of the barrel constitutes the actual SA binding site of the protein.
Sialic acid binding

On the basis of the in meso structure of OpcA, its fluorescence quenching behavior, and the MD simulations results it seemed reasonable to speculate that the SA/proteoglycan binding site of OpcA is toward the base of the funnel-shaped depression at the extracellular end of the b-barrel. It is here that the five loops come together, the exposed surface of which was considered to create a binding pocket. Indeed, a suitably sized pocket of about ° 300 A3 [green cloud in Fig. 4(A)] was found at the entrance to the b-barrel channel, and the automatic docking simulation consistently placed SA in the cavity [Fig. 4(B)]. This ligand position is characterized by a very good van der Waals fit and by the formation of a network of up to nine receptor-ligand hydrogen bonds. Two of these are predicted to form between SA and the hydroxyl groups of Tyr169 and Tyr218, and as a result, may be involved in ligand-induced fluorescence quenching [see Fig. 1(A) and Ref. 7]. Note, that the guanidinium group of Arg23, which is characterized by high Bfactors and does not have significant contacts with other residues of the protein, was considered flexible in the docking model. While its initial position in the X-ray model overlaps significantly with the sugar ring of the ligand, the side chain can adopt an alternative conformation that has optimal contacts with the carboxylate of SA. It is possible too that Arg23 may serve to attract the SA end of the proteoglycan into the barrel core and to assist in steering it into the binding pocket. Then, by an induced fit mechanism, it may secure the ligand in place electrostatically. It is interesting to note that the predicted orientation of SA in the binding pocket has its 2-hydroxyl pointing toward the extracellular opening of the channel. This agrees well with the terminal location of SA in mammalian proteoglycan chains.44
MD simulations

els of OpcA undergo pronounced conformational changes in the extracellular loop region. Eventually, the structures stabilize but the extent of motion points to a high degree of loop flexibility. This is in distinct contrast to the barrel itself, which is essentially rigid. The in surfo structure of OpcA was obtained based on crystals grown in the presence of zinc ions. As noted, two and a half zinc ions per protein molecule (one zinc ion is shared between two protein molecules) appear in the final model. One of the ions is coordinated by residues at the tips of L2, L3, and L4: the MD simulations provide evidence that this ion played a role in stabilizing the proteoglycan binding pocket proposed by Prince et al.6 Thus, when zinc was removed from the model the simulations show that L2, a major component of the putative pocket, moved in such a way as to destroy the binding surface [Fig. 3(D­F)]. It therefore appears unlikely that this binding site would persist in the absence of zinc ions. The in surfo structure of OpcA has also been subjected to MD simulations in a dimyristoyl-phosphatidylcholine bilayer environment.45 Very similar observations to ours were made in that study despite the differences in the lipid used for the membrane model. Thus, the zinc- and crystal contact-free protein exhibited considerable flexibility in its extracellular loop region that led, during the course of the simulation, to the disappearance of the binding pocket as described in the Prince et al. study.6 The in meso structure also shows evidence for considerable loop flexibility: the L2 loop, for example, has a conformation that is extended far from the b-barrel. During the course of the MD simulations, L2 migrates toward the barrel and then folds partially back in the direction from which it came. This, combined with the simulation data for the in surfo model, illustrates the wide range of motion available to L2. Remarkably, the water-filled passage connecting the extracellular space and the top of the barrel, which we propose contains the actual binding pocket, remains open during the course of the simulations (Supplemental Fig. S3). It is into this that the SA-terminated proteoglycan presumably sits [Fig. 4(B)]. Subsequent rearrangements of the extracellular loops may take place around the proteoglycan to secure it in position, in an induced fit process. CONCLUSIONS The in meso structure coupled with docking analysis points to an alternative binding site for SA, and hence proteoglycan more generally, at the confluence of the barrel and the flexible loops of the OpcA protein. The proposed binding cavity conforms to the size and chemistry of the ligand, and interaction is stabilized by several strong hydrogen bonds. Presumably then the apo-protein exists with its tentacle-like loops encircling the binding pocket and thrashing about in the extracellular medium. Upon engagement with ligand the loops may enfold and

The MD simulations show that, when placed in a lipid bilayer environment, both the in meso and in surfo mod-

32

PROTEINS

Sialic Acid Binding in the Adhesin OpcA

secure it in place by an induced fit mechanism. A particular role for Arg23 in this process is proposed. OpcA is the second example of a nonchromophore containing b-barrel protein to have produced diffraction quality crystals by the in meso method; BtuB was the first.10 The result demonstrates the general applicability of this novel approach for crystallizing membrane proteins. The crystals showed a layered (Type 1) arrangement and dense packing of OpcA molecules. Both characteristics are emerging as hallmarks of the in meso method (see Table II and Fig. 10 in Ref. 10). This work highlights the need for caution when interpreting crystallographic structure data obtained with just one form of a crystal. This is particularly true when the business end of the macromolecule is involved in crystal contacts. The so-called ``tyranny of the lattice'' comes into play then and contacts set up in the crystal can create non-native conformations. A recent example of this phenomenon has been described for the bacterial multidrug efflux transporter, AcrB.46 REFERENCES
1. de Vries FP, Cole R, Dankert J, Frosch M, van Putten JP. Neisseria meningitidis producing the Opc adhesin binds epithelial cell proteoglycan receptors. Mol Microbiol 1998;27:1203­1212. 2. Virji M, Makepeace K, Moxon ER. Distinct mechanisms of interactions of Opc-expressing meningococci at apical and basolateral surfaces of human endothelial cells; the role of integrins in apical interactions. Mol Microbiol 1994;14:173­184. 3. Nassif X, Pujol C, Morand P, Eugene E. Interactions of pathogenic Neisseria with host cells. Is it possible to assemble the puzzle? Mol Microbiol 1999;32:1124­1132. 4. Malorny B, Morelli G, Kusecek B, Kolberg J, Achtman M. Sequence diversity, predicted two-dimensional protein structure, and epitope mapping of neisserial Opa proteins. J Bacteriol 1998;180:1323­1330. 5. Rosenqvist E, Hoiby EA, Wedege E, Kusecek B, Achtman M. The 5C protein of Neisseria meningitidis is highly immunogenic in humans and induces bactericidal antibodies. The J Infect Dis 1993;167:1065­1073. 6. Prince SM, Achtman M, Derrick JP. Crystal structure of the OpcA integral membrane adhesin from Neisseria meningitidis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002;99:3417­3421. 7. Moore J, Bailey SE, Benmechernene Z, Tzitzilonis C, Griffiths NJ, Virji M, Derrick JP. Recognition of saccharides by the OpcA, OpaD, and OpaB outer membrane proteins from Neisseria meningitides. J Biol Chem 2005;280:31489­31497. 8. Landau EM, Rosenbusch JP. Lipidic cubic phases: a novel concept for the crystallization of membrane proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996;93:14532­14535. 9. Caffrey M. Membrane protein crystallization. J Struct Biol 2003; 142:108­132. 10. Cherezov V, Yamashita E, Liu W, Zhalnina M, Cramer WA, Caffrey ° M. In meso structure of the cobalamin transporter, BtuB, at 1.95 A resolution. J Mol Biol 2006;364:716­734. 11. Misquitta LV, Misquitta Y, Cherezov V, Slattery O, Mohan JM, Hart D, Zhalnina M, Cramer WA, Caffrey M. Membrane protein crystallization in lipidic mesophases with tailored bilayers. Structure 2004; 12:2113­2124. 12. Cheng A, Hummel B, Qiu H, Caffrey M. A simple mechanical mixer for small viscous lipid-containing samples. Chem Phys Lipids 1998;95:11­21.

13. Qiu H, Caffrey M. Lyotropic and thermotropic phase behavior of hydrated monoacylglycerols: structure characterization of monovaccenin. J Phys Chem B 1998;102:4819­4829. 14. Cherezov V, Qiu H, Pector V, Vandenbranden M, Ruysschaert JM, Caffrey M. Biophysical and transfection studies of the diC(14)-amidine/DNA complex. Biophys J 2002;82:3105­3117. ¨ 15. Blanton TN, Huang TC, Toraya H, Hubbard CR, Robie SB, Louer ¨ D, Gobel HE, Will G, Gilles R, Raftery T. JCPDS--International Centre for Diffraction Data round robin study of silver behenate. A possible low-angle X-ray diffraction calibration standard. Powder Diffr 1995;10:91­95. 16. Briggs J, Caffrey M. The temperature-composition phase diagram of monomyristolein in water: equilibrium and metastability aspects. Biophys J 1994;66:573­587. 17. Hammersley AP, Svensson SO, Hanfland M, Fitch AN, Hausermann D. Two-dimensional detector software: from real detector to idealised image or two-theta scan. High Pressure Res 1996;14:235­ 248. 18. Misquitta Y, Caffrey M. Rational design of lipid molecular structure: a case study involving the C19:1c10 monoacylglycerol. Biophys J 2001;81:1047­1058. 19. Liu W, Caffrey M. Gramicidin structure and disposition in highly curved membranes. J Struct Biol 2005;150:23­40. 20. Prince SM, Feron C, Janssens D, Lobet Y, Achtman M, Kusecek B, Bullough PA, Derrick JP. Expression, refolding and crystallization of the OpcA invasin from Neisseria meningitidis. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 2001;57:1164­1166. 21. Leslie AGW. Recent changes to the MOSFLM package for processing film and image plate data. Joint CCP4 1 ESF-EA MCB Newsletter on Protein Crystallography 1992, No. 26. 22. Laskowski RA, MacArthur MW, Moss DS, Thornton JM. PROCHECK: a program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures. J Appl Cryst 1993;26:283­291. 23. Vagin A, Teplyakov A. MOLREP: an automated program for molecular replacement. J Appl Cryst 1997;30:1022­1025. 24. Murshudov GN, Vagin AA, Dodson EJ. Refinement of macromolecular structures by the maximum-likelihood method. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 1997;53:240­255. 25. Collaborative Computational Project, Number 4. The CCP4 suite: programs for protein crystallography. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 1994;50:760­763. 26. Zhang L, Hermans J. Hydrophilicity of cavities in proteins. Proteins 1996;24:433­438. 27. Grubmuller H, Heymann B, Tavan P. Ligand binding: molecular mechanics calculation of the streptavidin-biotin rupture force. Science 1996;271:997­999. 28. Lomize MA, Lomize AL, Pogozheva ID, Mosberg HI. OPM: orientations of proteins in membranes database. Bioinformatics 2006;22: 623­625. 29. Jorgensen WL, Chandrasekhar J, Madura JD, Impey RW, Klein ML. Comparison of simple potential functions for simulating liquid water. J Chem Phys 1983;79:926­935. 30. Phillips JC, Braun R, Wang W, Gumbart J, Tajkhorshid E, Villa E, Chipot C, Skeel RD, Kale L, Schulten K. Scalable molecular dynamics with NAMD. J Comput Chem 2005;26:1781­1802. 31. MacKerell AD, Jr, Bashford D, Bellott M, Dunbrack RL, Evanseck JD, Field MJ, Fischer S, Gao J, Guo H, Ha S, Joseph-McCarthy D, Kuchnir L, Kuczera K, Lau FTK, Mattos C, Michnick S, Ngo T, Nguyen DT, Prodhom B, Reiher WE, III, Roux B, Schlenkrich M, Smith JC, Stote R, Straub J, Watanabe M, Wiorkiewicz-Kuczera J, Yin D, Karplus M. All-atom empirical potential for molecular modeling and dynamics studies of proteins. J Phys Chem B 1998;102:3586­3616. 32. Batcho PF, Case DA, Schlick T. Optimized particle-mesh Ewald/ multiple-time step integration for molecular dynamics simulations. J Chem Phys 2001;115:4003­4018. 33. Bruenger AT. X-PLOR version 3.1. A system for X-ray crystallography and NMR. New Haven: Yale University Press.
PROTEINS

33

V. Cherezov et al.

34. Martyna GJ, Tobias DJ, Klein ML. Constant pressure molecular dynamics algorithms. J Chem Phys 1994;101:4177­4189. 35. An J, Totrov M, Abagyan R. Pocketome via comprehensive identification and classification of ligand binding envelopes. Mol Cell Proteomics 2005;4:752­761. 36. Totrov M, Abagyan R. Flexible protein-ligand docking by global energy optimization in internal coordinates. Proteins 1997;29 (Issue S1):S215­S220. 37. Totrov MM, Abagyan RA. Protein-ligand docking as an energy optimization problem. In: Raffa RB, editor. Drug-receptor thermodynamics: introduction and applications. New York, NY: Wiley; 2001. pp 603­624. 38. Momany FA, McGuire RF, Burgess AW, Scheraga HA. Energy parameters in polypeptides. VII. Geometric parameters, partial atomic charges, nonbonded interactions, hydrogen bond interactions, and intrinsic torsional potentials for the naturally occurring amino acids. J Phys Chem 1975;79:2361­2381. 39. Abagyan R, Totrov M, Kuznetsov D. ICM--a new method for protein modeling and design: applications to docking and structure prediction from the distorted native conformation. J Comput Chem 1994;15:488­506.

40. Bursulaya BD, Totrov M, Abagyan R, Brooks CL, III. Comparative study of several algorithms for flexible ligand docking. J ComputAided Mol Des 2004;17:755­763. 41. Chen H, Lyne PD, Giordanetto F, Lovell T, Li J. On evaluating molecular-docking methods for pose prediction and enrichment factors. J Chem Inf Model 2006;46:401­415. 42. Misquitta Y, Caffrey M. Detergents destabilize the cubic phase of monoolein: implications for membrane protein crystallization. Biophys J 2003;85:3084­3096. 43. Cherezov V, Clogston J, Papiz MZ, Caffrey M. Room to move: crystallizing membrane proteins in swollen lipidic mesophases. J Mol Biol 2006;357:1605­1618. 44. Lehmann F, Tiralongo E, Tiralongo J. Sialic acid-specific lectins: occurrence, specificity and function. Cell Mol Life Sci 2006;63: 1331­1354. 45. Bond PJ, Derrick JP, Sansom MS. Membrane simulations of OpcA: gating in the loops? Biophys J 2007;92:L23­L25. 46. Murakami S, Nakashima R, Yamashita E, Matsumoto T, Yamaguchi A. Crystal structures of a multidrug transporter reveal a functionally rotating mechanism. Nature 2006;443:173­179.

34

PROTEINS

