doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2008.08.081

J. Mol. Biol. (2008) 383, 753­761

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Ligand Recognition by ActR, a TetR-Like Regulator of Actinorhodin Export
Kapil Tahlan 1 , Zhou Yu 2 , Ye Xu 1 , Alan R. Davidson 2 and Justin R. Nodwell 1 
Michael DeGroote Institute for Infectious Diseases Research and Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University, 1200 Main Street West, Hamilton, ON, Canada L8N 3Z5 Department of Molecular Genetics and Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 1A8 Received 30 July 2008; received in revised form 22 August 2008; accepted 25 August 2008 Available online 9 September 2008 Edited by J. Karn
2 1

TetR-like transcriptional repressors interact with small-molecule ligands to control many facets of prokaryotic biology, including clinical antibiotic resistance. ActR is a TetR-like protein encoded in the biosynthetic gene cluster for the antibiotic actinorhodin and controls the expression of two actinorhodin exporters. We showed previously that actinorhodin and its precursor 4-dihydro-9-hydroxy-1-methyl-10-oxo-3-H-naphtho-[2,3-c]pyran-3-(S)-acetic acid can bind ActR and prevent its interaction with DNA. Here, we compare ActR's interaction with naturally occurring and synthetic molecules to show that pathway intermediates bind to ActR 5- to 10-fold more tightly than actinorhodin itself, consistent with our suggestion that they are the biologically relevant triggers for actinorhodin export. We also find that the ligand-binding cavity of this protein can accommodate a surprisingly large diversity of ligands, many of which can release ActR from DNA in vitro and in vivo. These data suggest that the actR locus could be activated by, and perhaps adapted to confer resistance to other antibiotics.
© 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: TetR-like transcriptional regulators; Streptomyces coelicolor; protein­ligand interactions; synthetic ligands

Introduction
Bacteria must interact with large numbers of small molecules and regulate genes accordingly. For example, some genes that confer resistance to antibiotics are activated exclusively in the presence of the antimicrobial agent--several mechanisms that bring this coupling about have been characterized.1,2 One very large family of ligand-sensing transcriptional regulators is exemplified by TetR, which controls tetA, a major determinant of resistance to tetracyclines.3,4 TetR is a repressor that binds target
*Corresponding author. E-mail address: nodwellj@mcmaster.ca.  K.T. and Z.Y. contributed equally to this work. Present address: K. Tahlan, Tuberculosis Research Section, LCID, NIAID, NIH, 9000 Rockville Pike, MSC 3206, Bethesda, MD 20892-3206, USA. Abbreviations used: (S)-DNPA, 4-dihydro-9-hydroxy-1methyl-10-oxo-3-H-naphtho-[2,3-c]-pyran-3-(S)-acetic acid; ANS, 8-anilino-1-naphthalenesulfonic acid; DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide.

promoters and prevents transcriptional initiation. When tetracycline enters a cell, it interacts with the C-terminal domain of TetR, preventing DNA binding and thereby activating the resistance gene. Ligand binding by TetR is very tight and specific: all of the known inducers of tetA expression are tetracycline antibiotics. In contrast, another TetR-like protein called QacR, which controls the expression of the QacA and QacB multidrug exporters, can interact with a wide variety of structurally unrelated molecules, some of which are not even antibiotics.5,6 This is consistent with the broader export specificity associated with QacA/B.6 The genome databases encode N4000 TetRlike proteins, and for all but a tiny number of these, the ligands are unknown.3 Whether these proteins interact with narrow sets of nearly identical ligands such as TetR or with many highly diverse ligands such as QacR is critical to understanding their biological roles. In contrast to clinical antibiotic resistance, a neglected question is how antibiotic-producing microorganisms induce self-protective export mechanisms so that they are able to produce these molecules without inhibiting their own growth?7 Some of the antibiotic biosynthetic gene clusters encode export

0022-2836/$ - see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

754 proteins that are presumed to protect the producer organism from its own biosynthetic capacity. It must be important for these genes to be activated before the antibiotic accumulates; otherwise, antibiotic biosynthesis would be a fatal event. Actinorhodin, produced by Streptomyces coelicolor, is a member of the benzoisochromanequinone family of natural products, which includes many polycyclic and aromatic antibiotics.8 The biosynthesis of actinorhodin is executed by enzymes encoded in a N 20-kb cluster of approximately 22 genes (SCO5070-5092). Embedded within this cluster is the two-gene operon actAB, which encodes efflux pumps of the Major Facilitator Subfamily (ActA) and Resistance Nodulation Division (ActB).9 The actAB operon is regulated by the ActR repressor, a TetR-like protein encoded by the divergently expressed actR gene.9­11 We have shown that ActR binds and represses the actAB promoter and that this interaction is prevented by small-molecule ligands.10 Among these ligands are

Ligand Recognition by ActR

actinorhodin itself, one of its biosynthetic precursors, 4-dihydro-9-hydroxy-1-methyl-10-oxo-3-H-naphtho[2,3-c]-pyran-3-(S)-acetic acid [(S)-DNPA], and kalafungin, a molecule that is related to another precursor, dihydrokalafungin. Importantly, we found that (S)DNPA could prevent DNA binding by ActR at lower concentrations than actinorhodin11 and interpreted this as evidence that the intermediates may serve as the most biologically significant triggers of actAB expression during biosynthesis in vivo. This could have the effect of directly coupling the production of ActA and ActB to biosynthesis. While it is not known whether S. coelicolor is sensitive to actinorhodin in the absence of these export proteins, if it is, then this mechanism could help prevent actinorhodinmediated inhibition of producer cell growth.7,11 Nanaomycin A, which differs from kalafungin and the bona fide pathway intermediate dihydrokalafungin primarily in the chirality at C3 and C15 (see Fig. 1a), did not prevent DNA binding by

Fig. 1. Interaction of ActR with actinorhodin, (S)-DNPA, and (R)DNPA. (a) Gel mobility shift assays using purified ActR, [32P]-Oact containing DNA probe, and various ligands as indicated. (b) Fluorescence emission spectra of (1) 10 M ANS alone, (2) 10 M ANS in the presence of 1 M ActR and 100 M actinorhodin, and (3) 10 M ANS in the presence of 1 M ActR. (c) Estimation of the binding affinity of ActR/actinorhodin, ActR/(S)DNPA, and ActR/(R)-DNPA using the ANS displacement method. The x-axis indicates the concentration of the ligand used, and the y-axis is a measure of the fraction of the ligand that bound to ActR.

Ligand Recognition by ActR

755 DNPA, and a collection of synthetic molecules. Our results suggest that the chirality at C3 is not important for binding, and this permitted us to conduct a structure-based search of the compound library in the McMaster University High Throughput Screening Laboratory. We have identified at least 10 molecules exhibiting a striking structural diversity that can bind ActR. Six of these can relieve DNA binding by ActR in vitro but the other four cannot. Five of the six molecules that relieved DNA binding in vitro could activate the actAB promoter in vivo, demonstrating that these interactions take place in a biologically significant manner. These data demonstrate that ActR, a protein whose primary biological role is most likely restricted to controlling actinorhodin export, nevertheless has a significantly more relaxed ligand-binding capacity that is more reminiscent of QacR than TetR.

ActR, suggesting that ligand binding might be exquisitely specific, like the interaction of TetR with its ligands.11 We solved the structure of ActR bound to both (S)-DNPA (Fig. 2) and actinorhodin (not shown). We found that each C-terminal ligand-binding domain in the ActR dimer binds one molecule of actinorhodin or two molecules of the precursor with one proximal and one distal to the dimerization interface.12 The two tricyclic halves of actinorhodin occupy similar positions in the ActR ligand-binding pocket as (S)-DNPA but they do not overlap completely (Fig. 2). Rather, the precursor molecules were able to adopt conformations not accessible to the mature antibiotic due to the structural constraint of the C­C bond joining its two halves. We suggested that this might explain why (S)-DNPA prevents DNA binding by ActR at lower concentrations than actinorhodin.12 The representations in Fig. 2 show that complex with (S)-DNPA from four vantage points, and from each, it is clear that there are patches in ActR that are within 5­10 Å of (S)-DNPA that are not occupied by ligand (Fig. 2). To understand the mechanism of induction of the actAB operon, it will be important to better understand the determinants of specific ligand binding by ActR. This also affords an important opportunity to understand ligand interactions of TetR-like repressors. We have therefore explored the interaction of ActR with actinorhodin, (S)-DNPA, (R)-

Results
ActR binds tricyclic molecules more tightly than actinorhodin Previous studies showed that the tricyclic molecule (S)-DNPA can prevent the interaction of ActR with DNA at lower concentrations than the hexacyclic antibiotic actinorhodin.11 Nanaomycin A,

Fig. 2. Structure of the ActR ligand-binding cavity bound to (S)-DNPA.12 (a) shows the location of the ligand-binding cavity relative to the entire protein. (b)­(e) show various orientations around the ligand-binding cavity. Surface colors indicate their distance from the (S)-DNPA molecule.

756 which is closely related to (S)-DNPA but differs in chirality at positions C3 and C15 (Fig. 1a), had no effect on DNA binding by ActR. To determine whether C3 or C15 was the site of chiral discrimination by ActR, we compared the capacity of (S)DNPA, (R)-DNPA, and actinorhodin to prevent the interaction of 7 nM ActR with DNA using a gel mobility shift assay (Fig. 1a). As previously discussed, (S)-DNPA prevented DNA binding by ActR more efficiently than actinorhodin (Fig. 1a). The effect of (R)-DNPA was indistinguishable from that of (S)-DNPA (Fig. 1a), suggesting that the chirality at

Ligand Recognition by ActR

C3 is not important for binding. The failure of the antibiotic nanaomycin A to induce must therefore be due to the chirality at C15 or the overall shape of the molecule. To determine ActR ligand-binding affinities, we developed a novel 8-anilino-1-naphthalenesulfonic acid (ANS) displacement assay. The interaction of ANS with hydrophobic patches in some partially unfolded proteins or ligand-binding sites leads to fluorescence emission peaking at 480 nm.13 We have found that ANS interacts relatively weakly with the ligand-binding cavities of several TetR-like proteins

Fig. 3. Identification of synthetic ligands capable of relieving the interaction of ActR with DNA in vitro. (a) The 20 molecules in the McMaster University High Throughput Screening Laboratory collection that contain the anthraquinone core. The molecules are grouped according to their ability to interact productively or nonproductively with ActR (upper 10) or their inability to do so (lower 10). (b) Effects of the 20 molecules in (a) on DNA binding by ActR in vitro. Molecules were added at 25 M.

Ligand Recognition by ActR

757 Stabilization of ActR on ligand binding Binding of tetracycline confers increased thermal stability to TetR.18 As both the tricyclic natural products and synthetic anthraquinones could specifically interact with ActR, we used circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy to determine if the two classes of compounds bind ActR by a similar mechanism. As expected,12 the CD spectrum of purified ActR was characteristic of -helical proteins (Fig. 4a). We did not observe a significant change in the ActR CD spectrum upon addition of any of the ligands (data not shown), suggesting that none of them induces measurably increased -helicity. We therefore employed thermal denaturation of purified ActR in the presence and absence of ligands as a means of assessing ligand binding. We used CD spectroscopy to assess changes in secondary structure stability by monitoring ellipticity at 224 nm. We found the Tm of ActR alone to be 47.5 °C (Fig. 4b), lower than that of TetR,19 and then determined the protein's Tm in the presence of the natural products and synthetic compounds. A marginal stabilization of ActR was observed in the presence of actinorho-

(unpublished data), likely due to the hydrophobic nature of these binding sites. We assume that this interaction is with the ligand-binding pockets of the proteins because only those proteins with a sufficiently large binding cavity ( 700 Å3) display the associated fluorescence emission. ANS binding can be detected by fluorescence emission and can be competed out by the addition of authentic ligands. This phenomenon provides the basis for a quantitative binding assay that is applicable to many protein­ligand interactions. The advantage of this assay is that the interaction between the protein in question and its authentic ligand need not produce a fluorescent signal. To validate this assay, we used it to measure the affinity of the toluene efflux pump repressor in Pseudomonas putida, TtgR, to its ligand phloretin14,15 and determined a dissociation constant (Kd) of 0.35 M, which agreed well with the Kd determined using a standard procedure based on tryptophan fluorescence (Kd = 0.80 M, data not shown). As shown in Fig. 1b, ANS exhibited significantly increased fluorescence in the presence of ActR, and this could be competed by the addition of actinorhodin. Using this displacement assay, we determined that the Kd of ActR for actinorhodin was 13.9 (±3.57) M, while the Kd values for (S)-DNPA and (R)-DNPA were 2.6 M (±1.1) and 1.9 M (±0.1), respectively (Fig. 1c). These values are consistent with results from gel mobility shift assays and clearly demonstrate that the tricyclic DNPA molecules interact more tightly with ActR than hexacyclic actinorhodin. Identification of synthetic ActR ligands The ability of (R)-DNPA to prevent the interaction of ActR with DNA in vitro demonstrated that a specific chiral center at the C3 position was not essential for binding. This in turn suggested that ActR might bind to simpler tricyclic anthraquinones. We showed previously that ActR's interaction with DNA is not prevented by the anthraquinone aloesaponarin II, which is produced by certain S. coelicolor mutants.16 There are many naturally occurring anthraquinones,17 but these were not readily available to us. We therefore searched the  150,000 compound library at the McMaster University High Throughput Screening Laboratory for structures related to the anthraquinone core motif and identified 20 compounds of interest (Fig. 3a). We tested these molecules for interaction with ActR by first determining whether they could prevent the protein's interaction with DNA. As shown in Fig. 3b, six synthetic anthraquinone derivatives (A11, B2, B3, B6, B8, and B9) inhibited the ActR/DNA interaction when used at 25 M, showing similar inducing ability to the tricyclic benzoisochromanequinone natural product ligands. The structural diversity of these ligands was striking and suggested that the ActR ligand-binding cavity can accommodate considerably greater ligand diversity than we had expected.

Fig. 4. Thermal stabilization of ActR on ligand binding. (a) CD spectrum of 10 M ActR. (b) Thermal stability of 10 M ActR and 100 M ligands. The melting curve of ActR in the absence of ligand is indicated by the red curve. The curves in the presence of actinorhodin, (S)-DNPA, (R)DNPA, and synthetic molecules A3, A7, A10, B2, and B3 are as indicated. The y-axis is a measure of ellipticity (A224) determined to monitor protein folding, and the x-axis indicates the temperature.

758 din, whereas there was no significant change in the presence of (R/S)-DNPA (Fig. 4b and Table 1). We then determined the effects of the 20 synthetic molecules and found that many of them increased thermal stability of ActR by at least 2.5 °C (Fig. 4b and Table 1), consistent with a direct interaction. Of the synthetic molecules that prevented the interaction of ActR with DNA (Fig. 2), all but one, compound B6, conferred significantly increased thermal stability in the protein. Compounds B2 and B3 increased in the Tm of ActR by the largest margins: 8.7 and 5.4 °C, respectively (Table 1). Surprisingly, compounds A2, A6, A7, A10, and B4, which had no impact on DNA binding in vitro, conferred significantly increased thermal stabilization in ActR with effects ranging from 3.1 °C (A6) to 5.9 °C (A7). The results in Figs. 1, 3, and 4 demonstrate two things. First, the ligand-binding site in ActR must be able to accommodate ligands of considerable chemical diversity. This is in marked contrast with the specificity we had expected based on the chirality effect observed previously11 and on the fact that this protein's role appears to be restricted to controlling actinorhodin export genes. The unoccupied spaces in the ligand-binding cavity in the (S)-DNPA and/or actinorhodin complexes may account for this additional ligand-recognition capacity (Fig. 2). Second, there must be at least two distinct binding modes. The first of these is a productive interaction where ligand binding prevents the interaction of ActR with
Table 1. Properties of ActR­compound interactions
In vitro derepressiona (25 M) - + + + + - + - - - + - + + - - - - + - - - - - Tm (°C)b 47.5 49.2 47.2 47.6 55.7 53.4 52.9 51.6 51.2 50.9 50.9 50.6 50.3 50.2 49.9 49.9 49.8 49.6 49.2 49.1 49.0 49.0 48.9 48.8 In vivo Induction inductionc (50 M) ND ND ND ND - ND + ND ND ND - ND + + ND ND ND ND + ND ND ND ND ND

Ligand Recognition by ActR

Fig. 5. Induction of actAB using synthetic ligands. Six ligands having the capacity to displace ActR from its DNA binding site in vitro (A11, B2, B3, B6, B8, and B9) were added to S. coelicolor strain N1765, bearing a complete deletion of the actinorhodin polyketide synthase genes11 and a fusion of the actAB promoter to the luxCDABE genes.20 The lux readout [in relative light units (RLU)] is plotted against the concentration of each ligand added to the cells.

DNA. The second we refer to as a nonproductive interaction where ligand binding fails to trigger release of ActR from DNA. It is conceivable, though we think unlikely, that these unproductive complexes involve the interaction of ligands with sites outside the ActR ligand-binding cavity. Activation of the actAB promoter in S. coelicolor To determine whether any of the molecules that could prevent DNA binding by ActR in vitro could also activate the actAB promoter in vivo, we constructed a fusion of the actAB promoter to the luxCDABE reporter construct20 and introduced it into wild-type cells and a strain bearing a deletion of the actinorhodin polyketide synthase (pks).11 Monitoring light output as a measure of promoter activation, we found that the fusion was expressed in the wild-type strain but not in the pks mutant, consistent with a requirement of actinorhodin pathway molecules for derepression (data not shown). We then added each of the six synthetic molecules that could prevent DNA binding by ActR in vitro (Fig. 3) to the PKS-deficient cells at 2, 10, and 50 M and monitored their ability to activate the actAB promoter. As shown in Fig. 5, of the six molecules that could prevent ActR's interaction with DNA in vitro (A11, B2, B3, B6, B8, and B9), five (A11, B2, B3, B6, and B8) could activate the actAB promoter in vivo when added directly to S. coelicolor cultures. This demonstrates that the productive interactions we have observed in vitro are biologically indistinguishable from those exhibited by natural ActR ligands in vivo.

Compound None Actinorhodin (S)-DNPA (R)-DNPA B2 (MAC-0022977) A7 (MAC-009051) B3 (MAC-0023447) A10 (MAC-021930) A3 (MAC-008030) B4 (MAC-0023509) B9 (MAC-0038293) A6 (MAC-009045) A11 (MAC-0021932) B8 (MAC-0038284) A4 (MAC-0008554) B7 (MAC-0037680) B11 (MAC-0038296) A8 (MAC-021884) B6 (MAC-0037223) A2 (MAC-006823) A5 (MAC-0009038) B10 (MAC-0038294) B5 (MAC-0037221) A9 (MAC-021928)

The original synthetic compound identification tags are shown in parentheses. +, prevention of DNA binding by mobility shift; -, no observed effect; ND, not determined. a Determined using electrophoretic mobility shift assays. b Thermal stability determined using CD spectroscopy. c Determined using the S. coelicolor strain N1756 pactAluxCDABE.

Discussion
Our results demonstrate that the tricyclic precursors from the actinorhodin biosynthetic pathway

Ligand Recognition by ActR

759
cedures.23 S. coelicolor M145 was grown on MS agar plates and was cultured in 2YT broth containing the appropriate antibiotic using standard procedures.24 Actinorhodin, (S)-DNPA, and (R)-DNPA were kindly provided by Koji Ichinose (Musashino University, Tokyo, Japan), and the anthraquinone derivatives used in this study were obtained from the McMaster High Throughput Screening Laboratory (Hamilton, Canada). Standard procedures were used for the manipulation of E. coli plasmid DNA.23 Vent DNA polymerase (New England Biolabs) was used for PCR. Chromosomal DNA preparation and introduction of plasmid DNA into S. coelicolor were carried out as described earlier.24 Protein purification, gel mobility shift assays, and fluorescence assays Recombinant His6-ActR was expressed and purified as described elsewhere.11 Also, gel mobility shift assays using purified His6-ActR and a 106-bp DNA substrate containing Oact were also carried out as described earlier.11 ActR­ANS binding curve was generated by titrating ANS into a fixed amount of protein and recording the fluorescence increase. Assuming a 1:1 binding stoichiometry between ANS and ActR monomer as shown in the following equilibrium: P þ L ± PL;
Kd

induce the release of DNA by ActR at lower concentrations than the mature molecule because they bind the protein more tightly. The tighter interactions exhibited by the biosynthetic precursors suggest that these molecules could therefore serve as more efficient inducers of actinorhodin export, as we suggested previously.11,12 We were surprised by the structural diversity of the ligands that could bind ActR and induce the actAB promoter. The fact that ActR, ActA, and ActB are encoded in the actinorhodin biosynthetic gene cluster suggested that their role is to export actinorhodin exclusively. Because of this, and based on our previous work,11 we had expected that ligand binding by this protein would be extremely specific. This appears not to be the case. Indeed, the ability of ActR to recognize a more diverse pool of ligands suggests that these genes could be induced by a much broader spectrum of benzoisochromanequinones than anticipated. If ActA and/or ActB can export a similarly broad array of antimicrobial agents, then these genes could perform two functions for S. coelicolor: export of actinorhodin and protection against polycyclic antibiotics produced by other microorganisms. The fact that some ligands bind ActR but fail to cause a loss of DNA binding demonstrates that there is more than one possible mode of binding in the ActR cavity. Indeed, it is unlikely that ligands A10, A11, B2, B3, and B8 (Fig. 3) could fit into the ActR ligand-binding cavity using the binding modes exhibited by (S)-DNPA or actinorhodin (Fig. 2). It is informative to compare what is known about ligand interactions of TetR and QacR in this regard. While there is some flexibility in how TetR interacts with various tetracyclines, these variations are fairly modest shifts, and one end of the molecule, `ring A' of the four-ring system, is always tightly held in the same place.21 In contrast, QacR can bind molecules in many different configurations. Indeed, QacR binds the closely related molecules hexamidine and pentamidine, which differ by only one methylene carbon, in different regions of its ligand-binding cavity altogether.22 We suggest that the ligand-recognition flexibility demonstrated here for ActR is due to a similarly plastic ligand-binding cavity and that the unused spaces in our solved structures account for this phenomenon. If this ligand-recognition plasticity is a common property of TetR-like proteins, then it is likely that ligand recognition could evolve rapidly. Antibiotic export mechanisms regulated by TetR-like proteins in antibiotic-producing organisms could serve as a reservoir of progenitors of resistance mechanisms observed in clinically relevant pathogens.

Kd ¼

½P½L ½PL

where P is protein and L is ligand (in this case, ANS) and [PL] is the concentration of protein­ANS complex, the apparent dissociation constant (Kd) of ActR­ANS binding was then determined by fitting the titration data into the following equations: F ¼ Fmin þ ½PLðFmax À Fmin Þ ½Pt  qffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ð½Pt  þ ½Lt  þ Kd Þ2 À4½Pt ½Lt  2

½PL ¼

½Pt  þ ½Lt  þ Kd À

where F, the fluorescence intensity, is expressed as a function of the total protein concentration [Pt], total ANS concentration [Lt], and the Kd. The stoichiometry of the reaction does not affect the Kd significantly as evidenced by only 2% difference between a 1:3 binding stoichiometry and a 3:1 stoichiometry as long as the ANS binding is not cooperative. ActR's biological binding partner was then titrated into saturated ActR­ANS complex, and an ANS displacement curve was plotted through recording the fluorescence decrease due to the fact that ActR's ligand generally binds much tighter than ANS and, thus, can compete out ANS from the cavities. The competitor binding equilibriums are as follows, also assuming a 1:1:1 binding stoichiometry between ANS, ligand, and ActR monomer: P þ L ± PL;
Kd

Materials and Methods
Bacterial strains, materials, culture conditions, and DNA manipulation Escherichia coli XL1-Blue (Stratagene) and BL21 (DE3) (Novagen) were employed for cloning DNA fragments and protein expression, respectively, using standard pro-

Kd ¼

½P½L ½PL ½P½C ½PC

P þ C ± PC;
Kc

Kc ¼

where ANS is considered as competitor C with the binding dissociation constant being Kc, which has been determined in the previous step. The authentic ligand of ActR is de-

760
signated L in this case. When [Ct], the total ANS concentration, is much higher than the total protein concentration [Pt], the free ANS concentration [C] approximately equals to [Ct] and the apparent Kd of ligand­ActR binding can then be determined by fitting the titration data into the following equations: F ¼ Fmax À ½PLðFmax À Fmin Þ ½Pt 

Ligand Recognition by ActR

Kd Kc þ Kd ½Ct  þ ½Pt Kc þ Kc ½Lt  vffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi uK2 K2 þ 2K2 K ½C  þ 2K K2 ½P  þ 2K K2 ½L  d c t d c t u d c d c t u u 2 ½C 2 þ 2K ½C ½P K þ 2K ½C K ½L  Àu þKd t t c d t d t c t t 2 2 2 2 þ½Pt  Kc À 2Kc ½Pt ½Lt  þ Kc ½Lt 2 ½PL ¼ 2Kc where the fluorescence intensity F can be expressed as a function of the total protein concentration [Pt], the total ligand concentration [Lt], the total ANS concentration [Ct], Kc, and Kd. An Aviv ATF 105 spectrofluorometer was used to obtain fluorescence data. ANS (Sigma-Aldrich) fluorescence was recorded by exciting at 340 nm and monitoring the emission at 480 nm. In the ActR­ANS binding assay, ANS was titrated into a 1-cm path-length cuvette, keeping the protein concentration constant at 0.5 M. The ANS displacement titrations were performed in 0.5 M ActR and an excess amount of ANS, 100 M. Samples were equilibrated for 1.5 min at 25 °C for each concentration and then the fluorescence was recorded by averaging the signal for over 15 s. In order to remove background ANS and compound fluorescence, we subtracted titrations of ANS alone and compound into ANS, respectively, from titrations containing ActR. The stoichiometry of the displacement assay was set as ActR (monomer):actinorhodin:ANS 1:1:2 and ActR (monomer):(S/R)-DNPA:ANS 1:2:2. Changing stoichiometry does not affect the relative Kd values. CD spectroscopy and thermal stability assays CD analysis was conducted using an Aviv 62A DS CD spectrometer. Wavelength scans were performed as described earlier with an averaging time of 5 s for each measurement.19 Thermal stability of ActR alone and in the presence of ligands was monitored at 224 nm starting at 20 °C with increments of 2 °C and ending at 95 °C with an equilibration time of 1 min at each step. The ligands were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and were added such that the final concentration of DMSO did not exceed 5% v/v. Since no apparent aggregation was observed, as assessed by monitoring absorbance, at temperatures up to 60 °C, it was concluded that ActR folding was reversible at temperatures throughout the transition region. Thus, the unfolding curves could be fit using a standard two-state model.25 The data were normalized and plotted in units of fraction unfolded as determined from linear fits of the folded and unfolded base lines. The temperature at the unfolding transition midpoint (Tm) is defined as the temperature at which half of the protein is unfolded. Preparation of the S. coelicolor biosensor and luminescence assays The primer pair PactII-2/L (5-gcGGATCCctcccttcctcgcttc-3) and PactII-2/R (5-gcGGTACCttcaacggaactcatgg-3)

containing engineered BamHI and KpnI sites shown in capital letters, along with S. coelicolor genomic DNA as template, was used to isolate a 160-bp DNA fragment encompassing the actAB promoter by PCR. The 160-bp PCR product was treated with BamHI and KpnI and ligated to a similar digest of pMU1,20 giving pMU1-PactAB . The plasmid pMU1-PactAB was then introduced into the S. coelicolor actinorhodin nonproducing mutant N176511 to give the ACT biosensor strain used to detect actA promoter activity. Also, promoter-less pMU1 was also introduced into S. coelicolor N1765, to give the strain that functioned as the negative control. For luminescence detection, the ACT biosensor or the negative control was cultured in 50 ml liquid medium for 30 h after which 100-l samples were withdrawn and placed in sterile cuvettes containing ligands dissolved in DMSO. Luminescence was measured at different time points as described earlier.20

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Dr. Koji Ichinose for providing purified actinorhodin, (S)-DNPA and (R)-DNPA, and to Dr. Andrew Willems for generating Fig. 2. This work was supported by grants from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research to J.R.N. (#MOP-57684) and A.R.D. (#MOP-13609) and by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council to K.T.

References
1. Haldimann, A., Fisher, S. L., Daniels, L. L., Walsh, C. T. & Wanner, B. L. (1997). Transcriptional regulation of the Enterococcus faecium BM4147 vancomycin resistance gene cluster by the VanS­VanR two-component regulatory system in Escherichia coli K-12. J. Bacteriol. 179, 5903­5913. 2. Meier, I., Wray, L. V. & Hillen, W. (1988). Differential regulation of the Tn10-encoded tetracycline resistance genes tetA and tetR by the tandem tet operators O1 and O2. EMBO J, 7, 567­572. 3. Ramos, J. L., Martinez-Bueno, M., Molina-Henares, A. J., Teran, W., Watanabe, K., Zhang, X. et al. (2005). The TetR family of transcriptional repressors. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 69, 326­356. 4. Berens, C. & Hillen, W. (2003). Gene regulation by tetracyclines. Constraints of resistance regulation in bacteria shape TetR for application in eukaryotes. Eur. J. Biochem. 270, 3109­3121. 5. Grkovic, S., Hardie, K. M., Brown, M. H. & Skurray, R. A. (2003). Interactions of the QacR multidrugbinding protein with structurally diverse ligands: implications for the evolution of the binding pocket. Biochemistry, 42, 15226­15236. 6. Paulsen, I. T., Brown, M. H., Littlejohn, T. G., Mitchell, B. A. & Skurray, R. A. (1996). Multidrug resistance proteins QacA and QacB from Staphylococcus aureus: membrane topology and identification of residues involved in substrate specificity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 3630­3635. 7. Hopwood, D. A. (2007). How do antibiotic-producing bacteria ensure their self-resistance before antibiotic

Ligand Recognition by ActR biosynthesis incapacitates them? Mol. Microbiol. 63, 937­940. Hertweck, C., Luzhetskyy, A., Rebets, Y. & Bechthold, A. (2007). Type II polyketide synthases: gaining a deeper insight into enzymatic teamwork. Nat. Prod. Rep. 24, 162­190. Caballero, J. L., Martinez, E., Malpartida, F. & Hopwood, D. A. (1991). Organisation and functions of the actVA region of the actinorhodin biosynthetic gene cluster of Streptomyces coelicolor. Mol. Gen. Genet. 230, 401­412. Ahn, S. K., Tahlan, K., Yu, Z. & Nodwell, J. (2007). Investigation of transcription repression and smallmolecule responsiveness by TetR-like transcription factors using a heterologous Escherichia coli-based assay. J. Bacteriol. 189, 6655­6664. Tahlan, K., Ahn, S. K., Sing, A., Bodnaruk, T. D., Willems, A. R., Davidson, A. R. & Nodwell, J. R. (2007). Initiation of actinorhodin export in Streptomyces coelicolor. Mol. Microbiol. 63, 951­961. Willems, A. R., Tahlan, K., Taguchi, T., Zhang, K., Lee, Z. Z., Ichinose, K. et al. (2008). Crystal structures of the Streptomyces coelicolor TetR-like protein ActR alone and in complex with actinorhodin or the actinorhodin biosynthetic precursor (S)-DNPA. J. Mol. Biol. 376, 1377­1387. Masui, R. & Kuramitsu, S. (1998). Probing of DNAbinding sites of Escherichia coli RecA protein utilizing 1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonic acid. Biochemistry, 37, 12133­12143. Teran, W., Krell, T., Ramos, J. L. & Gallegos, M. T. (2006). Effector­repressor interactions, binding of a single effector molecule to the operator-bound TtgR homodimer mediates derepression. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 7102­7109. Alguel, Y., Meng, C., Teran, W., Krell, T., Ramos, J. L., Gallegos, M. T. & Zhang, X. (2007). Crystal structures of multidrug binding protein TtgR in complex with antibiotics and plant antimicrobials. J. Mol. Biol. 369, 829­840. Taguchi, T., Itou, K., Ebizuka, Y., Malpartida, F.,

761
Hopwood, D. A., Surti, C. M. et al. (2000). Chemical characterisation of disruptants of the Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) actVI genes involved in actinorhodin biosynthesis. J. Antibiot. (Tokyo), 53, 144­152. Bystrykh, L. V., Herrema, J. K., Kruisinga, W. & Kellogg, R. M. (1997). 5-Hydroxyaloesaponarin II, a minor blue pigment in an actinorhodin-negative mutant of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). Biotechnol. Appl. Biochem. 26, 195­201. Wagenhofer, M., Hansen, D. & Hillen, W. (1988). Thermal denaturation of engineered tet repressor proteins and their complexes with tet operator and tetracycline studied by temperature gradient gel electrophoresis. Anal. Biochem. 175, 422­432. Reichheld, S. E. & Davidson, A. R. (2006). Two-way interdomain signal transduction in tetracycline repressor. J. Mol. Biol. 361, 382­389. Craney, A., Hohenauer, T., Xu, Y., Navani, N. K., Li, Y. & Nodwell, J. (2007). A synthetic luxCDABE gene cluster optimized for expression in high-GC bacteria. Nucleic Acids Res. 35, e46. Orth, P., Schnappinger, D., Sum, P. E., Ellestad, G. A., Hillen, W., Saenger, W. & Hinrichs, W. (1999). Crystal structure of the tet repressor in complex with a novel tetracycline, 9-(N,N-dimethylglycylamido)6-demethyl-6-deoxy-tetracycline. J. Mol. Biol. 285, 455­461. Murray, D. S., Schumacher, M. A. & Brennan, R. G. (2004). Crystal structures of QacR­diamidine complexes reveal additional multidrug-binding modes and a novel mechanism of drug charge neutralization. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 14365­14371. Sambrook, J. & Russell, D. W. (2001). Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual, 3rd edit., vol. 3. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY. Kieser, T., Bibb, M. J., Buttner, M. J., Chater, K. F. & Hopwood, D. A. (2000). Practical Streptomyces Genetics. John Innes Foundation, Norwich, UK. Allen, D. L. & Pielak, G. J. (1998). Baseline length and automated fitting of denaturation data. Protein Sci. 7, 1262­1263.

8.

17.

9.

18.

10.

19. 20.

11.

12.

21.

13.

22.

14.

23. 24. 25.

15.

16.

