MATERIALS CH~c~D
Materials Chemistry and Physics 45 ( 1996) 103-I 07

Domain arrangements in flux-grown PbTi03 single crystals
Chen-Chia Chou, Cheng-Sao Chen, Dong-Yang Tseng
Materials Science and Technology Center and Department of Mechanical Engineering, National Taiwan Institute of Technology, 43 Keelung Road Sec. 4, Taipei 10672. Taiwan, ROC Received 19 December 1994; accepted 9 October 1995

Abstract
The flux method was used to grow PbTiO, single crystals in the present experiment, and the domain structures of polydomain as-grown crystals have been studied using optical and electron microscopy. Investigations on etched crystals indicate that crystals grown under different conditions have similar domain structural characteristics, but those grown under conditions with heavy PbO evaporation show relatively complicated 90" domain arrangements. Various domain structures have been observed, including conventional 90" domain arrangements, herringbone structures, banded structures, and intersecting banded structures. In addition, domain bands that may correspond to transformation variants in alloys were also seen. Drawing schematic polarization configurations, one finds that head-to-head, tail-to-tail, or other unconventional domain configurations exist constantly in PbTiO, crystals, indicating that the high energy configurations are quite common in lead titanate crystals. Keywords: Domain structures; Lead titanate single crystals; Flux-grown crystals

1. Introduction

Ferroelectric

materials

with the perovskite

structure

have

been widely used in many electronic devices. Although many of the properties of ferroelectric ceramics, such as dielectric constant, dielectric loss, aging, etc., are known to be closely related to the motion of domain boundaries [ l-51, explorations of the domain boundary structures are relatively limited compared with the efforts on the properties of ferroelectric materials. Lead titanate has a ferroelectric phase transition temperature T, near 500 "C [6,7]. PbTi03 is cubic above T, and exhibits a strong tetragonal distortion at 20 "C: c/a = 1.06, which persists up to T, (c/a = 1 .Ol) [ 8,9]. PbTiO, single crystals present a highly polar structure with very high spontaneous polarization in the perovskite family [ 6,7]. Since the tetragonal phase is ferroelectric, two types of domain boundaries can be observed: 90" and 180" domain boundaries. In most cases, researchers believe that 90" domain arrangements should follow `head-to-tail' or `tail-tohead' rules in order to achieve lower electrical energy. However, some peculiar domain arrangements have been reported [ 5,10,11]. For instance, Hu et al. [ 51 have implied that an unconventional domain wall, which is not stable, exists in BaTiO, crystals. The unstable domain structure was replaced by conventional domains after a period of investigation under
0254-0584/96/$15.00 0 1996 Elsevier Science S.A. All rights reserved .XSD10254-0584(95)01713-9

electron beam radiation [ 51. Yakunin et al. [ lo] reported a `head-to-head' 90" domain boundary that shows a zigzag morphology in a BaTiO, film in order to form a low energy polarization configuration. Shakmanov and Spivak [ I I] showed a complex u-c domain structure in BaTi03 crystals. In their interpretation, a-c domain wedges were located in an a domain of an a-a structure. Although many studies have been done on the domain boundaries in BaTiO, crystals, comparatively few have been performed on those in PbTiO, because of the availability of crystals as well as the similarity between the two materials. However, there are still differences between BaTiO, and PbTi03. For example, PbTi03 possesses the highest polarization in the similar series of materials and a higher ionization polarity. Moreover, the tetragonality during the cubic to tetragonal transformation is much higher in PbTiO,, which may introduce higher strain, and therefore higher strain energy in the microstructure during transformation [ 6,7]. Thus it is more convenient to study a domain structure using PbTiO, rather than BaTiO, because of the immobility of domain boundaries during investigation in PbTi03 [ 12-141. Moreover, it has also been suggested that domain arrangements and domain dynamics may be greatly influenced by different growing conditions, which also determine the properties of a crystal. In the present work, we grew PbTiO, single crystals using a flux method and studied the domain structures

104

C.-C. Chou et al. /Materials

Chemistry and Physics 45 (1996) 103-107

in the crystals; we try to correlate the domain structures with the crystal growing conditions, and show some high energy domain structures. 2. Experimental PbTiO, crystals were grown by slow cooling from a flux method [ 141. To maintain the high purity of the crystal, a self-flux method, which uses one of the elements of the compound as a flux, was employed. The starting ingredients containing PbO and TiO, were soaked at 1150 "C for 2 h and then cooled to 900 "C with a protected atmosphere [ 81 in a 50 cm3 platinum crucible. Crystal growth proceeded either in an oxygen atmosphere or in an ambient environment with a vertical tube furnace, which was programmed to give a very slow cooling rate from 0.5 to 10 "C h- `. The structure of the pulverized crystal was examined using an X-ray diffractometer with a copper target. The as-grown crystals were cubic in shape or had elongated cubic and orthogonal forms and were studied directly using optical microscopy for surface conditions. Some were etched using two different solutions: hot phosphoric acid and (95% HCl + 5% HF) for optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) investigations. Some crystals were ground by hand to a thickness of about 150 brn and then by a commercial dimple machine down to 10 pm. An ion miller was employed at 6 kV, 0.5 mA, each gun with a tilting angle of 18" for further thinning. After perforation, the specimens were bombarded by the ion beam with reduced voltage and tilting angle for several minutes. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) investigation was conducted using a Hitachi H800 and a JEOL 2000FXII microscope with a double-tilt specimen holder operated at 200 kV. 3. Results and discussion The as-grown crystals were cubic in shape or had elongated cubic and orthogonal forms, and showed a bluish luster. Fig. 1

shows a batch of as-grown single crystals in a platinum crucible. Some of the crystals were pulverized and examined using an X-ray diffractometer at room temperature. The diffraction pattern shown in Fig. 2 indicates a typical PbTi03 perovskite structure. The domain structures in the crystals were investigated using optical microscopy and electron microscopy. Typical etched patterns and some interesting features have been observed in the crystals. Fig. 3 shows 90" domain structures observed in an as-grown PbTi03 single crystal. The figure is an SEM micrograph showing several bands of regions with different etch rates in a crystal. The etched bands correspond

pulverized crystal of PbTiO3

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

60

2theta
Fig. 2. X-ray diffraction pattern of the pulverized crystals at room temperature, grown using a self-flux method, showing a typical perovskite PbTiOs structure.

Fig. 1. Micrograph showing as-grown PbTiO, single crystals in a platinum crucible, grown using a self-flux method.

Fig. 3. An SEM micrograph of 90" domain structures showing several bands of regions with different etch rates in a lead titanate single crystal. The etched bands labeled A correspond to a-c domains, and the relatively unetched regions labeled B are a-a type domains.

C.-C. Chou et al. /Materials Chemistry and Physics 45 (1996) 103-107

105

Fig. 5 is an optical micrograph showing the surface relief of an as-grown crystal - that is, the crystal surface forms hills and valleys on a flat surface after a phase transformation occurs. Ordinarily, surface relief can easily be observed when the specimen surface is clean and shiny, and the best viewing conditions can be derived with appropriate adjustment of the specimen orientation. The contrast of specimens changes greatly if the specimen or illumination orientation varies. In contrast, growth markings or ledges show no characteristic crystallographic features and relatively strong contrast at any illumination during observation, and therefore it is easy to tell growth markings from surface relief. In fact, the surface relief disappears when a specimen is heated above T,, and another set of reliefs appears upon cooling, indicating that the possibility of this being growth ledges or facets, which always exist, may be excluded. The surface relief phenomenon has been discussed extensively for metals, and it is often attributed to a diffusionless structure transformation. It is seen that the relief traces are roughly parallel to [ 1001 directions in this case, but many of them are not straight, indicating that the relief trace is not a twin boundary. The same crystal as in Fig. 5 (a) was chemically etched and observed again, and the outlined region in Fig. 5 (a) was enlarged and is shown in Fig. 5 (b). Finer structure was seen in each band, and in fact the finer structures are 90" and/or

Fig. 4. (a) A `EM micrograph showing two sets of neighbouring a-u domains; (b) the corresponding diffraction pattern showing 0-a domains with a twin relationship.

to a-c domains, and the relatively unetched regions are a-u type domains. The widths of the domain bands are not all the same, and later we may find that this can be correlated with stress conditions. The most important feature in this micrograph is the band structure, and in most etched regions finer structures were observed. What are the finer structures in these bands and why do they form? Fig. 4(a) is a TEM micrograph showing two sets of neighbouring a-u domain bands (A and B). Fig. 4(b) is the corresponding diffraction pattern showing typical a-a domains with a twin relationship. The diffraction pattern was taken from the area labeled A, and similar results can be derived from area B. The highly separated diffraction spots imply the large tetragonality of the ferroelectric phase. An intriguing feature is the boundary of the two sets of u-a 90" domains, as indicated by the small arrows. It is clear that the boundary is not straight, but rather like the boundary of the two selfaccommodated regions in a martensite of an alloy or metal, which has been demonstrated to have often irrational planes [ 151. In addition, the a-u 90" domain boundaries appear to conserve higher energy than the matrix, because the boundaries show irradiation damage, which appears as dark spots after a short period of investigation.

Fig. 5. Surface relief showing the close relation with the band structures: (a) as-grown specimen: (b) the same specimen, showingthe region outlined in (a ), after chemical etching using hot phosphoric acid at 120' C for 2 min.

106

C.-C. Chou et al. /Materials Chemistry and Physics 45 (1996) 103-107

Fig. 6. An SEM micrographof

intersected 90" domain bands showing heavily to high energy configurations in a lead

etched regions, which correspond titanate crystal.

180" domain boundaries. Similar structures were consistently observed, indicating that the surface relief was actually the band structures, such as shown in Figs. 3 and 5. From Fig. 5 (a) and (b) , one finds that each band may correspond to the `transformation variant' due to cubic-to-tetragonal transformation of PbTiO, upon cooling, and the domains are the twins in the variants, similar to the case in an alloy martensite.

Crystals grown with an ambient atmosphere and a loosely covered crucible are often defective owing to heavy evaporation of PbO, and show much more complicated 90" domain arrangements, such as shown in Fig. 6. Three-dimensional information is revealed in deep-etched regions, which may correspond to high energy configurations. Some 90" domain walls in each band may incline in one direction and some may incline in the other direction, even though the surface etched pattern looks similar, as indicated. A high-electricalenergy domain arrangement with two possible polarization configurations, enlarged from Fig. 6, is shown in Fig. 7(a). One sees that the head-to-head and/or tail-to-tail arrangements are inevitable, indicating the existence of a high-electrical-energy configuration, as shown in Fig. 7 (b) and (c) . Moreover, the etched patterns show that regions with unconventional polarization arrangements are not always etched away, but regions with possible high strains are constantly deep-etched, implying that the strain energy appears to be higher than the electrical energy, which may appear as headto-head, tail-to-tail or unconventional polarization vector arrangements. We suggest that the complexity of domain arrangements may be due to the impurity and/or tetragonality as a result of the growing conditions as well as the cooling rate and temperature distribution through the transformation temperature. Crystals containing suitable impurities may reduce the tetragonality of the cubic /tetragonal transformation and therefore decrease the transformation strain in a crystal. The consequence of a reduction of the strain energy is a simpler domain arrangement. Similarly, a lower tetragonality will induce a smaller strain and therefore the domain boundary energy is lower. The cooling rate during crystal growth is also an important factor in determining the domain structure of a crystal. A well-controlled cooling rate can induce a high quality crystal with a very simple domain arrangement.

0

point up

(b
0 pointdown
Z Pomttorhe-

(a)

Polarization vector arrangement

Fig. 7. (a) Enlargement of a region in Fig. 6, showing an abnormal domain arrangement. Schematic drawings (b) and (c) am polarization vector arrangements, showing two possible polarization configurations, suggesting the existence of a high energy state. Note that no matter how a polarization configuration is drawn, there are always some unconventional or high energy polarization arrangements.

C.-C. Chou et al. /Marerials Chemistry and Physics 45 (1996) 103-107

107

4. Conclusions

References

( 1) Crystals grown under an oxygen atmosphere with a tightly packed crucible show simpler 90" domain arrangements and more 180" domain boundaries; crystals using selfflux under conditions with heavy PbO evaporation show complicated 90" domain arrangements. (2) High energy domain arrangements have been observed consistently in crystals grown under various conditions. Head-to-head and/or tail-to-tail arrangements appear to be quite common in lead titanate crystals. (3) As-grown lead titanate crystals show structural characteristics very similar to those of martensites of various alloys and ceramics - that is, bands are analogous to transformation variants; domains are analogous to twins.

[ 11 S. Ikegami and 1. Ueda, J. Phys. Sot. Jpn., 22 ( 1967) 725.

[21 J. Stankowskaand
455

J. Stankowski,

Proc. Phys. Sot., London, 75 (1960) 73-85.

[Xl W.P. Mason, J. Acoust. Sot. Am., 27 (1955)

[4l CM. Zhang, W.Y. Pan, S.J. Jang and L.E. Cross, J. Appl. Phys., 64 (1988) 6445. [Sl Y.H.Hu,H.M.Chan,Z.X.WenandM.P.Harmer,J.Am. 69 (8) Cerum.Soc.,

( 1986) 594, and references therein.
1045. 265.

[61 G. Shirane, S. Hoshino and K. Suzuki, Phys. Rev., 80 (1950) 1105. I71 G.A. Smolenskii, Sov. J. Tech. Phys., 21 (1951) [ 8 I H.D. Megaw, Proc. R. Sot. London, Ser. A, I89 ( 1947) 26 1. [91 G. Shirane and S. Hoshino, J. Phys. Sot. Jpn., 6 (1951) Phys. -Solid (1968) 802. [ 121 M. Tan&&T. (1970) 386. YatsuhashiandG. Honjo,J. Phys. Sot. Jpn., 28 (Suppl.) Mater. Phys. Chem., 36 L.C. Yang and C.M. Slure. 14 (2) ( 1972) 310.

[ 101 S.I. Yakunin, V.V. Shakmanov, G.V. Spivakand N.V. Vasil'eva,Sov. [ 111 V.V. Shakmanov and G.V. Spivak, Sov. Phys. - Solid State. 10 (4)

1131 C.C. Chou, L.C. Yang and CM. Wayman,

Acknowledgements

(1993) 57-63. 1141 CC. Chou, S.M. Tsai, B.N. Sun, Y. Huang, Wayman, Proc. I993 Annu. Conj: Chinese Society for Materials Science, Hsinchu, Taiwan, April 1993, p, 2-83.

This project is supported by the National Scientific Council under Contract No. NSC 83-0404-E-01 l-01 1, Republic of China.

[ 151A.G. Khachaturyan,
43 (1991) 1832.

S.M. Shapiro and S. Semenovskaya,

Phys. Rev.,

