T620

Poster Presentations P3: recognition and binding to substrates. Methods: We have employed a co-crystallization strategy that provides a superb methodology to facilitate crystal growth and improve crystal quality for nicastrin structural studies. Results: We purified nicastrin ectodomain (NCTect) from the medium of a mammalian cell line that stably expresses NCTect, and deglycosylated this subject to remove N-glycans. Using a phage library that displays a large number of potential binders with desired diversities, we performed multiple rounds of affinity selection against NCTect. Eight independent Fab fragments have been successfully identified that tightly bind NCTect. The binding strength was determined by surface plasmon resonance biosensor, with dissociation constants in the lower nanomolar range. Conclusions: The nicastrin and Fab fragment form stable complexes which are now being isolated and purified for crystallization trials. P3-337 S-PALMITOYLATION TARGETS BACE-1 TO LIPID RAFTS

caveolin-1, suggesting that only the enzymatic activity of -secretase is subject to the regulation by caveolin-1. We also showed that overexpression of caveolin-1 can attenuate -secretase-mediated proteolysis of APP and Notch and that PS1 and NCT co-localize with caveolin-1 in HEK293 cells. Conclusions: Our results clearly suggest that caveolin-1 is an important endogenous regulator of -secretase. P3-335 UPSTREAM OF N-RAS (UNR) IS INVOLVED IN TRANSLATIONAL CONTROL OF ADAM10 PROTEIN EXPRESSION

Sven Lammich1, Sonja Zilow1, Dominik Bull1, Ann-Katrin Ludwig1, ¨ Claudia Prinzen2, Falk Fahrenholz2, Helene Jacquemin-Sablon3, Christian Haass1, 1Ludwig Maximilians University, Adolf Butenandt Institute, Munich, Germany; 2Johannes Gutenberg University, Institute for Biochemistry, Mainz, Germany; 3INSERM U889, Gref, University Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. Contact e-mail: slammich@med.unimuenchen.de Background: The amyloid beta peptide (A ) is derived by proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by the beta-secretase BACE1 and gamma-secretase. In contrast to this amyloidogenic processing, APP is predominantly cleaved by the alpha-secretase within the A domain and this precludes the formation of A . We and other research groups could show that BACE1 protein expression is regulated by the 5'untranslated region (UTR) of the BACE1 mRNA, however little is known about the regulation of alpha-secretase. Similar to the 5'UTR of BACE1, the 5'UTR of ADAM10 consists of 444 nucleotides with a GC-content of 70% and two upstream open reading frames. We hypothesize that ADAM10, the major anti-amyloidogenic alpha-secretase, is also regulated by its 5'UTR and postulate that ADAM10 and BACE1 are regulated on a posttranscriptional level by 5'UTR binding proteins. Methods: We performed a large mutagenesis analysis to identify regions within the 5'UTR of ADAM10 which are important for translational regulation. To identify possible binding candidates we performed a UTR-database search. Results: We found that ADAM10 expression is regulated by its 5'UTR. In the presence of the 5'UTR we observed a significant reduction of ADAM10 protein levels in HEK293 cells. mRNA levels were not affected. Deletions from the 3' end of the 5'UTR led to an even stronger inhibition of ADAM10 expression. However, a stepwise deletion of the first 259 nucleotides from the 5'end resulted in a strong increase in ADAM10 protein expression. Moreover we show that RNA binding proteins exist which bind specifically and selectively to either the 5'UTR of ADAM10 or BACE1. Using Electophoretic Mobility Shift Assays we identified UNR, a cytosolic RNA binding protein, as one binding partner of the ADAM10 5'UTR. Deleting the two well conserved binding sites within the UTR abolished the binding of recombinant UNR to the 5'UTR of ADAM10 and resulted in an increase of ADAM10 expression after transient transfection. Conclusions: In this sudy we demonstrate that the cytoplasmic protein UNR is able to bind to the 5'UTR of ADAM10 and that UNR might be involved in translational regulation of ADAM10 protein expression. P3-336 PURIFICATION AND COCRYSTALLIZATION OF NICASTRIN ECTODOMAIN

Xavier Meckler1, Kulandaivelu S. Vetrivel1, Ying Chen1, Tong Li2, Nabil G. Seidah3, Robert Vassar4, Philip C. Wong2, Masaki Fukata5, Gopal Thinakaran1, 1University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 2The John Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; 3 Clinical Research Institute of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada; ´ ´ 4 Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA; 5National Institute for Longevity Sciences, Aichi, Japan. Contact e-mail: xmeckler@bsd.uchicago.edu Background: Several studies have previously highlighted the importance of cholesterol-rich lipid raft membrane microdomains in the processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by - and -secretases to release Alzheimer's disease-associated amyloid peptides (A ). Biochemical fractionation and antibody co-patching methods indicate that a significant fraction of the -secretase BACE-1 is targeted to lipid rafts. However, the molecular determinants responsible for BACE-1 targeting to lipid rafts are still unknown. Methods: Radiolabeled palmitic acid labeling, biochemical lipid rafts-isolation, Western blot, antibody co-patching, immunocytochemistry Results: Here, we show that BACE-1 undergoes post-translational Spalmitoylation at four cysteine residues within the transmembrane and cytosolic domains. Substitution of these 4 cysteines to alanines was sufficient to abolish BACE-1 S-palmitoylation and targeting to lipid raft domains. However, wild type and palmitoylation-defective BACE-1 appear to have similar subcellular distribution in stably transfected cell lines. We also identified a subset of DHHC-containing palmitoyl-transferases that were able to mediate BACE-1 S-palmitoylation. Conclusions: Our studies indicate that S-palmitoylation is required for BACE-1 targeting to lipid rafts. As S-palmitoylation is a reversible post-translational modification, DHHC-containing palmitoyl-transferase activities might mediate dynamic modulation of BACE-1 association to lipid rafts. P3-338 ACE PROTEIN AND ENZYME ACTIVITY LEVELS IN BRAIN AND CSF IN ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE: INFLUENCE OF DISEASE SEVERITY AND ACE-1 GENOTYPE

Scott Miners, Emma Ashy, Seth Love, Patrick Kehoe, Bristol University, Bristol, United Kingdom. Contact e-mail: Scott.Miners@Bristol.ac.uk Background: Several observations point to a role for angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD): ACE cleaves human amyloid beta (A ) in vitro, the level and activity of ACE are reportedly increased in AD, and there is significant association between variations in the ACE gene and AD. Objectives: We have measured ACE activity and protein levels in CSF and frontal cortex from post-mortem AD cases and matched controls, and analyzed the relationships to Braak tangle stage, parenchymal A load and the ACE-1 I/D polymorphism. Methods: Frozen frontal cortex from 121 cases of AD and 60 controls (all characterized for Braak tangle stage, ACE-1 I/D polymorphism and frontal parenchymal A load was homogenized and used for sandwich ELISA of

Guoqing Lin1, Seong-Hun Kim2, Brenda Leung1, Akiko Koide1, Shohei Koide1, Sangram S. Sisodia1, 1University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 2University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. Contact e-mail: glin@bsd.uchicago.edu Background: Nicastrin (NCT) is an essential component of gamma-secretase, a multiprotein complex that catalyzes intramembranous cleavage of APP, Notch and other substrates. Shah, Yu and colleagues have reported that the large ectodomain of NCT functions as a receptor that recognizes and captures substrate to facilitate proteolysis. At present, very little information has emerged pertaining to the domains through which the components within the complex interact, or the structural basis for NCT

