doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2004.06.090

J. Mol. Biol. (2004) 342, 119­130

Structure of Alanine Dehydrogenase from Archaeoglobus: Active Site Analysis and Relation to Bacterial Cyclodeaminases and Mammalian mu Crystallin
¨ D. T. Gallagher1*, H. G. Monbouquette2, I. Schroder3, H. Robinson4 1 1 M. J. Holden and N. N. Smith
Biotechnology Division of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg MD 20899-8312, USA
2 Department of Chemical Engineering, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA 1

Department of Microbiology Immunology and Molecular Genetics, UCLA, Los Angeles CA 90095, USA Department of Biology Brookhaven National Labs Upton, NY 11973, USA
4

3

The hyperthermophilic archaeon Archaeoglobus fulgidus contains an L-Ala dehydrogenase (AlaDH, EC 1.4.1.1) that is not homologous to known bacterial dehydrogenases and appears to represent a previously unrecognized archaeal group of NAD-dependent dehydrogenases. The gene (Genbank AAB89583; TIGR AF1665) was annotated initially as an ornithine cyclodeaminase (OCD) on the basis of strong homology with the mu crystallin/OCD protein family. We report the structure of the NAD-bound ° AF1665 AlaDH (AF-AlaDH) at 2.3 A in a C2 crystal form with the 70 kDa dimer in the asymmetric unit, as the first structural representative of this family. Consistent with its lack of homology to bacterial AlaDH proteins, which are mostly hexameric, the archaeal dimer has a novel structure. Although both types of AlaDH enzyme include a Rossmann-type NADbinding domain, the arrangement of strands in the C-terminal half of this domain is novel, and the other (catalytic) domain in the archaeal protein has a new fold. The active site presents a cluster of conserved Arg and Lys side-chains over the pro-R face of the cofactor. In addition, the best ordered of the 338 water molecules in the structure is positioned well for mechanistic interaction. The overall structure and active site are compared with other dehydrogenases, including the AlaDH from Phormidium lapideum. Implications for the catalytic mechanism and for the structures of homologs are considered. The archaeal AlaDH represents an ancient and previously undescribed subclass of Rossmann-fold proteins that includes bacterial ornithine and lysine cyclodeaminases, marsupial lens proteins and, in man, a thyroid hormone-binding protein that exhibits 30% sequence identity with AF1665.
q 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

*Corresponding author

Keywords: hyperthermophile; nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; Rossmann-fold

Introduction
For many newly sequenced genes, probable cellular roles and functions can be assigned on the basis of homology to known sequences. When homology fails to make the assignment clear, additional observations such as microarray (expression) data, protein structure, or protein
Abbreviations used: OCD, ornithine cyclodeaminase; AlaDH, alanine dehydrogenase; CRYM, mu crystallin. E-mail address of the corresponding author: travis.gallagher@nist.gov

activity (binding, catalysis) measurements are needed. Frequently, a hypothetical protein of unknown function represents a previously unrecognized branch of protein evolution, which cannot be deciphered without linking functional and sequence data from disparate sources. In favorable cases, combining these sources of information can lead to the identification of new phylogenic relations among genomes. Archaeoglobus fulgidus is a hyperthermophilic (growth optimum 83 8C) sulfate-reducing archaeon found in shallow-water hot springs near Italy. The sequencing of the A. fulgidus genome1 led directly to functional

0022-2836/$ - see front matter q 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

120 assignments for about half of its 2436 genes. Gene AF1665 (Genbank AAB89583) was annotated as a putative ornithine cyclodeaminase (OCD) on the basis of its 35% identity with the arcB gene from Agrobacterium tumefaciens, which belongs to the mu crystallin/OCD family. This gene family is taxonomically diverse and includes eye lens proteins in marsupials and thyroid hormone-binding protein in humans. Surprisingly, the AF1665 protein was detected by Edman sequencing of a dehydrogenaseactive band observed by in situ colorimetric assays after native gel electrophoresis of A. fulgidus cell lysates. Subsequent isolation and biochemical characterization showed that the AF1665 protein is in fact an L -alanine dehydrogenase, with no apparent cyclodeaminase activity.2 Alanine dehydrogenase (AlaDH; EC 1.4.1.1) enzymes catalyze the NAD-dependent interconversion of L-alanine and pyruvate. Both the forward, or dissimilatory, reaction, producing pyruvate, ammonium ion, and NADH, and the reverse (assimilatory) reaction (producing alanine), have important roles in the carbon and nitrogen metabolism of microorganisms.3 AlaDH enzymes from a variety of bacteria have been characterized. Most are hexameric, including those of various Bacilli,3 Mycobacterium tuberculosis,4 Streptomyces phaeochromogenes,5and psychrophilic Shewanella and Carnobacterium species.6 Tetramers from Streptomyces fradiae7 and soybean nodule bacteroids,8 and an octamer from Streptomyces aureofaciens9 have been reported. The crystal structure of the hexameric AlaDH from Phormidium lapideum has been determined.10 The level of sequence homology between that enzyme and those of other eubacteria is high and the tertiary structures are likely to be similar, despite differences in oligomeric state. Those enzymes comprise an NAD-binding, Rossmannfold domain,11 and a catalytic domain, and have sizes from 40 kDa to 51 kDa. Bacterial AlaDH enzymes stand apart, in sequence and in structure, from the superfamily of other amino acid dehydrogenases that includes PheDH,12 LeuDH,13 and GluDH.14 Instead, in fold and catalytic machinery (though not in sequence), bacterial AlaDHs appear similar to the family of D-2-hydroxyacid dehydrogenases.10 Thus, there are two distinct groups of amino acid dehydrogenases, differing in hydride stereochemistry (pro-R versus pro-S) and in the type of acid/base catalyst (His versus Arg). Diaminopimelate DH15 is a special case that belongs to the amino acid DH superfamily, yet transfers the pro-R hydride. Prior to this work, one type of archaeal amino acid dehydrogenase structure was known: GluDH from both Thermococcus16 and Pyrococcus17 species. In these cases the archaeal proteins are homologous with their bacterial counterparts. Although confirmed to function as an AlaDH,18 the 35 kDa archaeal AF1665 protein has no homology with previously reported dehydrogenases, and appears to represent a new class of AlaDH, unrelated to bacterial DH enzymes, and instead belonging to the evolutionarily broad mu crystallin/

Structure of Archaeal Ala Dehydrogenase/Crystallin

ornithine cyclodeaminase family. In order to better understand these structural and evolutionary relationships and to provide a model for the mammalian and bacterial homologs, we have determined the structure of AF1665 AlaDH with bound NAD. Although the structure contains a Rossmann-type NAD domain, the non-Rossmann domain, the overall organization, and the active site are distinct from archived structures.

Results
Tertiary and quaternary structure AlaDH from A. fulgidus is a dimer of 322 residue chains. The refined model contains residues 1­320 of each chain. Ramachandran statistics are given in Table 1. There are two non-glycine residues with La conformation, Met59 and Asn312, both of which occur in compact connections between regular secondary structure elements, far from the cofactor. The dimer is oblong, with overall dimensions ° ° ° 90 A!40 A!40 A (Figure 1). The length of the dimer is perpendicular to the dyad, so that the NAD ° domains extend to 45 A from the dyad and the ° active sites are separated by 36 A. The largely ° hydrophobic dimer interface buries 1175 A2 of the accessible surface area19 per subunit and is formed by a seven-stranded, mostly antiparallel sheet. The
Table 1. Diffraction and refinement statistics
Space group Unit cell dimensions ° a(A) ° b(A) ° c(A) Unit cell angles a (deg.) b (deg.) g (deg.) ° Resolution (A) No. unique refs Redundancy Completeness (%) I/s(I) Rmergeb ° B-factor from Wilson plot(A2) Total non-H atoms Total solvent molecules R-value R-free (4% of data) r.m.s.d. from ideal ° Bond lengths (A) Bond angles (deg.) Mean B (main chain) Mean B (side-chain) ° Estimated sA coord. error (A) Ramachandran metricc C2 108.707 55.452 131.285 90 111.08 90 8.0K2.32 29,537 3.2 (2.7)a 95 (93) 8.8 (2.7) 0.05 (0.21) 40.4 5283 338 0.22 (0.25) 0.26 (0.29) 0.018 3.2 31.2 33.4 0.20 636/636 (100%)

a Values in parentheses correspond to the highest-resolution ° shell 2.46­2.32 A. P P b Rmerge Z jIK hIij= I, where hIi is the mean of symmetryrelated reflection intensities. c Fraction of residues (A and B chains) lying within either the core or additionally allowed regions of conformational space, as calculated by PROCHECK.36

Structure of Archaeal Ala Dehydrogenase/Crystallin

121 core between the domain 1 sheet and the helix 294­311. Consistent with the general tendency of thermophilic genomes to encode higher proportions of charged residues than mesophiles (29.8% versus 24.1%),20 AF-AlaDH has 87 EDKRH residues or 27.0%. NAD binding The catalytic cofactor NADC binds to AF-AlaDH at the C-terminal ends of the central strands in domain 2 in a manner similar to many dehydrogenases.11 The NAD-associated P-loop sequence motif GxGxxG/A is present as residues 132­137 with the adenyl moiety binding in the space adjacent to Gly132 and between the side-chains of Val158 and Thr195. Within the mu crystallin/OCD family, this motif appears as GxGxQA, with the QA present in most, but not all, members. This semiconserved Gln side-chain (Gln136) forms ° several buried polar interactions within 5 A of the nicotinamide ring. The 2 0 and 3 0 hydroxyl groups of the adenine ribose are coordinated by Asp157. The pyrophosphate moiety coordinates to the N-terminal end of the helix that follows the GxG motif (as in other dehydrogenases), occupying the space adjacent to Gly134 and forming several direct and water-mediated H-bonds with main-chain amide groups 134­137. The hydroxyl groups of the nicotinamide ribose donate H-bonds to 217 O and 219 OD2. The nicotinamide moiety (Figures 3 and 4) packs its pro-S face against apolar portions of Thr109, Gln136, and Ile216, with the glycosidic bond in anti conformation. Both carboxyamide polar atoms have H-bonds to enzyme groups: the nitrogen atom to Ser290 O and the oxygen atom to Arg108 NH1. In addition, there is an apparent hydrogen bond ° (3.0 A) between the C4 of the nicotinamide moiety (the hydride acceptor atom) and the hydroxyl oxygen atom of Thr109. This hydroxyl oxygen atom has nearly perfect tetrahedral interactions ° with acceptor 105 O (distance 2.6 A), donor 108 ° ), and the nicotinamide carbon atom NH1 (3.0 A ° (3.0 A) and thus, if we consider C4 as a donor atom, has ideal H-bonding geometry. Both of the nicotinamide ligands, Arg108 and Thr109, are well conserved in the mu crystallin/OCD family (Figure 5). The nicotinamide ring binding geometry exposes its pro-R face to the cleft, facing several conserved and semiconserved side-chains of ° domain 1 across a gap of about 6 A. Active site Given the described geometry, the location of the active site can be inferred from the position of the cofactor and the adjacent cavity with reference to conserved residues. The pro-R face of the nicotinamide group has no van der Waals contact in the crystal structure; it faces a cavity with diameter ° about 6 A (Figures 3 and 4). On the opposite side of this cavity is a group of side-chains from domain 1

Figure 1. Ribbon diagram of the AF-AlaDH dimer with the bound NAD cofactors represented in ball-and-stick. The upper and lower subunits are structurally similar, but the dimer is oriented to provide different views of the two subunits. The upper subunit is colored from blue (at the N terminus) through green and yellow to red to indicate sequence order of the structural elements. The catalytic hydride acceptor atom of the nicotinamide ring in each active site is drawn as a double-sized black sphere for emphasis. The N and C termini of both subunits are labeled. The Figure was made using MOLSCRIPT.39

NAD domains are on either side of this dyadic beta sandwich, forming the tips of the elongated dimer. The active sites are in the clefts on either side of the central sandwich, between it and the NAD domains. The subunit folds into two domains, the smaller dimerization/catalytic domain 1 (residues 1­120 and 293­322) and the larger NAD-binding domain 2 (residues 121­292). Both termini belong to domain 1, where they are in close proximity. Domain 1 consists mainly of the above-mentioned sheet, whose one face forms the dimer interface while the other face forms a wall of the active site. Domain 2 contains a classical dinucleotide-binding folding unit (residues 121­232) as seen in many dehydrogenases,11 but includes also a region (residues 233­292) with a unique strand order and high coil fraction (38%). The central sheet of domain 2 is pure parallel with eight strands ordered 32145867. The topologies of the sheets and arrangement of secondary structures are diagrammed in Figure 2. The three Cys side-chains all belong to the NAD domain, and all are buried. Curiously, all of the nine methionine residues are within the first 100 residues, primarily serving to build the hydrophobic

122

Structure of Archaeal Ala Dehydrogenase/Crystallin

Figure 2. A diagram showing secondary structure elements with sequence numbering. The colors of each element are as in Figure 1. The NAD domain is pure parallel, with all strands rising out of the page. The star indicates the P-loop that binds the central pyrophosphate group of the NAD cofactor and contains the GxGxxA sequence fingerprint. The pair of crosses indicate the approximate region of the active site.

comprising Lys41, Arg52, Met54, Lys65, and Val67. With the exception of Arg52, these sites are well conserved (Figure 5). In addition, the strictly conserved Arg108, which H-bonds to the

nicotinamide carboxyamide group, appears well positioned to coordinate the carboxylate group of the substrate. The putative active-site cavity contains two crystallographically ordered water

Figure 3. A stereo diagram showing electron density in the A chain active site. The 2FoKFc map is contoured at the 1.5s level, with the refined model superimposed. The nicotinamide ring of the catalytic cofactor is at lower right (red), with two well-ordered water molecules (green) above it.

Structure of Archaeal Ala Dehydrogenase/Crystallin

123

Figure 4. A stereo diagram of residues surrounding the active-site cavity of AF-AlaDH. The nicotinamide ring is at lower center, with its C4 atom (hydride acceptor site) indicated by an asterisk. Two well-ordered water molecules are ° shown as cyan spheres. Dotted lines indicate key H-bonding interactions under 3.2 A. Not shown for reasons of clarity is the side-chain of Val67, which forms the "ceiling" of the active site and would be in the upper middle foreground in this view. The Figure was made using MOLSCRIPT.39

molecules whose positions suggest potential involvement in the mechanism. Wat503 (the water molecule on the left in Figures 3, 4 and 6(a)) is the best ordered water in the entire crystal (lowest ° ° thermal parameter, BZ6.2 A2), and is situated 5.9 A from the hydride-accepting C4 atom of the cofactor.

Discussion
Fold Domain 1 has no known structural homolog. This domain contains both termini, but is formed primarily by residues 1­100. The seven-stranded sheet that dominates domain 1 has four consecutive beta-ribbon connections (residues 41­100; see Figure 2). These connecting loops are generally short, so that overall the domain is extensive in two dimensions but thin. The domain forms a core by wrapping the sheet partly around helix 294­311. The helical region 8­33, which sequentially connects the first two beta strands, does not contact the sheet but instead wraps around the farther side of helix 294­311. This arrangement effectively makes helix 294­311 the core of the domain: partly buried between the sheet and other helices, and with its N-terminal region near the active site. The specific connectivity of the domain 1 sheet is novel; no match was found with the same 7165432 connectivity in searches of structure databases. Among previously known protein structures, the closest matches to AF-AlaDH are others that contain NAD-binding domains, but the similarity is limited to those domains. The AF-AlaDH NAD domain (domain 2) comprises a single sequence zone (121­292) that interrupts domain 1, thus placing it in the formate/glycerate dehydrogenase family of Rossmann-fold domains. This is one of the

ten families of Rossmann-fold enzymes defined by the SCOP database.21 Although the entire fold/ superfamily is formally defined by the strand order 321456, in fact the database includes many variations involving the C-terminal strands of the domain. The formate/glycerate dehydrogenase family includes the AlaDH from the cyanobacterium Phormidium, whose topology is 3214576 with the last two strands antiparallel.10 Clearly, the C-terminal portions of NAD domains are relatively diverse, as might be expected, since the function of NAD binding belongs almost entirely to the N-terminal portion. In the case of AF-AlaDH, the C-terminal portion of domain 2 contains the protein's largest concentration of coil (non-alpha, non-beta) structure. The role of this region of the structure is unclear, since the active site and NAD-binding functions do not involve residues 240­289 directly. Comparison with bacterial AlaDH Comparison of AF-AlaDH with the hexameric P. lapideum structure shows that, although the catalytic domains are in the same region with respect to the common NAD domain, they are folded differently. Thus, while the sheet in domain 1 of the phormidial structure 1PJC is pure parallel, sheet 1 in AF-AlaDH is mostly antiparallel. Moreover, superposition of the entire oligomers indicates that the quaternary contacts utilize completely different surfaces of the protomers: while in 1PJC the NAD domain forms most of the quaternary interactions, in AF-AlaDH dimerization is entirely the function of the catalytic domain (Figure 7). The phormidial enzyme has been crystallized in two distinct complexes; one with NADC and the other with pyruvate. A motion is apparently ° required to close the gap of w7 A that is observed (in separate structures) between the locations of

124

Structure of Archaeal Ala Dehydrogenase/Crystallin

LT LS S LT VT LS IS S LT LK LN S VQ

E H D D E E Q E E D R E E E S D S Q D E E

E E E R R R E E E E E R R

LS I ID LR LS LS

E R E E E E

AF TF L AF AF GY AL GF AF AY GL DF GL F DF GL TL NL SF AL AL AL

YA KP E FS YG RG FS YS LA FS QG W C LA WP G HG HS S FS FS FS

PK PK PR R TR PR PI P PI DY PR PR PL AQ AR P PK VR AR VR VR VR

G G S N G G N G G G G G A G G G A S G G G G

L F L W L F

I F I L F I W I L L L L L

MPA MPA MVA MPS MPA YSA MPS KSA KTA K G L G MPT MPV Y G MPV MP MPG MPS MPG MPV MPA MPA

G G S S G G G A S G G G G A G G A

K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K

N N G N A T T P G G N T P N G A T T T T T

H H Y I F F F F Y H F Y H Y F F Y Y Y

N N N N N N N N N N N N R N N N N N H R

K R R K K W I K I E H R K R Q I

A A G G

G G G G G A A A A G G G G A A

L L L L L L L V L L L L L L L L L V L L

SPETG PETG SSDG SPDTG DT A DADSG D QAG SAHTG SSQTG DARS DPRTG NV SG DGEDG S QTG VETG DDTTG DPDTG SSTTG NSTTG DPSNG DPSNG PSNG

AV CL AI AI AL AL AL L CI AI L AL L L AL CV A AI SI AV AV

DAT AT A EGS EAN DGA EGS D G D G DGS DAT E T EAS DAA E T DGV DAA DGT EAN DGN DGN DGN

T IT T LT L LT LT LT IT IT LT LT LT T LT LT LT LT IT IT IT

LRTG LRTG WRTA IRTA IRTG L TG IRTG MRTA RTA LRTG MRTG LRTA RRTA RTA LRT IRTG RTA YRTS IRTA KRTA KRTA KRTA

AAGGIAA AAGAVAS AASALA SASVLST AVTA AT AAGAVGV A SGVAT AG IAA AAGAVAA ASGAVSV AVTAIGA ATSAVAA SSALAA ATTAVAV ATS AA AASA AS AASAV S SVSGLGS AS VAT AVSAIAT AVSAIAT AVSAIAT

KY KY K EL I DE KY RL KH K RH KH DY D R RL KY KI F KF KL KF

L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L

A A G

N D H N D N Q D N D N D E D D H D R S S

S V G V A A V A A S A A A A S V S A S S S

S R D E S K K S R K R R C R R R Q R E D E

A A A S A A A A A A A S A

G IGCG VGIVGAG LGVIGAG LGIIGAG AIIGSG LAVIGS LCIIGTG IGILGTG TI GAG VA IGTG LA IGA AIIGNG L VVGCG LALIGSG ALIGNG VGLIGSG IAVIGAG L VGSG LGIVGCG LCILGAG LCILGAG LCILGAG

QA QG QA EA QA QA QA QA QA QA A QS LA A QS QS QG LA QG QA QA QA

Y R R K E H K Q R R Y E

Q Q H H Q Q Q Q Q N Q

H H E Q Q L H H M H Y H Y H Y H

E L R K E Q E E R R R L R Q L H E I E E E

L H L M I L L L F H F L L L F F F F

FD FD F FS N RD RD D RP M FD LG RD RD LG FP HP S FS FS FS

EVK YD E VFVYD DEILV S SRVLI A TEIRVYS DTIHVYS EKVILYN RQVIVWG RQ RIWA EKIH WS DEIRVHS DKLRLYD RHI IWG Q VRVH EEI VYD ERVL WD E HI D RRVIIWN R IRLWN KEVRIWN KEVR WN KEVRIWN

R R K N T T H D T R D D S D D D T T T T T

K E E S E E E R E E Q C S D Q K E E

F L L F F F Y L Y F L R L L L L L F F F

AS V V A AV AV V ST AS VA AV AC AA AA A VA PV S VC VC VC VC

N

S S D D D S D S G S S P S T S S S

DVL DVV S VV S VI AD I ADIV ADII A LI A IV ADIL ADIV ADII AD V ADVI ADIV ADII ADVV GDII DVI ADVI ADVI ADVI

TTT TCT AAT ATT T T TAT TTT CTT TTT TTT A TVT CVT CT TVT TAT TAT CAT TAT TVT TVT TVT

SR AT ST SD SN AS AT SR AD GK K SR S K

PVV P L PVV PVV PIV PV PV LL PIL LV PLL IL LV VI II PVL PLV PLV PIL PIL PIL

ST SS AT AT AT

E V E V L K L K L D L E L D V S L D V E I N V L R L D I D V S V E L S L E V E V E V

G D G D G G G G G G G G P G G G N G G G

HIN HVN YVA HVS HIN HVT HVN HIT HVT HIV VV HIN HLD VT HIN HIN V HLD HIN HIN HIN HIN

GA GA GA GA GS G GS GA GS G G GG GA GG G GS GA GA GA GA

QE QE RE RE RE RE QE QE NE QE E TE RE HE TE TE D KE E RE RE RE

V T D D S T S P P P T G V A A A D D D D

L L K I L I I I F M L L L L I Y M M M

KA RA RA KS DA RA KA RA RA NA K RS RA A RA A RG E N QA EA

K

V D V D V V P V V V V V V V C V P A V S E

K N T K D D K D R D R H D S Q

GE GD SD GD G GD GE GE GE G GE GD GE GD GE G GE E GD GD GD

S D D D D E T D E D Q D D V S V S V S

TIGEV ELSDV TL D EIGEI EL DV ELGDV ELGQI ELGTL ELGEV EIGEV ELGQI EL EV EL DL DLAEL DL RV SLGEL SVSDV NL EL EVGEV ELGEV ELGEV ELGEV

G G G A G G G G G G G G A G G G G G G

S D R S S N H R S S D D E S N S Q H H H

E E D R H E E Q D E E Q E R Q D D S K K K

TIFDS TVFDS VYKS SIFKT TVFKS TVFDS TIFKS TL D TI D TIFDS LF TLFDS TLFKS A FRS TVFDS N TVFKS SVF S TVFKS TVFKS TVFKS

G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G

AIQD AI D V D A QD GLED GIE AV D AVQD GVQD AIQD SLSD A ED ALED GLED ALED AVHD G D A ED AVED AVED AVED

A A A G A A A G A A A A A A T A A G S V A A A S A G A T G V A V A V A

YEN YER YER YEE LKN YER YER H FQR YQN L K RDK DN Y R LEQ T FD HET YEK YDS YDS YDS

Figure 5. Multiple sequence alignment of the mu crystallin protein family. Here, 22 sequences are aligned, out of a total of 96 listed under the Pfam website, where the sequence database codes are listed (www.sanger.ac.uk). The first sequence is that of AF-AlaDH (Genbank AAB89583). The top six sequences (preceded by an asterisk (*)) are archaeal, and the last

Structure of Archaeal Ala Dehydrogenase/Crystallin

125

Figure 6. Stereo diagrams with alanine modeled into the AF-AlaDH active-site crystal structure. The substrate has been positioned so as to form a bidentate salt-link interaction with Arg108. The asterisk shows the hydride acceptor atom ° of the NADC cofactor. In (a), key H bonds under 3.2 A are represented by broken thin lines. The broken thick lines indicate the putative nucleophilic attack by Wat503 on the substrate from above, and the hydride transfer path with ° length 3.6 A (below the substrate). The alanine carboxylate group is coordinated to Arg108. In (b), the corresponding region of the phormidial AlaDH pyruvate complex (1PJC) is superposed in purple on the archaeal structure in green. Note that Arg108, Asp297, and Lys65 appear to have close matches in the 1PJC structure, but that Arg52 and Lys41 do not. Note also the large distance to the cofactor in 1PJC, apparently requiring a domain rearrangement to enable hydride transfer.10 The Figure was made using MOLSCRIPT.39

substrate and cofactor (Figure 6(b)). In contrast, in the AF-AlaDH structure (with bound NADC but no substrate or product) the active site is apparently already in a closed conformation, as the cavity adjacent to the cofactor is just large enough for substrate, and the putative substrate-coordinating Arg108 is also H-bonded to the cofactor (Figures 3, 4 and 6(a)). Mechanism Because the crystal structure contains NADC, we focus primarily on alanine-to-pyruvate conversion;

the reverse process is expected to involve similar steps in the opposite order. The catalytic efficiencies and substrate affinities are about equal for the two directions.2 The catalytic reactions of dehydrogenase enzymes are well studied, enabling structure-based hypothesis concerning the roles in catalysis of key conserved residues.13,22 Based on the hydride transfer geometry in mechanistically characterized precedents, the substrate alanine was modeled into the AF-AlaDH active site (Figure 6(a)). The cavity is sized appropriately, and lined generally with conserved, often cationic, side-chains. The proposed binding mode of alanine utilizes the

five (preceded by an exclamation point (!)) are eukaryotic, ending with kangaroo, mouse, and man. Using the AF-AlaDH numbering, every 20th residue is marked with a dot above the alignment, and every 100th with two dots. Key residues are marked by crosses above the alignment. The 74 omitted sequences include nine archaea and eight eukaryotes. The alignment omits the last ten residues of AF-AlaDH, where homology is very weak. The consensus line uses capitals for conserved residue types and lower case for conserved residue properties. The Figure was made using CHROMA,40 using the default parameters.

126

Structure of Archaeal Ala Dehydrogenase/Crystallin

Figure 7. Superposition of the archaeal dimeric AFAlaDH onto the mesophilic hexameric AlaDH from P. lapideum. Five of the six phormidial subunits are represented by their surfaces; the sixth is represented by the green cartoon diagram at the center, with its bound NAD in yellow. Note that the green phormidial subunit comprises two domains, and that it is the domain on the lower left, the NAD-binding domain, that interacts with the other (surface-rendered) phormidial subunits to form the hexamer. The AF-AlaDH dimer is drawn (the red and purple subunits) such that one of its two NAD domains (the red one at center) superposes onto the green phormidial NAD domain. Although within a single subunit, the two proteins (green and red) have similar positions of the two domains (i.e. with catalytic domains to the upper right of the superposed NAD domains), the dimer interface in AF-AlaDH and the oligomer interfaces in Phormidium clearly have different locations. The Figure was made using PYMOL (www.pymol.org).

minimum energy conformation of the substrate. In addition, it places the beta carbon atom nearest the bulk solvent, which is consistent with measurements showing that the enzyme is relatively insensitive to substituents on this site. For example, both 2-ketobutyrate and oxaloacetate are aminated reductively with nearly the same catalytic efficiency as pyruvate.2 As in other dehydrogenase structures, the carboxylate group of the substrate is expected to be coordinated by a conserved Arg (or Lys) side-chain. The best candidate in the present case, analogous to Arg15 in 1PJC, is the conserved Arg108 in AF-AlaDH (Figure 6(b) shows the key similarities and differences between AF-AlaDH and its bacterial counterpart 1PJC). As in 1PJC and other dehydrogenase structures, the Arg is itself coordinated by a side-chain carboxylate group, which is likewise conserved, in this case Asp297. Placement of alanine so as to form a bidentate salt-link interaction with Arg108 gives the substrate a nearly ideal relation to the cofactor, with the substrate Ca ° atom (the hydride donor) at a distance of 3.6 A from

the nicotinamide C4 atom (hydride acceptor) and the putative hydride transfer path nearly perpendicular to the cofactor ring. In this position the substrate fits snugly between the methyl group of Thr105 and the H-bonding pair involving the epsilon amine group of Lys41 and the carbonyl group of 291. Binding of alanine in this manner appears nearly to trap the two water molecules, and the observed location of Wat503 appears well positioned for nucleophilic attack on the substrate ° Ca atom (distance of 2.5 A). The second water molecule (Wat510) would then be well positioned to mediate proton transfers involving the amine leaving group. There are two key ways in which the conformation of bound Ala could vary from that suggested in Figure 6(a), while still maintaining the bidentate coordination to Arg108 and the required geometric relation to the cofactor. First, the Ala molecule has one degree of conformational freedom: torsion around its central bond. This would have the effect, approximately, of exchanging the positions of its amine nitrogen and beta carbon atoms. Second, the Arg108 side-chain is flexible and torsion of the guanidino group could play a mechanistic and/or binding role. This latter type of motion appears more likely in the case of the planar pyruvate substrate, since in the crystal structure the plane of the guanidine group is nearly perpendicular to the plane of the pyridyl ring. The polar substituents to the substrate 2-carbon (i.e. the Ala amine group and, in the reverse reaction, the pyruvate carbonyl group) require an acid/base capable of catalytically transferring protons. This role is fulfilled by His in some dehydrogenases (e.g. AlaDH, see Figure 6(b)), and by Lys in others (e.g. PheDH). AF-AlaDH appears to belong to the latter mechanistic class; it has no histidine ° residue within 10 A of the expected substrate Ca ° site, but the strictly conserved Lys65 is within 5 A. In addition, both Lys41 (which is replaced by Arg in ° some homologs) and Arg52 are within 7 A. These three cationic groups are linked by H-bonds through the two highly ordered water molecules, Wat503 and Wat510 (Figures 3 and 4), an arrangement expected to reduce the effective pKa values of the side-chains. On the basis of established DH structures, the catalytic acid/base functional group, whether His or Lys, is expected to have an Asp or Glu partner; in the present case, this appears to be ° the strictly conserved Asp297, which is within 3 A of Lys65. A key difference between the two substrates is that pyruvate is planar, while Ala is not. Thus, were pyruvate to bind as Ala is modeled in Figure 6(a), its carbonyl group could be close to the location of Wat503. This has two important implications. First, if Wat503 were displaced by pyruvate, and the water site becomes the carbonyl-binding site, then the adjacent second water site (Wat510) would be well positioned to serve as proton donor in protonation of the carbonyl group. Second, the distinct orientations of the beta carbon atoms in the two substrates would help to explain the

Structure of Archaeal Ala Dehydrogenase/Crystallin

127 indicate that NAD(P) binding is conserved. Figure 5 is a multiple alignment of 22 of the 96 known CRYM protein sequences. There are three sites that are 100% conserved in this set: Thr109, which binds the catalytic hydride acceptor atom in the present structure (Figures 3 and 4), Gly132, which is part of the NAD-binding motif, and Gly292, where any substitution would impinge on the NAD­Arg108 interaction described above (Figure 4). Five additional residues are conserved with only one or two exceptions: Lys65 (active site; potential substrate ligand, see Figures 4 and 6(a)), Arg108 (active site; nicotinamide ligand and likely substrate ligand, see Figures 4 and 6(a)), Gly134 (NAD binding motif), Thr195 (adenine ligand), and Asp297 (bidentate coordination of active site Arg108). Cyclodeaminases

biochemical observation that the enzyme tolerates beta analogs of pyruvate, but not Ala. Figure 8 diagrams the proposed roles of active-site sidechains and water molecules in the dehydrogenase mechanism. Although these considerations are consistent with the structure and with established mechanistic analyses, they provide only a preliminary sketch toward the chemical mechanism of AF-AlaDH. In particular, the location from which the cosubstrate ammonia attacks pyruvate, the specific roles, if any, of the two observed water sites, the conformation of the carbinolamine intermediate, and the detailed sequence of mechanistic steps, are unresolved. Another open question, suggested by precedents involving interdomain motions, is to what extent do large-scale rearrangements play a role in the mechanism? Phylogeny AF-AlaDH belongs to the CRYM (mu crystallin) protein family, with homologs in all three biotic kingdoms. Figure 5 shows that sequence conservation extends through both structural domains. Among archaebacteria, no functions besides alanine dehydrogenase are known, although the sequence variation is relatively high. In some eubacteria (e.g. agrobacteria), the homolog is known to function as ornithine cyclodeaminase (OCD). In diurnal marsupials (e.g. kangaroo), the protein homolog serves as a major component of eye lens and gives the entire family its name. In man, the nearly identical protein appears to have another function, involving thyroxin binding. The function in plants is unknown. While it is convenient to consider the protein family in terms of these major taxonomic groups, the sequences do not group so neatly, and some archaeal and bacterial sequences appear to be more similar to the mammalian than to other members of their own kingdom. In general, all the homologs share about 30% identity, and both biochemical evidence and sequence analysis

Ornithine cyclodeaminase (OCD; EC 4.3.1.12; arcB), is not present in Escherichia coli (where arcB refers to a different enzyme) or in Bacillus subtilis. In Agrobacter species it is encoded by the plant tumorinducing Ti plasmid, and appears to play a role in transforming the host. OCD performs an unusual cyclization reaction to convert ornithine directly to proline with release of ammonia. The Agrobacter sequence is similar, in part, to that of E. coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa carbamoyltransferase. Although the OCD reaction is not well understood, it is known to require NAD as cofactor.23 In addition, the related enzyme lysine cylodeaminase from Streptomyces hygroscopicus is 27% identical with AF-AlaDH. The AF-AlaDH enzyme has been assayed for OCD activity, with none detected.2 It appears that the AF-AlaDH scaffold has been modified evolutionarily and the active site adapted for the OCD reaction. By comparison to the AlaDH active site, the longer side-chains of ornithine and lysine could apparently be accommodated by projecting outward, in the direction of the ribose moieties, in the same manner that longer substrates

Figure 8. Functional scheme of alanine in the AF-AlaDH active site, with key side-chains and putative residue roles for the hydride transfer step. O 503 and O 510 represent the two observed water molecules (as in Figures 3, 4 and 6(a)). ° Residue identifiers represent side-chain functional groups and broken lines represent distances under 3.2 A. The bonding rearrangements indicated by the arrows would lead to the carbinolamine intermediate in the Ala-to-Pyr conversion. Doubling of the bond from O 503, with elimination of the amine group, would then yield pyruvate.

128 appear to be accepted by AlaDH. However, this leaves open the question of how the ornithine and lysine side-chains are sterically constrained for cyclization. mu crystallins A dominant eye lens component in diurnal marsupials, the kangaroo mu crystallin protein has been purified and characterized.24 Like many taxon-specific lens proteins that closely resemble dehydrogenases and other metabolic enzymes, it is known to bind NADP.25 The function of dinucleotide ligand in the lens is not known; it has been suggested to serve in maintenance of stable redox state in the lens, to filter ultraviolet light or to promote transparency and refractive functions.26 Since lens proteins do not undergo turnover during the lifetime of the organism, it is likely that the stability of the protein has a role in its recruitment to the lens. The 314 residue human homolog of mu crystallin does not appear to serve as a lens protein, but is over 86% identical with the kangaroo protein. It was found to be expressed in retina and subsequently found in various tissues.27 It has been cloned and biochemically characterized,24 and has been called thyroid hormone-binding protein (THBP) based on measurements of thyroxin binding.28 The thyroid hormones (thyroxines T3 and T4), targeted to widespread tissues, are modified iodinated tyrosine residues that serve as crucial mediators of osmoregulatory and metabolic homeostasis in man and other mammals. THBP binds thyroxine T3 with nanomolar affinity in the presence of NADP, confirming that the dinucleotide-binding function is conserved in this homolog, as is suggested by the 30% sequence identity. Thyroid hormones are poorly soluble in water, and in the bloodstream are carried by proteins, chiefly thyroglobulin, transthyretin and albumin. The crystal structure of transthyretin (2ROX)29 shows that in this unrelated protein, the T4 hormone is bound internally within a dimer interface. Thus, there appear to be two distinct structural modes by which human mu crystallin could bind thyroxins. Since the hormones are modified tyrosine molecules with alpha-amino and carboxylate groups, they could bind close to the NAD(P) moiety, as alanine binds to AlaDH (Figure 6(a)). Alternatively, the binding could resemble that in transthyretin, where the aromatic side-chain is bound in a hydrophobic cavity, and the polar alpha groups project outward and are bound only weakly. Measurements of thyroxine-binding stoichiometry could be useful in resolving this uncertainty. The function of the human CRYM protein is the subject of active investigation. Alignment of the archaeal and human sequences (Figure 5) shows that there is only one large (more than three residues) insertion, of four residues at position 35, and one large deletion, of residues 252­259. Both these sites are on the protein surface and far from

Structure of Archaeal Ala Dehydrogenase/Crystallin

the archaeal active site. Recent studies involving microarray approaches to identifying genes linked to human diseases have implicated the human CRYM protein in prostate cancer30 and in deafness. High levels of expression were found in inner ear tissue, and two specific mutations (one adding five extra residues at the C terminus, the other changing the C-terminal Lys314 to Thr) were found to be linked with non-syndromic deafness.31 These mutations are far from the active site in AlaDH, but are on the dimer interface, suggesting that the dimer may be destabilized, or that the hormonebinding site may be between the sheets and affected. The 30% identity of human mu crystallin to AF-AlaDH suggests that the overall structures are similar, and provides a basis for detailed modeling of the lens and human proteins. Conclusions Alanine dehydrogenase from A. fulgidus is the first structurally characterized member of the mu crystallin/ ornithine cyclodeaminase protein family, with broad phylogenic relations encompassing all major branches of the tree of life. The NAD cofactor binding is fairly typical, except that the hydrideacceptor site is H-bonded to a threonine side-chain. The active site appears ready to bind substrate (alanine) in a reactive position relative to the cofactor, with the best-ordered water molecule of the entire structure situated ideally for nucleophilic attack. This is one of two structured water molecules observed in potentially mechanistic positions. AF-AlaDH and bacterial Ala-DH appear to share two key features that are generally absent from the superfamily of amino acid DHs: the transfer of the pro-R hydride of the nicotinamide ring, and a conserved Arg for substrate coordination. In another respect, however, AF-AlaDH appears similar to other amino acid DHs and unlike bacterial AlaDH: the AF-AlaDH catalytic machinery is devoid of His, and rich in Lys and Arg, making the strictly conserved Lys65 the most likely candidate to serve as catalytic acid/base. The diverse functions performed by homologs in archaea, bacteria, and mammals make this an apt study in protein adaptation and evolution. Both domains have novel folding features: domain 1 has a previously undescribed beta-strand arrangement, while domain 2, although basically a Rossmanntype fold, has a unique arrangement of its last three strands. Due to the strong sequence conservation across the mu crystallin family, the present structure provides an approximate model for bacterial cyclodeaminase enzymes, mammalian lens proteins, and human thyroxine-binding protein. It appears that the fold is stable and versatile enough to have been maintained through extensive evolutionary diversification and recruited for a wide variety of biological functions.

Structure of Archaeal Ala Dehydrogenase/Crystallin

129
complete genome sequence of the hyperthermophilic, sulphate-reducing archaeon Archaeoglobus fulgidus. Nature, 390, 364­370. ¨ Schroder, I., Vadas, A., Johnson, E., Lim, S. & Monbouquette, H. G. (2004). A novel archaeal alanine dehydrogenase homologous to ornithine cyclodeaminase and mu crystallin. J. Bacteriol. In the press. Ohshima, T. & Soda, K. (1990). Biochemistry and biotechnology of amino acid dehydrogenases. Advan. Biochem. Eng. Biotechnol. 42, 187­209. Andersen, A. B., Andersen, P. & Ljungqvist, L. (1992). Structure and function of a 40,000-molecular-weight protein antigen of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Infect. Immun. 60, 2317­2323. Itoh, N. & Morikawa, R. (1983). Crystallization and properties of L-alanine dehydrogenase from Streptomyces phaeochromogenes. Agric. Biol. Chem. 47, 2511­2519. Galkin, A., Kulakova, L., Ashida, H., Sawa, Y. & Esaki, N. (1999). Cold-adapted alanine dehydrogenases from two antarctic bacterial strains: gene cloning, protein characterization, and comparison with mesophilic and thermophilic counterparts. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65, 4014­4020. Vancura, A., Vancurova, I., Volc, J., Jones, S. K., Flieger, M., Basarova, G. & Behal, V. (1989). Alanine dehydrogenase from Streptomyces fradiae: purification and properties. Eur. J. Biochem. 179, 221­227. Smith, M. T. & Emerich, D. W. (1993). Alanine dehydrogenase from soybean nodule bacteroids: purification and properties. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 304, 379­385. Vancurova, I., Vancura, A., Volc, J. et al. (1988). Purification and partial characterization of alanine dehydrogenase from Streptomyces aureofaciens. Arch. Microbiol. 150, 438­440. Baker, P. J., Sawa, Y., Shibata, H., Sedelnikova, S. E. & Rice, D. W. (1998). Analysis of the structure and substrate binding of Phormidium lapideum alanine dehydrogenase. Nature Struct. Biol. 5, 561­567. Rossmann, M. G., Liljas, A., Branden, C.-I. & Banaszak, L. J. (1975). Evolutionary and structural relationships among dehydrogenases. In The Enzymes (Boyer, P. D., ed), pp. 61­102, Academic Press, New York. Vanhooke, J. L., Thoden, J. B., Brunhuber, N. M. W., Blanchard, J. S. & Holden, H. M. (1999). Phenylalanine dehydrogenase from Rhodococcus sp. M4: highresolution X-ray analyses of inhibitory ternary complexes reveal key features in the oxidative deamination mechanism. Biochemistry, 38, 2326­2339. Baker, P. J., Turnbull, A. P., Sedelnikova, S. E., Stillman, T. J. & Rice, D. W. (1995). A role for quaternary structure in the substrate specificity of leucine dehydrogenase. Structure, 3, 693­705. Stillman, T. J., Baker, P. J., Britton, K. L. & Rice, D. W. (1993). Conformational flexibility in glutamate dehydrogenase: role of water in substrate reconition and catalysis. J. Mol. Biol. 234, 1131­1139. Scapin, G., Reddy, S. & Blanchard, J. S. (1996). Threedimensional structure of meso-diaminopimelic acid dehydrogenase from Corynebacterium glutamicum. Biochemistry, 35, 13540­13551. Nakasako, M., Fujisawa, T., Adachi, S., Kudo, T. & Higuchi, S. (2001). Large-scale domain movements and hydration structure changes in the active-site cleft of unligated glutamate dehydrogenase from Thermococcus profundus studied by cryogenic X-ray crystal structure analysis and small-angle X-ray scattering. Biochemistry, 40, 3069­3079. Yip, K. S., Stillman, T. J., Britton, K. L., Artymiuk, P. J.,

Methods
Protein preparation and crystal growth of both orthorhombic and monoclinic forms have been described.32 The structure was initially solved in the orthorhombic ° P21212 form by multiple wavelength methods at 2.9 A resolution, using an Ir derivative and the program Solve.33 The structure was transformed into space group ° C2, where superior diffraction data (to 2.3 A resolution) had been collected.32 Refinement and model building were continued in C2, using the programs CNS34 and Xfit.35 Over six rounds of refinement and model building, electron density for the least-ordered parts of the polypeptide dimer (short loops and coil regions in residues 240­270, especially in the B chain) became interpretable, leading to a model in which the NAD cofactors could be built into difference electron density and water molecules could be added. Inspection of solvent coordination showed that in two cases, a site is coordinated by two carboxylate groups; these were modeled as sodium ions (crystal growth conditions included 200 mM NaCl). The final deposited structure has 338 water molecules, two NAD cofactors, two sodium ions, RZ0.22 and RfreeZ0.26. Statistics for the refinement and final model are given in Table 1. The refined model contains both complete chains with the exception of two disordered C-terminal residues of each chain (residues 321­322). The structure was analyzed using PROCHECK36 and using tools within Xfit. ° The two chains superimpose with Ca rmsd of 1.0 A but are of unequal quality. The A chain is superior, with B ° values below 45 A2 throughout, while some B values are ° near 60 A2 for B chain residues 150­190 and these residues are included in the model with the precaution that they are marginally ordered. This is apparently due to crystal packing: the NAD domain of the A chain has more, and larger, crystal contacts than the equivalent domain of the B chain. The comparisons of the fold with previously archived structures utilized Dali37 and CE.38 Protein Data Bank accession code The structure and diffraction measurement data have been deposited in the RCSB Protein Data Bank under accession code 1omo. 12. 2.

3. 4.

5. 6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

Acknowledgements
Data for this study were measured at beamline X26c of the National Synchrotron Light Source. We thank the National Center for Research Resources of the National Institutes of Health, and the Offices of Biological and Environmental Research and of Basic Energy Sciences of the US Department of Energy, for support of the beamline. Identification of specific instruments and products is solely to identify the experimental procedure and does not imply recommendation or endorsement.

13.

14.

15.

16.

References
1. Klenk, H. P., Clayton, R. A., Tomb, J. F., White, O., Nelson, K. E., Ketchum, K. A. et al. (1997). The 17.

130
Baker, P. J., Sedelnikova, S. E. et al. (1995). The structure of Pyrococcus furiosus glutamate dehydrogenase reveals a key role for ion-pair networks in maintaining enzyme stability at extreme temperatures. Structure, 3, 1147­1158. ¨ Vadas, A. J. H., Schroder, I. & Monbouquette, H. G. (2002). Room-temperature synthesis of L-alanine using the alanine dehydrogenase of the hyperthermophilic archaeon Archaeoglobus fulgidus. Biotechnol. Prog. 18, 909­911. Lee, B. & Richards, F. M. (1971). The interpretation of protein structures: estimation of static accessibility. J. Mol. Biol. 55, 379­400. Deckert, G., Warren, P. V., Gaasterland, T., Young, W. G., Lennox, A. L., Graham, D. E. et al. (1998). The complete genome of the hyperthermophilic bacterium Aquifex aeolicus. Nature, 392, 353. Murzin, A. G., Brenner, S. E., Hubbard, T. & Chothia, C. (1995). SCOP: a structural classification of proteins database for the investigation of sequences and structures. J. Mol. Biol. 247, 536­540. Grimshaw, C. E., Cook, P. F. & Cleland, W. W. (1981). Use of isotope effects and pH studies to determine the chemical mechanism of Bacillus subtilis L-alanine dehydrogenase. Biochemistry, 20, 5655­5661. ¨ ¨ Sans, N., Schroder, G. & Schroder, J. (1987). The Noc region of Ti plasmid C58 codes for arginase and ornithine cyclodeaminase. Eur. J. Biochem. 167, 81­87. Kim, R. Y., Gasser, R. & Wistow, G. J. (1992). Mucrystallin is a mammalian homolog of Agrobacterium ornithine cyclodeaminase and is expressed in human retina. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 89, 9292­9296. Chang, G. & Lee, H. (1994). Endogenous enzymatic activities of taxon-specific lens crystallins. Zool. Stud. 33, 177­185. Jaenicke, R. & Slingsby, C. (2001). Lens crystallins and their microbial homologs: structure, stability, and function. Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 36, 435­499. Segovia, L., Horwitz, J., Gasser, R. & Wistow, G. (1997). Two roles for mu-crystallin: a lens structural protein in diurnal marsupials and a possible enzyme in mammalian retinas. Mol. Vision, 3 www.emory. edu/molvis/v3/segovia. Vie, M. P., Evrard, C., Osty, J., Breton-Gilet, A., Blanchet, P., Pomerance, M. et al. (1997). Purification, molecular cloning, and functional expression of the human nicodinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate-regulated thyroid hormone-binding protein. Mol. Endocrinol. 11, 1728­1736.

Structure of Archaeal Ala Dehydrogenase/Crystallin

18.

19. 20.

21.

22.

23. 24.

25. 26. 27.

28.

29. Wojtczak, A., Cody, V., Luft, J. & Pangborn, W. (1996). Structures of human transthyretin complexed with ° thyroxin at 2.0 A resolution and 3 0 , 5 0 -dinitro-N° acetyl-L-thyronine at 2.2 A resolution. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 52, 758­765. 30. Mousses, S., Bubendorf, L., Wagner, U., Hostetter, G., Kononen, J., Cornelison, R. et al. (2002). Clinical validation of candidate genes associated with prostate cancer progression in the CWR22 model system using tissue microarrays. Cancer Res. 62, 1256­1260. 31. Abe, S., Katagiri, T., Saito-Hisaminato, A., Usami, S., Inoue, Y., Tsunoda, T. & Nakamura, Y. (2003). Identification of CRYM as a candidate responsible for nonsyndromic deafness, through cDNA microarray analysis of human cochlear and vestibular tissues. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 72, 73­82. 32. Smith, N., Mayhew, M., Robinson, H., Heroux, A., Charlton, D., Holden, M. & Gallagher, D. T. (2003). Crystallization and phasing of alanine dehydrogenase from Archaeoglobus fulgidus. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 59, 2328­2331. 33. Terwilliger, T. C. & Berendsen, J. (1999). Automated MAD and MIR structure solution. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 55, 849­861. 34. Brunger, A. T., Adams, P. D., Clore, G. M., DeLano, W. L., Gros, P., Grosse-Kunstleve, R. W. et al. (1998). Crystallography NMR system: a new software suite for macromolecular structure determination. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 54, 905­921. 35. McRee, D. (1999). A versatile program for manipulating atomic coordinates and electron density. J. Struct. Biol. 125, 156­165. 36. Laskowski, R. A., Macarthur, M. W., Moss, D. S. & Thornton, J. M. (1993). PROCHECK: a program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures. J. Appl. Crystallog. 26, 283­291. 37. Holm, L. & Sander, C. (1996). Mapping the protein universe. Science, 273, 595­602. 38. Shindyalov, I. N. & Bourne, P. E. (1998). Protein structure alignment by incremental combinatorial extension (CE) of the optimal path. Protein Eng. 11, 739­747. 39. Kraulis, P. J. (1991). MOLSCRIPT: a program to produce both detailed and schematic plots of protein structures. J. Appl. Crystallog. 24, 946­950. 40. Goodstadt, L. & Ponting, C. P. (2001). CHROMA: consensus-based colouring of multiple alignments for publication. Bioinformatics, 17, 845­846.

Edited by I. Wilson (Received 16 April 2004; received in revised form 29 June 2004; accepted 30 June 2004)

