108

American Federation for Clinical Research
neomycin careful attention should be given to development of toxic reactions. ABSORPTION, DISTRIBUTIONAND EXCRETION OF INTRAMUSCULARLY ADMINISTERED CHLOROMYCETIN IN ACETYL DIMETHYLAMINE AND ORALLY ADMINISTERED CHLOROMYCETINPALMITATE. Ellard M. Yow, M.D., H. E. Carries, M.D. (by invitation), Joseph Hirsch, M.D. (by invitation), R. A. Frankel, M.D. (by invitation) and F. W. Taylor, M.D. (by invitation). (From the Department of Medicine, Baylor University College of Medicine, Houston, Tex.) The absorption, distribution and excretion of two new forms of chloromycetin were studied in forty-one patients varying in age from one month to seventy-eight years. Body fluid levels were determined by both microbiologic assay and a calorimetric method based on the reduction of chloromycetin with stannous chloride, diazotization and coupling with the BrattonMarshall reagent. Following single intramuscular injections of chloromycetin in acetyl dimethylamine there was a slight initial rise, followed by a gradual fall in the blood level over a period of eight to twelve hours. Although 50 to 60 per cent of the drug was excreted in the urine in twenty-four hours, the blood level curves suggested slow and inconstant absorption. When chloromycetin was given intramuscularly at four-hour intervals, higher blood levels were attained but the levels were not consistent. Cerebrospinal fluid and pleural fluid concentrations of the drug were about half the serum levels. A tasteless ester of chloromycetin was administered orally to thirty-two patients using varying dosage schedules. Following the administration of single doses peak levels were reached in two hours and detectable levels were present for twelve to twenty-four hours. Relatively constant levels were maintained when the drug was administered every six to eight hours, comparable to those obtained following the oral administration of crystalline chloromycetin. The drug diffused into the cerebra-spinal fluid and pleural fluid, and was largely excreted in the urine in twenty-four hours. PHOTOMETRIC ANALYSIS OF CERTAIN LIGHT ABSORPTION PROPERTIES OF INTRAEPITHELIAL CARCINOMA, INVASIVE CARCINOMA, SQUAMOUS METAPLASIA AND NORMAL EPITHELIUM OF THE CERVIX UTERI. Alvan G. Foraker, M.D. (From the Departments of Pathology of Emory UniverAMERICAN JOURNAL
OF MEDICINE

Therapy with ACTH produces a return of the ability of the cell to reduce the dye and the plasma will no longer interfere with normal cells even though it still induces morphologic changes in the cells. This type of dye reaction has been noted in all patients with disseminated lupus studied, an occasional patient with discoid lupus and in rare moribund individuals with other diseases. BACTERIALENDOCARDITIS DUE TO PSEUDOMONAS AERUGINOSA-TREATED WITH NEOMYCIN. Wilbur L. Kenoyer, Capt., U.S.A.F. (M.C.) (by invitation), Charles T. Stone, M.D. (by invitation) and William C. Levin, M.D. (From the Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Tex.) The literature contains reports of eleven cases of bacterial endocarditis due to Pseudomonas aeruginosa with no recoveries. The present report describes a case of bacterial endocarditis caused by this organism in which treatment with neomycin was followed by recovery. A twenty year old white male had been known to have rheumatic heart disease since the age of seven. Valvular lesions consisted of mitral stenosis and insufficiency and aortic insufficiency. He had a febrile illness of one week's duration when hospitalized. Blood cultures were taken and treatment was instituted with penicillin and streptomycin. There was slight initial improvement but relapse occurred in one week. The blood cultures yielded Pseudomonas aeruginosa which was insensitive to penicillin, aureomycin, chloramphenicol, streptomycin and terramycin at attainable blood levels, but was sensitive to neomycin in a concentration of 5 pg./cc. Neomycin was given intramuscularly in a dosage of 0.5 gm. every six hours. Within thirty-six hours the fever subsided and the patient became asymptomatic. All subsequent blood cultures were negative. Within fourteen days, bilateral high frequency hearing loss was noted and the drug was discontinued. This hearing loss has persisted although there is minimal loss in the spoken voice range. The remission of the bacterial endocarditis has persisted for four months. No appreciable change in the cardiac status has occurred. This report indicates that neomycin may be used successfully in the treatment of an infection previously considered to be universally fatal. The drug is extremely toxic and its use should be reserved for infections with organisms insensitive to other antibiotics. During therapy with

