CURRENT

AWARENES I
receptors for UTP or UDP. Thus, studies of the response of a tissue to ATP itself are predictably compromised by rapid conversion of ATP to ADP, which potentially acts on a different receptor or complement of receptors, and conversion of ADP to AMP and then adenosine, which can introduce a new set of complications through activation of receptors that selectively recognize adenosine. Adenosine receptor antagonists of reasonably high selectivity have been developed and can be utilized to block the potential contribution of these receptors. The potential metab+ olism of UTP to uridine presents less of a problem than the metabolism of ATP since uridine-activated receptors have not yet been identified. However, conversion of UTP to UDP could result in stimulation of a receptor for UDP that is not activated by UTP. Receptor subtype selective antagonists have not been identified for I'2 receptors. Study of the pharmacological properties of cloned P2 receptors expressed by null cell lines has fewer problems associated with it than the study of P2 receptors natively expressed in mammalian tissues. Nonetheless, there are still a number of factors that can produce dramatic and potentially misleading effects on the observed drug selectivities of these cloned receptors (Fig. 1). For example, hydrolysis of nucleotides (at pharmacologically effective concentrations) remains a problem in studies with cultured cells, and 1321Nl human astrocytoma cells, which have been widely used for the expression and functional assay of cloned P2Y receptors, express an ecto-nucleotidase(s) that rapidly hydrolyzes ATP (Ref. 7) and potentially hydrolyzes UTP. In addition, a novel enzymatic activity exists on the extracellular face of 1321Nl cells that can markedly contribute to the observed pharmacological selectivity of nucleoside di- and triphosphates. Nucleoside diphosphokinase catalyzes the transfer of the yphosphate of nucleoside triphosphates to nucleoside diphosphates. For example, in the presence of ATP,

Release, metabolism and interconversion of adenine and uridine nucleotides: implications for G protein-coupled P2 receptor agonist selectivity
T. Kendall Harden, Eduerdo R. Lazarowski and Richard C. Boucher The occurrence of a physiologically relevant release of adenine nucleotides that results in the activation of cell surface receptors was formally postulated several decades ago',?. More recently, the reputation of ATP and ADP as extracellular signalling molecules has been augmented by the identification of coding sequences for a remarkably large number of adenine nucleotide-activated receptors. These include at least seven receptors of the so-called P2X receptor class of l&and-gated ion channels and at least two members of the P2Y* receptor subfamily of G protein-coupled receptors'. Additional pharmacological and second
messenger signalling data suggest that the full cohort of receptors for extracellular adenine nucleotides

important because of the difficulties previously encountered in unambiguously resolving individual members of the P2 class of receptors

has not yet been cloned. Although evidence for regulated release of uridine nucleotides is sparse", the high selectivity of several of the cloned P2Y receptors for UTP or UDP supports the idea that extracellular uridine nucleotides also subserve physiologically important roles. The molecular cloning of DNA encoding P2 receptors has enabled the pharmacological selectivity of I'2 receptors of defined amino acid sequence to be delineated. This development particularly was
*The number of cloned PZY receptors has expanded during the past year and at least seven entities are currentlv proposed (see website http:/ /mgddki. niddk.nih.~ov:8000/nomenclature.html).
We make deference in this article to the P2Y,, P2Y,, P2Y,, P2Y, (mammalian) receptors for which both pharmacological and functional properties have been defined.

in pharmacological studies with tissue preparations. Thus, cloned P2 receptors now can be expressed in null cell lines, and pharmacological and signalling selectivities rigorously established. Such information, together with the development of molecular probes for the unequivocal identification of receptor mRNA and protein, should lead eventually to the association of individual P2 receptors of known sequence and activity with well-defined physiological responses to extracellular nucleotides in mammalian tissues. The existence of at least a dozen extracellular nucleotide receptors was not anticipated from traditional pharmacological studies of P2 receptors for a number of reasons. Ectoenzymes that rapidly hydrolyse nucleoside triphosphates and diphosphates reside on the extrafacial surface of most target cells5,h, and although this gives extra support to the significance of adenine nucleotides as extracellular signalling molecules, the presence of these very active enzymes has severely compromised pharmacological studies. Thus, the effects of ATP (or UTP) have often been difficult to distinguish from those of their metabolic products. This problem has been heightened by the paucity of hydrolysis resistant agonists that can distinguish the various P2 receptor subtypes. Moreover, a single tissue may express, for example, multiple receptors that selectively recognize ATP, ADP, or adenosine as well as

T. K. Harden.
Professor,

Department of Pharmacology.
E. R. Lszarowski,

Research Associate. Department of Medlclne. and Il. C. Boucher. Professor, Department of Medicine. Chvef. Divwon of Pulmonary Diseases dlld Director, Cystic Fibrosis Center. University of North Carolina, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599.7365. USA

0 lYY7,

Elsevier

Science

Ltd

PII:

50165.6147(96)01023-l

TiPS

Februarv

1YY7

(Vol.

18)

43

CURRENT

AWARENESS

UDP receptor

ecto-NDP kinase

UTP

ecto-NTPase UTP receptor m
Fig. Influence of nucleotide-metabolizing 1. enzymes on the observed activity of UTP or UDP at uridme nucleotide receptors. Two hypothetical cells are illustrated both of which express ecto-nucleotidase (ecto-NTPase], ecto-nucleoside diphosphokinase (ecto-NDP kinase), a UDP-selective receptor and a UTP-selective receptor. Exogenously added UTP can be converted to UDP by ecto-NTPase to elicit a response at the UDP receptor. Alternatively, exogenously added UDP can be converted to UTP by a mechanism involving release of ATP from the cells and ecto-NDP kinase activity. Finally. UTP could be released from cells to activate a UTP-selective receptor or a UDP-selective receptor after enzymatic conversron.

nucleoside diphosphokinase catalyzes the conversion of UDl' to UTP: nucleoside diphosphokinase ATl'tUDP+ADP+UTI' Although previous studies have ostensibly focused on the intracellular form of this enzyme, our research group has recently identified nucleoside diphosphokinase activity associated with the extracellular face of both 1321Nl human astrocytoma cells and primary cultures of human nasal epithelial cellsg. Accordingly, addition of UDP to the medium bathing 1321Nl cells, in the presence of ATP, results in extracellular formation of UTP (Fig. 2). Although conversion of UDP to UTP should not be a problem in experiments where no exogenously added nucleoside triphosphate is present (either in the culture medium or owing to contamination of the preparation of UDP), in practice extracellular phosphorylation of UDP to UTP readily occurs. This is a result of the release of ATP from 1321Nl cells in response to medium changes or physical stimulation7 (such as

movement of a culture dish); this released ATP can serve as the source of y-phosphate in nucleotide diphosphokinase-promoted interconversion of di- and triphosphates (Fig. 1). Indeed, we have observed that even under conditions where medium changes are avoided and movement of culture dishes is kept to an absolute minimum, some extracellular conversion of radioactive UDP to radioactive UTP still occurs, presumably promoted by basal release of small amounts of cellular ATP (and/or UTP). The ecto-nucleoside diphosphokinase activity of 1321Nl cells exhibits a larger V,,, and lower K, for UDP than the 1321Nl cellassociated UDP hydrolase activity does. Thus, addition of UDP to the medium in the presence of ATP favours metabolic formation of UTP rather than UMP. Whether an upstream conversion of extracellular diphosphates to triphosphates occurs as a physiologically important mechanism is yet to be proven. Other problems that can occur due to the release of cellular nucleotides (Fig. 1) include the elevation of basal levels of second messengers, such as

inositol phosphates. This phenomenon is particularly important when studying cloned P2Y receptors expressed at high levels7~9J0, which may exhibit increased sensitivity to nucleotide-promoted activation of second messenger production due to receptor reserve. Conversely, desensitization and downregulation of the P2 receptor-promoted signalling response can potentially occur as a sequela of such activation. Finally, nucleotide analogues that are not P2 receptor agonists may appear to be so by reducing the enzymatic breakdown of ATI' (or UTP) released from cells. Although all the above-mentioned problems make the accurate definition of the pharmacological selectivities of adenine and uridine nucleotide-activated receptors difficult, a number of approaches can help to circumvent these and other confounding issues. Rapid purification by high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) of nucleotides and their analogues can be incorporated just prior to use of these molecules in any experiment whose goal is to define precisely the

4 4

TiPS - February

1997 (Vol. 18)

CLIRRENT
pharmacological selectivity of a receptor. The same system(s) also can be incorporated as a routine analytical methodology to assess the stability of these molecules during incubation with tissues. Nucleotide-modifying enzymes also can be utilized to maintain the `fidelity' of pharmacological responses assessed for nucleoside diphosphates and triphosphates. For example, hexokinase catalyzes the phosphorylation of glucose and will utilize both ATE'and UTP as a phosphate-contributing cosubstrate? nucleoside triphosphate + glucose hexo3hase nucleoside diphosphate + glucose-6P Therefore, hexokinase and glucose can be included in assays of the pharmacological activity of nucleotide diphosphates to prevent any contribution of triphosphates present in the original preparation of diphosphate, released from cellular sources, or formed as a consequence of the action of nucleoside diphosphokinase activity". Alternatively, enzymatically based triphosphate regenerating systems (e.g. creatinine phosphokinase/phosphocreatinine), could theoretically be used to maintain ATE' (or UTP) during tissue incubations. However, we have not been fully successful in applying such methodology to remove contaminating nucleoside diphosphates from nucleoside triphosphate solutions. Apyrase [ATE' (or ADP) + AMP] has proven very useful for removing tri- and diphosphonucleotides from the extracellular medium under conditions (e.g. during physical manipulations of cells), where release of cellular nucleotides introduces problems7JO and for removing contaminating ATP or ADP (Ref. 7) from preparations of hydrolysis resistant nucleotides (e.g. ADPPS, ATPyS, AJ'J. Application of these and other approaches for accurately defining the pharmacological selectivity of adenine and uridine nucleotides and

AWARENESS

their analogues has led to revision of the initially reported pharmacological selectivity of several of the cloned P2Y receptors. For example, we initially reported that although not as potent as UTP, UDP was, nonetheless, a full agonist at the cloned and stably expressed P2Y, receptor'. However, subsequent analysis of the effects of UDP, under conditions in which the stock solution of UDP was made UTP-free and in which accumulation of UTP during incubation with cells was prevented with hexokinase and glucose", indicated that UDP is essentially inactive at the P2Y, receptor (Fig. 3). In addition, reexamination of the effects of UDP on human nasal epithelial cells under these conditions unmasked the presence of a mucosal-restricted UDP receptor (presumably the P2Y, receptor)8. A similar point could be made for the lack of activity of ADP at the P2Y, receptor. A revision" of the originally reported pharmacological selectivity of the P2Y, receptorl*J (i.e. the receptor is highly selective for UTP over UDP) has resulted from a similar analysis. Definition of the P2Y, receptor as a UTP/ATP-selective receptor and the P2Y, receptor as being essentially UTP specific is of considerable physiological significance since the P2Y, receptor (originally thought to be UTl' selective; Ref. 14) is highly selective for UDP (Ref. 11) and the yet-to-be cloned P2T receptor of platelets is ADP specificIs. Unambiguous definition of the selectivity for natural nucleotide agonists will be an important step in the placement of each new cloned P2 receptor in physiologicallpharmacological context with the previously cloned members of the P2Y (and P2X) receptor class of signalling proteins. It is anticipated that in the near future such information will be complemented by the development of agonists that specifically activate individual receptors and that are resistant to enzymatic conversion to another molecule that may not share this receptor specificity. Bolstered by this pharmacological armamentarium and molecular probes for specific P2

T=O

21

: b,+--&-L,20m
0
10

20

30

Elution time (min) Fig. 2. Conversion of extracellular UDP to UTP. 1321Nl human astrocytoma cells were incubated with 1)LM [3H]UDP and 10 JLM ATP for the indicated times. The formation of UTP in the medium was assessed by high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis. The elution of authentic UDP and UTP from an HPLC column are indicated.

receptor subtypes, the field will be in position to align physiologically regulated responses in mammalian tissues with P2 receptors of known primary amino acid sequence and pharmacological selectivity.

I 9

I 8

1 7 6 -3 -log [nucleotide] (M)

Fig. 3. Effects of hexokinase on the observed response to UDP at the PZY, receptor. 13'21 Nl human astrocytoma cells expressing the cloned human P2Y, receptor were incubated with UTP (squares). UDP (filled triangles). or UDP t hexokinase (IOUml-1) (open triangles) t 25mM glucose and total inositol phosphates were measured. The data represent the mean value of triplicate samples from a single experiment Similar results were also obtained in two additional experiments published elsewherel.

TiPS - February

1997 (Vol. 18)

4 5

CURRENT
Selected references
1 Bumstock, G. (1972) Phumacol. Rev. 24, 509-581 2 Bumstock, G. (1978) Cell Membrane Receptorsfor Drugs and Hormones: A Multidisciplinary Approach (Straub, R. W. and Bolis, L., eds), pp. 107-118, Raven Press 3 Fredholm, 8. B. et al. Trends PharmacoI. Sci. (in press) 4 Saiae. B. et al. (1995) Endothelium 2.279-285 5 Slakry, L. i., Lordon, E. M. and Pearson, J. D. (1990) Ann. Neu York Acad. Sci. 603,366-379

AWARENESS
6 Dubyak, G. R. and El-Moatassim, C. (1993) Am. J. Physiol. 265, C577-06 7 Lazarowski, E. R., Watt, W. C., Stutts, M. J,, Boucher, R. C. and Harden, T. K. (1995) Br. J Phamuzcol. 116,1619-1627 8 Lazarowski, E. R., Paradiso, A. M., Watt, W. C., Harden, T. K. and Boucher, R. C. Droc. N&l. Acud. Sci. U. S. A. (in press) 9 Parr, C. E. et al. (1994) Proc. N&l. Acud. Sci. U. S. A. 91,3275-3279 10 Filtz, T. M., Li, Q., Bayer, J. L., Nicholas, R. A. and Harden, -T. K. (1994) Mol. Phmtucol. 46, b14 11 Nicholas, R. A., Watt, W. C., Lazarowski, E. R., Li, Q. and Harden, T. K. (1996) Mol. Pharmacol. 50,22&229 12 Communi, D., Pirotton, S., Parmentier, M. and Boeynaems, J. M. (1995) J. Bio2. Chem. 270,30849-30852 13 Nguyen, T. et al. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 30845-30848 14 Chang, K., Hanaoka, K., Kumada, M. and Takuwa. Y. (1995) 1. Biol. Chem. 270. 26152-26158 ' 15 Hourani, S. M. 0. and Hall, D. A. (1994) Trends Phurmacol. Sci. 15,103-108 '

NF-KB: a pivotal role in asthma and

a new target for therapy
Peter J. Barnes and Ian M. Adcock

P. J. Barnes, Professor, and I. Adcock. Lecturer. Department of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute. Imperial College, London. UK SW36tY.

Asthma is a complex chronic inflammatory disease of the airways that is increasing in prevalence and morbidity world-wide. While the causes of asthma remain obscure, there have been important advances in understanding the underlying inflammatory processes. Many inflammatory cells are involved and a large number of inflammatory mediators have now been identified in the airways. Cytokines play a crucial role in the chronic inflammatory process and they appear to determine the nature of the inflammatory response by directing the selective recruitment and activation of inflammatory cells and their perpetuation within the airways'. Several factors exacerbate asthma, including allergen exposure, virus infections (which underlie most exacerbations that need severe hospital admission) and possibly exposure to air pollutants, such as ozone (0,) and NO. Many inflammatory cells are involved in asthmatic inflammation, including mast cells, eosinophils, Tlymphocytes and macrophages, all of which release a large variety of inflammatory mediators, including multiple cytokines. Structural cells of the airways, such as epithelial cells, fibroblasts, airway smooth muscle cells and endothelial cells may be an even more important source of mediators. These mediators then have

many effects on the airway, causing bronchoconstriction, plasma exudation, mucus secretion, neural activation and airway hyperresponsiveness. The inflammatory response in asthma is similar to the defence mechanism mounted against worms and parasites, which is beneficial and self-limiting in the case of these infectious diseases, but in the case of asthma persists due to continued exposure to allergens. The inflammatory response in asthma (and other chronic inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease) is due to the increased expression of genes that encode inflammatory proteins, such as cytokines, chemokines, enzymes, receptors and adhesion molecules. These inducible genes are regulated by transcription factors which are activated extracellularly and bind to the promoter region of `inflammatory' genes to increase their rate of transcription. Although many transcription factors are involved in the regulation of these inflammatory genes, one, nuclear factor-KB (NFKB), appears to be of particular importance2.

Nuclear factor-i&
NF-KB, first identified as a factor that regulates K-light-chain expression in murine B-lymphocytes, is present in most cell types and plays

a key role in immune and inflammatory responses3,4. NF-KB is made up of two subunits which belong to the Rel family. The most usual form of NF-KB is a heterodimer of p65 (RelA) and p50 (NF-KB~), but other Rel proteins are also involved (Rel-B, p52/NF-KB~, v-Rel) and these different forms of NF-KB may have differential regulatory effects. It normally exists in the cytoplasm in a dormant form bound to an inhibitory protein, IKB, of which several forms exist (IKB-CW, IKB-p, IKB-y, IKB-6, I-KB-6)s. IKB is activated by specific IKB kinases6 and on phosphorylation it undergoes rapid ubiquitination and proteolysis by nonspecific proteases (the proteosome)7 (Fig. 1). This uncovers nuclear localization signals on the Rel proteins, which results in the rapid translocation of NF-KB to the nucleus. In the nucleus NF-KB binds to consensus (KB) sites in the promoter sequence of inducible genes (GGGACTTTCC), which results in a rapid increase in transcription and increased protein synthesis. The IKB-cxgene itself has a KB site in its promoter region, so that NF-KB induces its synthesis, resulting in termination of the activation of NF-KB. In contrast, IKB-p is not induced by NF-KB and therefore NFKBis more likely to be activated for a prolonged period in cells where IKBp predominatess. Many stimuli activate NF-KB, including pro-inflammatory cytokines, oxidants, viruses and activators of protein kinase C (PKC) (Box 1). Reactive oxygen intermediates may play an important role in mediating the activation of NF-KB, and antioxidants,

46

TiPS - February

1997 (Vol. 18)

0

1997, Elsevier Science Ltd

I'II: SO165-6147(96)01022-

