DAVID S. GOLDFARB

PROTEIN TRANSLOCATION

GTPase cycle for nuclear transport
The discovery that the small Ras-like GTPase, Ran, is required for the transport of proteins into the nucleus suggests a general mechanism for protein import.
The control of protein transport into the nucleus is increasingly understood to be important in regulating nuclear protein function [1]. Key switches in development, the cell division-cycle and signal transduction pathways are known to involve the controlled nuclear import of transcription factors or their activators. Now, as we begin to identify the players that mediate these processes, the unique character of the nuclear transport apparatus is becoming apparent, in addition to its similarity to other protein translocation systems. This review focuses on the recent discovery that a GTPase cycle plays a key role in nuclear transport [2,31. The targeting of proteins to subcellular compartments, such as the mitochondrion, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and nucleus, requires cytosolic and/or membrane-associated receptors that recognize signals within the primary sequence of the proteins to be compartmentalized [1,4]. In addition, multi-purpose 'chaperone' proteins, such as the heat-shock cognate protein hsc70, can be recruited to roles in folding and translocation [4]. A major challenge in the field of protein targeting is to identify both the optional and the essential components that mediate compartmentalization. In nuclear transport, proteins that contain a nuclear localization signal sequence are recognized in the cytoplasm by receptors specific for the signal, and are targeted to the nuclear pore complex by this receptor with the aid of other factors, including hsc70 (which may be an optional factor), and some unidentified N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive proteins [1]. Targeting to the pore complex occurs in ATP-depleted cells, but the nuclear accumulation of targeted proteins requires the presence of ATP. Thus, nuclear transport has distinct targeting and translocation stages. Little is known about the mechanism of translocation, other than that it occurs through the nuclear pore complex. It is likely that karyophilic (nuclear-targeted) proteins are carried into the nucleus as part of a complex containing targeting receptors and associated chaperones; the receptors and chaperones are probably then shuttled back to the cytoplasm following disassembly of the complex in the nucleus. This process is, in essence, what happens during mRNA export: proteins associated with the nuclear pre-mRNA leave the nucleus as part of a ribonucleoprotein particle (RNP); they are then displaced from the RNA in the cytoplasm and re-imported into the nucleus for another round of transport 15]. One possible role for multi-purpose chaperones is to facilitate the disassembly of 'used' transport complexes, for example as mediators of mRNP protein exchange: a documented case of this type of behavior is the stripping of clathrin from coated vesicles by hsc70 [6]. New results indicate that a GTPase - one of a superfamily of proteins that function as molecular switches in diverse cellular processes [71 - participates in nuclear transport [2,3]. This result is not entirely surprising, as GTPases are known to act in the targeting of vesicles to particular membranes [8] and in the targeting of membrane proteins to the ER by the signal recognition particle (SRP) and its receptor (SR) [9]. Protein targeting to the ER has been, and should continue to be, a good paradigm for nuclear transport [4]. Before describing the new results, we should first walk once around a GTPase cycle [7]. GTPases cycle between 'active' GTP-bound and 'inactive' GDP-bound forms (Fig. 1). The release of GDP produces a transient 'empty' site on the GTPase that is usually rapidly filled from the pool of soluble GTP. GTP binding induces a conformational change that usually increases the affinity of the GTPase for its target or effector protein. A GTPase-activating protein (GAP) is needed to accelerate the otherwise low intrinsic rate of GTP hydrolysis, and a guanine-nucleotide release protein (GNRP) catalyzes release of the bound GDP. In principle, transitions between each of the three conformations might increase or decrease the affinity of the GTPase for ligands; for example, the y subunits of the large

Fig. 1. A GTPase cycle (adapted from [7]). Transitions between the three GTPase conformations are mediated by a GTPase-activating protein (GAP), a guanine-nucleotide release protein (GNRP), and GTP binding. 57

© Current Biology 1994, Vol 4 No 1

58

Current Biology 1994, Vol 4 No 1 heterotrimeric G proteins bind the GDP-bound form of the a subunit more tightly than the GTP-bound cx [7]. In the targeting of membrane proteins to the ER, the 54 kD signal-binding subunit of SRP (SRP54) and both subunits of the SR contain GTPase consensus sequences [7]. The GTPase domain of SRP54 plays a controlling role in the binding and release of signal peptide [9]. The crucial conformational switch in this GTPase cycle is interconversion between the empty state and the GTP-bound state [9]. The binding of GTP to the empty GTPase-signal-peptide complex induces the release of the signal peptide to the translocation channel that spans the membrane. Subsequently, it is thought, GTP hydrolysis by the SR promotes dissociation of the SRP-SR complex [9]. Here, the important conversion is between GTP-bound and GDP-bound forms. GTPase switches are built into the ER targeting system in the form of polypeptide domains of the signal recognition and docking apparatuses; but the GTPase that has now been shown to participate in nuclear transport is part of a physically independent GTPase cycle that may nevertheless serve functions analogous to those of the integral GTPases of the ER targeting system. Two laboratories [2,31 have independently identified Ran (Ras-like nuclear protein), a previously known 26 kD GTPase, as an essential factor in the nuclear import of proteins in vitro. Using cell-extract-supplemented permeabilized cells to study nuclear protein import, it had been shown that the required components of the cell extract can be resolved into two fractions: A, which mediates the ATP-independent targeting of proteins to the nuclear periphery, and B, which mediates the subsequent translocation/accumulation of the substrate proteins in the nucleus [1,2]. Moore and Blobel [2] discovered that Ran is a necessary component of fraction B, but by itself it does not perform the function of the entire fraction. Melchior et al. [3] identified Ran in a fraction that increased the sensitivity of their nuclear import assay to inhibition by nonhydrolyzable analogues of GTP. In both studies, the addition of non-hydrolyzable GTP analogues not only inhibited accumulation of protein in the nucleus but also abolished targeting to the nuclear periphery. The addition of a GDP analogue locked import at the nuclear periphery, though some residual accumulation was observed [2] . These results indicate that GTP hydrolysis, converting a GTPase to the GDPbound form is required, either for formation of a targeting complex or for docking the targeting complex to the nuclear envelope. This is surprising, as it suggests that the active form of the GTPase is the one bound to GDP, although it is possible that the GTP analogues inhibit the function of the active, GTP-bound form. The fact that Ran was also shown to be required for driving targeted complexes into the nucleus [2,3] indicates that it also has a role in protein translocation or accumulation in the nucleus. Ran is a highly abundant nuclear protein (0.36 % of total HeLa cell protein [10,111), which is in approximately 25-fold excess over its nuclear GNRP, RCC1. Obviously, if Ran is to function in the targeting of proteins to the nuclear envelope, some Ran must be present, at least transiently, in the cytoplasm. A proportion of Ran is found in cytosolic extracts, although this material could have leaked from nuclei during cell disruption. The best evidence for a cytoplasmic pool of Ran comes from immunofluorescence studies of tsBN2 temperature-sensitive mutant hamster cells, which have a point mutation in the RCC1 gene [10,11]. These cells lose RCC1 protein at 39.5 C and display a complex set of defects, including premature chromosome condensation and defective nuclear RNA metabolism. Coincident with the loss of RCC1 protein is the relocalization of Ran to the cytoplasm [10]. Because Ran is always in excess of RCC1, its migration to the cytoplasm in tsBN2 cells is unlikely to be due to an inability to form Ran-RCC1 complexes in the nucleus. It is likely, however, that loss
of RCC1 the Ran-specific GNRP will lead to the

accumulation of GDP-Ran via intrinsic or GAP-assisted hydrolysis (Fig. 1). This raises the possibility that it is GDP-Ran that is released to the cytoplasm in tsBN2 cells and, by extention, during its metabolism in normal cells. Although the available data on the mechanistic role of Ran in nuclear import are scant [2,3], the discovery that a factor with a known activity participates in import invites speculative model building. The following model (Fig. 2) differs most significantly from those proposed by the Blobel and Gerace laboratories [2,3] in the proposition that GDP-Ran, not GTP-Ran, is the active form in targeting and translocation. The model shown here assumes that Ran interacts with the transport apparatus which it may not and that there are no

other GTPases or Ran-specific GAPs or GNRPs present in the cytoplasm - which there may be. According to the model shown in Figure 2, Ran initially associates in the cytoplasm with other components of the targeting complex, such as the nuclear-targeted protein (karyophile), the receptor for the nuclear localization signal (NLS) and hsc70, which has been shown to enter the nucleus together with the karyophile [121. This complex is then targeted to the nuclear envelope and ultimately docks with the nuclear pore complex. The observation that addition of non-hydrolyzable GTP analogues to permeabilized cells precludes peripheral nuclear targeting of karyophiles [2,3] is consistent with a role for GDP-Ran (and not GTP-Ran) in targeting. After targeting, the complex is translocated through the nuclear pore complex into the nucleus, perhaps in conjunction with a limiting component of fraction B. In the nucleus, RCC1 mediates the conversion of GDP-Ran to GTP-Ran; binding of GTP by Ran induces the translocation complex to dissociate, releasing the karyophile to the nucleoplasm and allowing the NLS-receptor and hsc70 to recycle back to the cytoplasm. This GTPinduced complex-cracking step is analogous to the release of the signal peptide that results from GTP binding to the 54 kD SRP subunit [9]. An independent, analogous hsc70 ATPase cycle may also occur during nuclear import.

DISPATCH Fig. 2. A testable model of a Ran-mediated protein-import cycle. GDP-Ran is required to form a productive targeting complex and is imported to the nucleus as part of the translocation complex, components of which include the karyophile (nuclear-targeted protein), hsc70 and the receptor for the nuclear localization signal (NLS). RCCl-mediated nucleotide exchange leads to disassembly of the complex, release of the karyophile and recycling of the targeting and translocation factors. GDP-Ran is regenerated as a result of the activity of a nuclear GAP, and is recycled to the cytoplasm.

59

In the final part of the Ran cycle, GTP-Ran is converted back to GDP-Ran, presumably assisted by a nuclear GAP, whereupon GDP-Ran leaves the nucleus for another round of import. Because RCC1 is responsible for maintaining Ran in the GTP-bound form [11], its loss
as in tsBN2 cells would lead to the accumulation

the model described here, GTP is not needed directly for either targeting or translocation, but only for the recycling of components of the targeting complex. A testable feature of this model is the nuclear transport cycle of Ran. The model predicts that free GDP-Ran is an exported protein, and that it only re-enters the nucleus when bound to a translocation complex. In circumstances in which the amount of cytoplasmic GDPRan exceeds the available karyophile-targeting complexes, free Ran would accumulate in the cytoplasm [10]. It is irrelevant whether or not small amounts of GTP-Ran are ever found in the cytoplasm, as GTI-Ran is predicted to have only a low affinity for the targeting complex; cytoplasmic GTP-Ran should not, therefore, interfere with the function ofGDP-Ran in import. The proposal that GDP-Ran is the active form in nuclear transport does not preclude GTP-Ran from acting as the active form in other process [11]. The finding that Ran participates in nuclear transport is particularly intriguing as it follows a report linking RCC1 with mRNA export from the nucleus [13]. Mutations in RCC1 homologues cause pleiotropic defects in various species [11]; defects in RNA processing and export were described in RCC1-mutant mammalian cells as well as in yeast cells mutant for yeast RCC1 homologues. The potential involvement of yeast Ran homologues in RNA export was suggested by a preliminary experiment in which the loss of an essential plasmid-borne copy of the GTPase led to nuclear accumulation of polyadenylated RNA [131.

of GDP-Ran in the nucleus; the GDP-Ran complex would then move to the cytoplasm, as predicted by the model and indirectly supported by the immunofluorescence data of Ren et al. [10]. Interestingly, the addition of GDP analogues in excess was not found to substitute for GTP in reactions that included fraction A, ATP, extra Ran and limiting amounts of fraction B [2]. As the model predicts that GDP-Ran is the active form for transport, GDP analogues would be expected to promote the formation of productive targeting and translocation complexes. The explanation for this discrepancy may be that the addition of 1 mM GDP analogue swamped out the remaining GTP in the permeabilized cells, preventing RCC1-mediated nucleotide exchange in the nucleus. According to the model, conversion of GDP-Ran to GTP-Ran is necessary for the disassembly of the nuclear translocation complex, so that the targeting factor(s) from fraction A, and, possibly, the translocation factor(s) from fraction B, can be recycled to the cytoplasm. As other factor(s) in fraction B besides Ran were found to be limiting in the assay [2], without GTPmediated recycling few rounds of import could be accomplished before these factors became depleted. In

60

Current Biology 1994, Vol 4 No 1 A direct link between the RCC1/Ran GTPase cycle and RNA export is lacking, as the mutant yeast cells have defects in RNA processing as well as the accumulation of polyadenylated RNA [13]- a block in RNA processing could arrest RNA maturation 'upstream' of export from the nucleus. Melchior et al. [31 predicted that mutations in RCC1 should be found to cause defects in nuclear import that should lead to deficiencies in transcription, RNA processing and the assembly of RNPs, indirectly wreaking havoc on nuclear RNA metabolism. The import defect would, however, have to be selective, as tsBN2 mutant cells with defects in RNA export were nevertheless able to import microinjected nucleartargeted proteins [13]. Clearly, if RCC1 is the only cellular GNRP for Ran, then RCC1-deficient cells should eventually display import defects. The role of the Ran cycle in nuclear transport is likely to be analogous to the action of the GTPase cycles associated with ER targeting [9] and with vesicle traffic [8]. Now that it has been proposed that hsc70 acts in a GTPase-like cycle of nucleotide hydrolysis and exchange, using ATP rather than GTP [14], the participation of GTPase/ATPase-mediated conformational switches in protein targeting is becoming a dominant theme. References
1. 2. FORBES DJ: Structure and function of the nuclear pore. Annu Rev Cell Biol 1992, 8:495-528. MOORE MS, BLOBEL G: The GTP-binding protein Ran/TC4 is required for protein import into the nucleus. Nature 1993, 365:661-663. MELCHIOR F, PASCHAL B, EVANS J, GERACE L: Inhibition of nuclear protein import by nonhydrolyzable analogues of GTP and identification of the small GTPase Ran/TC4 as an essential transport factor. J Cell Biol 1993, in press. GOLDFARB DS: Are the cytosolic components of the nuclear, ER and mitochondrial import apparatus functionally related? Cell 1992, 70:185-188. PINON-ROMA S, DREYFUS G: Shuttling of pre-mRNA binding proteins between nucleus and cytoplasm. Nature 1992, 355:730-732.
DELUCA-FLAHERTY C, McKAY DB, PARHAM P, HILL BL: Uncoating

4. 5.

6.

protein (hsc70) binds a conformationally labile domain of clathrin light chain LCa to stimulate ATP hydrolysis. Cell 1990, 62:875-887.
7. BOURNE HR, SANDERS DA, MCCORMICK F: The GTPase super-

8.
9.

family: conserved structure and molecular mechanism. Nature 1991, 349:117-127. PFEIFER SR: GTP-binding proteins in intracellular transport. Trends Cell Biol 1992, 2:41-46.
MILLER JD, WILHELM H, GIERASCH L, GILMORE R, WALTER P: GTP

binding and hydrolysis by the signal recognition particle during initiation of protein translocation. Nature 1993, 366:351-354.
10. REN M, DRIVAS G, D'EUSTACHIO P, RUSH MG: Ran/TC4: a small

nuclear GTP-binding protein that regulates DNA synthesis. J CellBiol 1993, 120:313-323. 11. DASSO M: RCC1 in the cell cycle: the regulator of chromosome condensation takes on new roles. Trends Biochem Sci 1993, 18:96-101. 12. OKUNO Y, INAMATO H, YONEDA Y: 70 kDa heat-shock cognate protein colocalizes with karyophilic proteins into the nucleus during their transport In vitro. Exp Cell Res 1993, 206:134-142.
13. KADOWAKI T, GOLDFARB D, SPITZ L, OHNO M, TARTAKOFF A:

Regulation of RNA processing and transport by a nuclear guanine nucleotide release protein and members of the Ras superfamily. EMBOJ1993, 12:2929-2937.
14. PALLEROS DR, REID KL, SHI L, WELCH WJ, FINK AL: ATP-induced
+ protein-hsp70 complex dissociation requires K but not ATP hydrolysis. Nature 1993, 365:664-666.

3.

David S. Goldfarb, Department of Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14627, USA.

