CRYSTAL STRUCTURE OF ESCHERICHIA COLI THYMIDYLATE SYNTHASE WITH FDUMP AND PROPARGYL-5,8-DIDEAZAFOLATE

10-

D. A. MATTHEWS,K. APPELTand S. J. OATLEY,t, Agouron Pharmaceuticals,11025N. Torrcy Pines Rd., La Jolla, CA 92037 INTRODUCTION Thymidylate synthase (TS, EC 2.1.1.45) is a 65,000-70,000 molecular weight dimeric protein that catalyzes the de novo formation of thymidylate from 2'-deoxyuridine monophosphate (dUMP) via a reductive methylation in which the methyl donor is 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (CH 2H4PteGlu, Fig. 1). Because of its crucial role in maintaining pools of thymidylate for DNA synthesis, TS is a central target for design of antimetabolites with potential clinical efficacy against various proliferative and infectious diseases. Inhibition of TS has been achieved with analogs of both the folate and pyrimidine substrates. Inhibitors that bind at the folate site have recently attracted renewed attention following reports of potent TS binding to N-10 substituted 5,8-dideazafolic acids (1). Most notable among the pyrimidines is the potent antitumor agent 5-fluorodeoxyuridine monophosphate (FdUMP), a metabolite of the antipyrimidines 5-fluorouracil and 5-fluorodeoxyuridine. It has been proposed that in the presence of CH2-H4PteGlu, FdUMP acts as a mimic of the substrate and is committed to the catalytic reaction up to the point where it forms a stable covalent adduct with an active site nucleophile but can proceed no further because F ÷, unlike a proton, cannot be extracted by the enzyme to force collapse of the enzyme : FdUMP : CH2-H4PteGlu intermediate (Ref. 2 and references therein). A detailed stereochemical understanding of how these inhibitors interact with the active site of TS could provide further insights into the enzyme's mechanism of action and thereby guide subsequent design of novel chemotherapeutic agents. In an effort to further advance these specific goals and to provide a basis for increased understanding of structure-function relationships among TSs in general, we have crystallized the Escherichia coli TS : FdUMP : 10propargyi-5,8-dideazafolate (PDDF) ternary complex and determined its structure at 2.3/~ resolution using x-ray diffraction methods. 'l,Deceased. 47

48
pteridine ring

D. A . M A T I - H E W S ,

et al. L-glutamate

p-aminobenzoyl

O

II- - N H - - C H - - C O O C I

COO
5,10-methyleneletrahydrofolate

O

N

©

0

IIC-

NI-I--C H - - C O O

HN ~ H 2 ~ H2N,"~N~
IO-propaxgyl- -d|dcazafolatc 5,8

I

COO

0

5

0

oICH~
O P O

I O"
5-fluom-2'-deoxyundylat,"

FIG. 1. Covalentstructureandatomnumbering 5,10-methylcnctetrahydrofola(lop), for te IO-propargyl-5,8-dideazafolatc FdUMP. and

STRUCTURE OF THYMIDYLATESYNTHASE

49

MATERIALS AND METHODS TS was isolated from E. coli transformed with a high amplifying expression plasmid containing the E. coli synthase gene (a gift of Drs. F. and G. Maley) and purified to homogeneity as described elsewhere (3). The ternary complex was prepared by addition of a 5-fold molar excess of solid FdUMP to an 18 mg/ml solution of apo enzyme followed by a 1 hr incubation and subsequent addition of PDDF. Enzyme was crystallized at 4°C using a vapor diffusion method in which protein solutions containing 0.7 M sodium/potassium phosphate, 0.05 M Tris pH 7.5 and 20 mM mercaptoethanol were equilibrated against reservoirs containing 1.5 M sodium/potassium phosphate, 0.05 M Tris pH 7.5 and 1 mM mercaptoethanol. Crystals in the shape of hexagonal bipyramids appeared within one week. Examination of diffraction patterns revealed that the crystals had a hexagonal unit cell and belonged to space group P6j or its enantiomer with a=b=125.2/~ and c=124.7A. Within a single protein drop roughly 20% of the crystals have unit cell dimensions differing from those for the predominant type by about 5%, although the two forms are morphologically indistinguishable. Ternary complex crystals diffract to at least 2.3/~ resolution and are stable in a rotating anode x-ray beam for a period of several days. Details of the structure solution will be reported elsewhere. The structure discussed here has a crystallographic R factor of 0.20 for all data to 2.3A resolution. The model is complete for all 264 residues in each subunit except that lysines 2, 259 and 259'* are missing side chain atoms beyond their respective gamma carbons. In addition, over 60 fixed solvent molecules have been identified based on analysis of the most recent F,,-F c difference maps. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Polypeptide Conformation The E. coli TS monomeric subunit (Fig. 2) folds into a 3-layer domain consisting of a large &stranded mixed beta sheet flanked by predominantly parallel alpha helices and covered by a third layer of helical segments plus a short antiparallel beta ribbon and several extended surface loops including one leading to the carboxy (C) terminus. The backside of the sheet is juxtaposed face to face against the corresponding side of the sheet in the second protomer, creating a beta sandwich which makes up much of the interface between subunits. In contrast to other proteins of
"Primed aminoacid residuescorrespond to t'hosein the secondsubunit.

50

D.A. MATI~HEWS,et al.

FIG. 2. Representation of the backbone chain folding fi~rone subunit of E. coli thymidylate synthase containing bound FdUMP and 10-propargyl-5,8-dideazafolate. known structure in which aligned beta sheets stack face to face with a counterclockwise (left-handed) rotation, sheets in the TS dimer are related by a clockwise twist (4, 5). The beta sheet in TS comprises 61 residues representing 23% of the constituent amino acids in a single subunit of the E. c o l i enzyme. The sheet has two parallel beta strands in the middle flanked on each edge by a pair of antiparallei strands. Strands A and C on opposite edges of the sheet are short, 3 and 5 residues, respectively, while the 4 interior strands are considerably longer, ranging from 10 to 16 amino acids in length. What is most striking about the geometry of this sheet is the presence of a pronounced crease running perpendicular to the direction of the strands and crossing the sheet about midway along the 3 longest strands (Fig. 3). Recently we have shown that this distortion or kinking of the central beta sheet in TS results from an unusual stacking of 3 beta bulges that effectively partitions the large sheet into 2 smaller classical beta sheets orthogonal to one another. This permits efficient interface packing of residues from opposing sheets only if the sheets are related by the observed clockwise

STRUCTURE OF THYMIDYLATE SYNTHASE

51

FIG. 3. The beta sandwich in thymidylate synthase consists of two six-stranded beta sheets, one from each subunit. The dyad relating the two sheets is approximately vertical and almost in the plane of the drawing. The bottom sheet is rotated in a right-handed sense (clockwise) relative to the top sheet.

rotation in contrast to other known "beta sandwich" type of structures in which the rotation between strand directions in the two aligned beta sheets is counterclockwise (5). The three dimensional structurc of L. casei TS (3.0/~ resolution with isomorphous replaccment phases) without bound substrates or inhibitors has recently bcen reportcd by Hardy et al. (4). The L. casei enzyme is unusual c o m p a r e d to other TSs of known primary structure because it contains a large insertion (52 amino acids rclativc to E. coli TS) in a surface loop just preceding helix IV. Thc cffect of thcsc "cxtra" amino acids on the backbone conformation of residues immediately following this insertion in L. casei TS is probably small. Hardy et al. (4) find that for L. casei TS the junction is followed by a 5 amino acid loop that leads directly into alpha helical secondary structure consistent with our observations for the analogous rcgion of the E. coli enzyme (Fig. 2). This is also in accord with thc highly conserved amino acid sequences for both helix IV and the 5 residues preceding it. Structural constraints for residues preceding the N-tcrminal portion of the inserted segment in L. caseiTS and corresponding portions of other TSs without such an insertion apparently are less rigid. Thus, whereas the N-terminal amino acid of the 52 residue insertion in L. casei TS links up directly with the terminating residue in a preceding alpha helix, the corresponding region in E. coli TS is not helical, but rather the protein chain forms two tight interlocking turns. This apparent difference between the two TS structures cannot be attributed to a conformational change induced by inhibitor binding to E. coli TS sincc the region in qucstion is nonhelical in the apo E. coli enzyme structure as well (unpublished results). Crystallographic refinement of the L. casei structure should resolve whether this is a real structural difference between these two bacterial synthases or an artifact resulting from errors in the original M I R phases.

52

D. A. MA'FI'HEWS, et al.

On the basis of backbone torsion angles and hydrogen bonding patterns we have identified 8 alpha helices in E. coli TS. In general these assignments agree with those proposed for the L. casei enzyme (4) except for the helical segment discussed above which immediately precedes the large insertion in L. casei TS and which in E. coli TS is nonhelical. Before turning our attention to the TS active site and a discussion of ligand binding there is another point of interest concerning the enzyme's overall backbone conformation. An unusually high 70% of the first 222 amino acids in E. coli TS exists in either alpha helix or beta sheet secondary structure, whereas all but 10 of the succeeding 42 residues form a nonrepetitive coil structure. Residue 222 at the end of helix VIII begins a long meandering stretch of extended polypeptide chain that encircles nearly half of one subunit before reversing direction and returning back past helix VIII to the carboxy terminus where, in the presence of bound substrates, it caps the active site, an important prelude to enzymic catalysis. Over most of its course the returning polypcptide chain runs antiparallel to the outgoing chain although in only onc stretch (229-233 and 246-250) are the two actually involved in antiparallcl beta structure. For the remainder of their paths the two chains arc linked by hydrogen bonding between side chains or between side chain and neighboring main chain and by extensive nonpolar van der Waals contacts. In what follows, we discuss in detail how FdUMP and a tight binding analog of the folate cofactor PDDF bind at the active site of TS. It should be emphasized at the outset that the enzyme structure discussed here is that of a ternary complex. Many researchers using a variety of spectroscopic and biophysical methods have suggested that TS undergoes conformational changes on binding ligands and that particularly for ternary complex formation these induced changes may bc substantial. Clearly, in order to better understand structurally the events leading up to catalysis it will be necessary to know the detailed geometrical nature of these putative conformational changes. That topic will be addressed in a future communication in which we will report the apo enzyme structure.

Overview of Ligand Binding to Thymidylate Synthase The TS dimer has two widely separated active sites each of which is bounded by beta strands D, E, and F, by helices 1I and VII and by 6 noncontiguous loop regions including the proteins' C-terminus. Each active site cavity is formed by 28 amino acids in all, 26 from one subunit and two from the other. Entrance to the active site is gained via a funnel-shaped opening at the back of each protomer on the side opposite the central beta sheet that forms part of the subunit interface. The substrate binding pocket extends from the surface downward into the protein for a distance of about

STRUCTURE OF THYMIDYLATESYNTHASE

53

25/~,, terminating near the backside of the large beta sheet. FdUMP binds at the bottom of this cleft (Fig. 2) where beta strands D and E separate owing to the kink in the beta sheet caused by stacked beta bulges from strands B, F, and E. This splaying apart of strands D and E at the bottom of the nucleotide binding pocket permits close approach of the other subunit to the ligands' 5' phosphate which is securely anchored by charge mediated hydrogen bonds to 4 conserved arginine sidechains, 2 from each protomer. Nucleotide binds to TS in an open conformation covalently linked through C6 to conserved Cys-146. Up-pointing faces of the pyrimidine and ribose rings are fully exposed and unobstructed providing a complementary docking surface for the bicyclic ring of the quinazoline inhibitor. PDDF binds in a partially folded conformation with its p-aminobenzoyl group inclined at a 65° angle to the heterocycle and the inhibitor's glutamate tail exposed at the entrance to the active site cleft. Ternary complex formation induces a conformational change in which the four carboxy terminal amino acids close down on thc distal side of the quinazoline ring capping the active site and sequestering the bound ligands from bulk solvent. FdUMP Binding to Thymidylate Synthase Using l')F nmr, Lewis et al. (6) demonstrated that in the absence of cofactor the binary complex of TS with FdUMP exists as an equilibrium mixture of covalent and noncovalent forms. The presence of folates or other cofactor-like molecules shifts the equilibrium toward the form with nucleotide covalently bound to the enzyme (2, 7). Isolation and sequencing of a nonapeptide covalently linked to FdUMP unequivocally identified the active site nucleophile in L. casei TS as Cys-198 (8) corresponding structurally to Cys-146 in the E. coli enzyme (3). Our crystallographic results are consistent with these conclusions and clearly demonstrate that in the E. coli TS : FdUMP : PDDF ternary complex, the enzyme is linked to C6 of the nucleotide through a thioether bond with Cys-146 at both active sites. The chirality of C6 in the binary adduct will depend on which face of the nucleotide's pyrimidine ring is attacked by Cys-146. From Figure 2 it can be seen that the stereochemistry at C6 is S as a result of Michael addition to the si face of FdUMP. Relative to the sugar moiety, the pyrimidine base of FdUMP is in an anti conformation with a torsion angle around the CI'-N bond of approximately 180°. It is interesting to note that circular dichroism (9) and 19F nmr studies (6) indicate that bound nucleotide has a syn conformation in the noncovalent binary complex. Taken together, these results suggest that the glycosyl torsion angle changes when proceeding from the initial binary noncovalent encounter complex to the covalent ternary complex.

54

D. A. MATFHEWS,et al.

The FdUMP molecule in the TS ternary complex is buried at the bottom of the active site cavity completely sequestered from bulk solvent except for a single ordered water molecule that interacts with the nucleotide's 5' phosphate, providing an indirect link through a second water to the protein surface. Polar atoms in both the pyrimidine and ribosyl groups are involved in numerous hydrogen bonding interactions with amino acid side chains and ordered solvent molecules. What is most surprising is that of 13 such interactions identified from our current model, in every case but one (His-147), the hydrogen bonding partner contributed by the protein is identically conserved in all 11 TS enzymes of known primary sequence. The situation with respect to hydrophobic van der Waals contacts between enzyme and bound nucleotide is only slightly more forgiving. In this case, 3 out of the 7 interacting residues are not strictly conserved; however, at two of these sequence positions only onc cxception from the consensus amino acid is observed while the more variable Cys-168 makes only main chain contacts with FdUMP. 31p nmr and calorimetric studies of dUMP binding to L. casei TS have been interpreted to indicate that the 5' phosphate is in the dianionic state (10, 11). Compounds incapable of forming the dianion such as methyl phosphate derivatives of dUMP are inactive as substrates for the E. coli enzymc (12). One or more arginine residues has been implicated in the protein's interaction with bound dUMP by chemical modification studies (13, 14). The crystallographic evidence shows that in thc ternary complex 4 conserved arginine side chains, 2 from each subunit, are positioned to interact with the nucleotide's 5' phosphate group. These interactions involving Arg-21, Arg-166, Arg-126' and Arg-127' must account in large part for the observation that 2'-deoxyuridine is not a substrate (15) and binds some 5(X) times more weakly than dUMP to the human leukemic TS (16).
P D D F Binding to Thymidylate Synthase PDDF is positioned in the TS active site cavity directly above FdUMP with one edge of the quinazoline ring and one face of the p-aminobenzoyl group contacting the exposed face of helix VII. The opposite side of the cleft comprises residues from helix II, a meandering loop region connecting helix III to helix IV and a single residue (Leu-143) located in the loop connecting helix VI with beta D. Main chain atoms at the protein's C-terminal tail, including residues 258-263, make extensive van der Waals contacts along one edge of the inhibitor's p-aminobenzoyiglutamate group while residues 262-264 fold down over the pyrimidine ring sealing off the active site from external solvent. The L-glutamate moiety binds just inside the entrance to the active site cleft. The enzyme's true natural substrates are

STRUCTURE OF THYM1DYLATE SYNTHASE

55

polyglutamylated forms of CH2-H4PteGlu with glutamate tails of varying lengths which could be accommodated in shallow side channels near the exposed L-glutamate binding site. The quinazoline ring of PDDF packs face to face against the pyrimidine and ribose rings of FdUMP in the TS active site. The center of the quinazoline's pyrimidine sits directly above the ribose CI' while the inhibitor's benzene ring and C9 stack against the nucleotide's pyrimidine ring such that the NI0 propargyl substituent is positioned near N3, C4, and 0 4 of FdUMP. If, by analogy, tetrahydrofolate substrates bind in a similar manner, then the C6 hydrogen would be located above C5 of dUMP pointing toward the nucleotide and correctly positioned for direct hydride transfer to the proposed C5 exocyclic methylene intermediate. Nonpolar hydrophobic contacts between PDDF and TS are extensive, involving at least 20 residues, 8 of which are contributed by the first third of the amino acid sequence with 6 additional contacting amino acids in both the middle and final thirds. For dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR, EC 1.5.1.3), the other folate dependent enzyme of known three-dimensional structure, the situation is quite different. In D H F R all but one of the protein residues directly involved in binding folate-like molecules occur in the first third of the amino acid sequence (17). Of 20 residues that make up the folate binding site in TS, 11 are identical in all synthases of known primary sequence, 4 are restricted to one or the other of only 2 possible amino acid choices while the remaining 5 sequence positions are more variable. For 2 of these 5, namely residues 260 and 261, side chain variability is of little consequencc since only main chain atoms closely approach the bound ligand. The 3 variable residues having side chain contacts with PDDF all occur at the exposed entrance to the active site cleft where they form part of the L-glutamate binding site. The geometrical disposition of protein and solvent in the immediate environment of the quinazoline's pyrimidine ring suggests that N1, N3, and the 2-amino group make specific hydrogen bonds with TS. The inhibitor's 2-amino group donates hydrogen bonds to the side chain hydroxyl of conserved Tyr-209 and to the backbone carbonyl of invariant Ala-263. N3 is appropriately oriented to hydrogen bond with the carboxylate of conserved Asp-169. Wat-401 is positioned close to N1 and as discussed more fully below may be important for correctly positioning the protein's C terminus upon binding the folate cofactor. Interestingly, the 4-oxo group of PDDF is not hydrogen bonded to any protein atom or fixed solvent molecule. In contrast to the quinazoline of PDDF, the pteridine moiety of CHe-H4PteGlu has nitrogens rather than carbons at the 5 and 8 ring positions. There are no potential hydrogen bond donor or acceptor groups within 5A of either position in bound quinazoline suggesting that the pyrazine nitrogens of the true substrate probably do not form

56

D. A. MATFHEWS,et al.

hydrogen bonds to nearby protein atoms. This observation may explain why quinazolines, which do not require desolvation of polar groups at these positions are better inhibitors of TS than the corresponding pteridines that do. Before concluding this discussion, we treat two other aspects of the TS structure that provide some additional insights into experimental results pertaining to the enzyme's mechanism of action. The first of these has to do with the sequence of substrate addition and product release in the enzyme catalyzed reaction.
Ordered Binding o f Substrates

We know from crystallographic data presented earlier that dUMP binds at the bottom of the TS active site with both its pyrimidine base and ribose rings exposed on one face to provide a complementary docking site for the folate substratc. Because bound nucleotidc forms an integral part of the folate binding site, thc apo enzyme must have a considerably reduced affinity for CHz-H4PteGlu. Moreover, such an enzyme : CH2-H4PteGlu binary complex, if it exists at all, cannot lie on the direct path leading to a catalytically viable ternary complex since the nucleotide's access to the dUMP binding site would be blocked by the folate molecule positioned across the entrancc to the active site cleft. Thus our structural results are consistent with the experimental observation that for monoglutamate substrates, TS follows a sequentially ordercd mechanism in which dUMP binds first to generate an enzyme : nucleotidc binary complex which then binds CHz-H4PteGIu (18). The situation with respect to polyglutamated substrates is more complex. Galivan et al. (19) showed that whereas CH2-H4PteGlu I binds to TS only in the presence of dUMP or a pyrimidine analog, the pentaglutamatc derivative forms binary complcxcs in the absence of a pyrimidine. Morc recently Lu et al. (20) proposed that for tetraglutamate substrates the order of substrate binding and product release is rcversed with binding of CH2-H4PteGlu 4 prcccding that of dUMP and rclcase of dTMP preccding rclcasc of H2PteGlu 4. From arguments advanced in the prcccding paragraph and thc reasonable assumption that thc pteroyl portion of the folate substrate will bind similarly in all catalytic tcrnary complexes regardless of the extent of polyglutamation, wc conclude that the CH2-H4PteGIu 4 substratc must occupy a different position on the enzyme in the binary complex than it does in the ternary complex with dUMP. Otherwise thcrc would be no accessible avenue of approach for dUMP to rcach the nucleotide binding site. One can envision a situation in which the tighter binding tetraglutamate substrate, anchored through its polyglutamate tail, initially forms a binary

STRUCTURE OF THYMIDYLATESYNTHASE

57

complex in which the pteroyl group is displaced from its catalytically productive position so as not to block entrance to the channel through which dUMP must pass to reach the bottom of the active site. Once the nucleotide is in place, the enzymatically relevant pteroyl binding site, previously incomplete because of the missing dUMP, is now fully formed. The pteroyl moiety of the tetraglutamate substrate can then slide across on top of dUMP and the entire active site finally is sealed off for catalysis by movement of the protein's C-terminal tctrapeptidc.
Ligand Interactions at the Protein's Carboxy Termintt~ A final topic of discussion concerns the aforementioned C terminus of TS and its role in events leading up to catalysis. The importance of the protein's C terminus was first demonstrated by Aull et al. (21) who found that treatment of L. casei TS with carboxypeptidase to remove the C-terminal valine from one of the two subunits is correlated with complete loss of enzyme activity. Later it was established that pteroylpolyglutamates protect the enzyme from such proteolytic inactivation, suggesting that valine participates in conformational changes accompanying folate binding leading to ternary complex formation (22). Crystallographic data summarized below suggest that: (1) the largest conformational changes associated with formation of the ternary complex occur at the protein's C terminus; (2) these changes are required for final formation of a functional folate binding site and (3) correct positioning of the protein's C-terminal tail is required for catalysis and depends critically on this strand's exact length. Two of the most pronounced structural differences between apo TS and ternary complexes containing FdUMP and a folate-like molecule involve conformational changes in the surface loop containing Arg-21 and at the protein's C-terminal tetrapcptide (unpublished results). In the absence of bound ligands, residues 261-264 at the carboxy terminus of crystalline E. coli TS are pulled away from the active site and point out toward solvent suggesting that in solution these amino acids are disordered. Wc noted earlier that the 5' phosphate of FdUMP bound to TS is stabilized by chargc mediated hydrogcn bonds to Arg-21 and three other conserved argininc residues. Howcvcr, in apo TS the sidc chain of Arg-21 is positioned 8/~ from the phosphate binding site and therefore must move in toward the nucleotide binding site at some point during formation of either the binary or ternary complex. A variety of evidence reviewed by Santi and Danenberg (2) suggests that conversion of the enzyme : dUMP binary complex to the ternary complex involves much larger conformational changes than occur upon binding nucleotidc to apo enzyme. We suggest that the repositioning of Arg-21 is concerted with movement of the protein's C-terminus and occurs when folate-like

58

D. A. MA'I"FHEWS.et al.

molecules bind to the enzyme : dUMP binary complex. This conclusion is strongly supported by the relative juxtaposition of Arg-21, the protein's C-terminus and bound inhibitor in the enzyme : dUMP : PDDF ternary complex. Figure 2 shows how these various amino acid segments come together in the ternary complex near the pyrimidine ring of bound PDDF. I1e-264, at the protein's C-terminus wedges into a pocket surrounded by Arg-21, Thr-22, Asn-82, and Trp-83. The side chain of Arg-21 makes a charge mediated hydrogen bonding interaction with the carboxylate group at the protein's C-terminus and donates a second hydrogen to a fixed solvent molecule, Wat-401, which in turn is hydrogen bonded to the inhibitor's N1 nitrogen. This same ordered water molecule also closely approaches two potential hydrogen bond acceptor groups in the flexible C-terminal tetrapeptide, namely the backbone carbonyl oxygen of Ala-263 and the carboxylate of Ile-264. There is also a potential hydrogen bonding interaction between Wat-401 and the indole NH of Trp-83 at one edge of the quinazoline binding pocket. Thus the phosphate of FdUMP is linked through Arg-21 and War-401 to both the quinazoline of PDDF and the protein's C-terminus. We noted earlier the favorable packing of another residue near the C-terminus, Val-262, just above the bound inhibitor's pyrimidine ring. It is clear from this discussion that intimate association of the protein's C-terminal tail with the pyrimidine ring of PDDF must be an important determinant of inhibitor and by analogy substrate binding to TS. Not only does movement of this tetrapeptide over the TS active site further anchor the folate substrate in its binding pocket and sequester it from solvent, but almost certainly it also provides for exact alignment of the two substrates through the intricate network of coupled hydrogen bonds described above. A foreshortening of this C-terminus by even a single amino acid would result in the loss of extensive van der Waals contacts involving Ile-264 in the ternary complex and would render the resulting shortened C-terminal tail incapable of reaching and hydrogen bonding to the guanidinium side chain of Arg-21 or fixed solvent molecule, War-401. We propose that loss of these potentially stabilizing interactions disrupts correct positioning of the protein's C-terminus interfering with both formation of the folate binding site and proper alignment of the two substrates for catalysis leading to the observed loss of enzyme activity. SUMMARY The crystal structure of an E. c o l i TS ternary complex containing FdUMP and PDDF has been determined and refined at 2.3~ resolution. Each of the two chemically identical subunits folds into a three-layer domain anchored by a large six-stranded mixed beta sheet. The backside

STRUCTURE OF THYMIDYLATE SYNTHASE

59

of one sheet is juxtaposed against the corresponding face of the equivalent sheet in the second protomer creating a beta sandwich. In contrast to other proteins of known structure in which aligned beta sheets stack face to face with a counterclockwise rotation, sheets in the TS dimer are related by a clockwise twist. The substrate binding pocket is a large funnel-shaped cleft extending some 25~ into the interior of each subunit and surrounded by 28 amino acids, 26 from one subunit and 2 from the other. FdUMP binds at the bottom of this pocket covalently linked through C6 to the sulfur of Cys-146. Up-pointing faces of the pyrimidine and ribose rings are exposed to provide a complementary docking surface for the quinazoline ring of PDDF. The quinazoline inhibitor binds in a partially folded conformation with its p-aminobenzoylglutamate tail exposed at the extrancc to the active site cleft. Ternary complex formation is associated with a large conformational change involving 4 residues at the protein's carboxy-terminus that close down on the distal side of the inhibitor's quinazoline ring, capping the active site and sequestering the bound ligands from bulk solvent.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to express our thanks to Drs. G. and F. Maley for the clone of E. coli TS and to Dr. K. Welsh for enzyme purification.

REFERENCES 1. T. R. JONES, A. H. CALVERT, A. L. JACKMAN, M. A. EAKIN, M. J. SMITHERS, R. F. BE'F'FERIDGE, D. R. NEWELL, A. J. HAYTER, A. STOCKER, S. J. HARLAND, L. C. DAVIS and K. R. HARRAP, Quinazoline antifolates inhibiting thymidylate synthase: Variation of the N10 substituent, J. Med. Chem. 28, 1468-1476 (1985). 2. D . V . SANTI and P. V. DANENBERG, Folates in pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthesis, pp. 350-398 in Folates and Pterins (R. L. BLAKLEY and S. J. BENKOVIC, eds.), John Wiley, New York (1984). 3. M. BELFORT, G. F. MALEY and F. MALEY, Characterization of the Escherichia coli thy A gene and its thymidylatc synthasc product, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 80, 1858-1861 (1983). 4. L. W. HARDY, J. S. FINER-MOORE, W. R. MONTFORT, M. O. JONES, D. V. SANTI and R. M. STROUD, Atomic structure of thymidylate synthase: Target for rational drug design, Science 235,448-455 (1987). 5. D. A. MATTHEWS, K. APPELT and S. J. OATLEY, Stacked beta-bulges in

thymidylate synthase account for a novel right-handed rotation between opposing beta sheets, J. Mol. Biol. 205, 449---454 (1989). 6. C. A. LEWIS, P. D. ELLIS and R. B. DUNLAP, 19F nuclear magnetic resonance investigation of the noncovalent and covalent binary complexes of 5-fluorodeoxyuridylate and Lactobacillus casei thymidylate synthase, Biochemistry 19, 116-123 (1980). 7. C. A. LEWIS and R. B. DUNLAP, Thymidylate synthase and its interaction with 5-fluoro-2'deoxyuridylate, pp. 169-219 in Topics in Molecular Pharmacology (A. S. V. BURGEN and G. C. K. ROBERTS, eds.), Elsevier, Amsterdam (1981).

60
8.
9.

D. A. MATTHEWS, et al. R. L. BELLISARIO, G. F. MALEY, D. U. G U A R I N O and F. MALEY, The primary structure of Lactobacillus casei thymidylate synthase, II. The complete amino acid sequence of the active site peptide, CNBr4, J. Biol. Chem. 254, 1296-1300 (1979). R . P . L E A R Y , N. BEAUDETTE and R. L. KISLIUK, Interaction of dcoxyuridylate with thymidylatc synthetase, J. Biol. Chem. 250, 4864-4868 (1975). M . J . BECKAGE, M. BLUMENSTEIN and R. L. KISLIUK, 3np nmr studies on the interaction of deoxyuridylate with thymidylate synthase, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 571, 157-161 (1979). N . V . BEAUDETI'E, N. LANGERMAN and R. L. KISLIUK, A calorimetric study of the binding of 2'-deoxyuridine-5'-phosphate and its analogs to thymidylate synthase, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 200, 411)-417 (1980). A. HOLY and I. VOTRUBA, Substrate specificity of bacterial thymidylatc synthetase, Collect. Czech. Chem. Commun. 39, 1646-1661 (1974). K. L. CIPOLLO and R. B. DUNLAP, Essential arginyl residues in thymidylate synthetase from amethopterin-resistant Lactobacillus casei, Biochemistry 19, 116-123 (1980). M. BELFORT, G. F. MALEY and F. MALEY, A single functional arginyl residue involved in the catalysis promoted by Lactobacillus casei thymidylate synthetasc. Arch. Biochem Biophys. 204,340--349 (1980). P. REYES and C. HEIDELBERGER, Fluorinated pyrimidines. XXVI. Mammalian thymidylate synthetase: Its mechanism of action and inhibition by fluorinated nucleotides, Mol. Pharmacol. I, 14-30 (1965). A. LOCKSHIN and P. V. DANENBERG, Biochemical factors affecting the tightness of 5-fluorodeoxyuridylate binding to human thymidylate synthasc, Biochern. Pharmacol. 30,247-257 (1981). J. KRAUT and I). A. MATI'HEWS, Dihydrofolatc reductase, pp. 1-71 in Biological Macromolecules and Assemblies, Vol. III (F. JURNAK and A. McPHERSON, eds.), John Wiley, New York (1987). H. H. DARON and J. L. AULL, A kinetic study of thymidylatc synthase from Lactobacillu, s casei, J. Biol. Chem. 253,940-945 (1978). J . H . GALIVAN, F. MALEY and C. M. BAUGH, Demonstration of separate binding sites for the folatc coenzymes and deoxynucleotides with inactivated Lactobacillus easel thymidylate synthetasc, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 71,527-534 (1976). Y. LU, P. D. AIELLO and R. G. MATI'HEWS, Studies on the polyglutamate specificity of thymidylate synthase from fetal pig liver, Biochemistry 23, 6870-~76 (1984). J. L. AULL, R. B. LOEBLE and R. B. DUNLAP, The carboxypeptidase-dependent inactivation of thymidylatc synthase, J. Biol. Chem. 249, 1167-1172 (1974). J. GALIVAN, F. MALEY and C. M. BAUGH, Protective effect of the pteroylglutamates and phosphate on the proteolytic inactivation of thymidylate synthase, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 184, 346-254 (1977).

10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 10. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22.

