doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2006.01.098

J. Mol. Biol. (2006) 358, 270­279

Functional and Structural Characterization of Spl Proteases from Staphylococcus aureus
Grzegorz M. Popowicz1, Grzegorz Dubin2, Justyna Stec-Niemczyk3 Anna Czarny3, Adam Dubin3, Jan Potempa2,4 and Tad A. Holak1*
Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18A, 82-152 Martinsried Germany
2 Department of Microbiology Faculty of Biotechnology Jagiellonian University, 7 Gronostajowa St, 30-378 Krakow, Poland 1

Analytical Biochemistry Faculty of Biotechnology Jagiellonian University, 7 Gronostajowa St, 30-378 Krakow, Poland Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Georgia, Athens GA 30602, USA
4

3

Staphylococcus aureus is the major cause of nosocomial infections worldwide, with increasing prevalence of community-acquired diseases. The recent dramatic increase in multi-antibiotic resistance, including resistance to the last-resort drug, vancomycin, together with the lack of an effective vaccine highlight the need for better understanding of S. aureus pathogenicity. Comparative analysis of available bacterial genomes allows for the identification of previously uncharacterized S. aureus genes with potential roles in pathogenicity. A good example is a cluster of six serine protease-like (spl) genes encompassed in one operon, which encode for putative proteases with similarity to staphylococcal glutamylendopeptidase (V8 protease). Here, we describe an efficient expression system for the production of recombinant SplB and SplC proteases in Escherichia coli, together with structural and functional characterization of the purified enzymes. A unique mechanism of cytoplasm protection against activity of misdirected SplB was uncovered. Apparently, the co-translated signal peptide maintains protease latency until it is cleaved by the signal peptidase during protein secretion. Furthermore, the crystal structure of the SplC protease revealed a fold resembling that of the V8 protease and epidermolytic toxins. Arrangement of the active site cleft and substrate-binding pocket of SplC explains the mechanism of enzyme latency and suggests that some Spl proteases possess restricted substrate specificity similar to that of the V8 protease and epidermolytic toxins.
q 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

*Corresponding author

Keywords: serine protease; Staphylococcus aureus; cytoplasm protection; protein structure

Introduction
Staphylococcus aureus is the major cause of nosocomial infections all over the world, accounting for nearly 15% of these infections,1­3 and affecting almost one in every 100 admitted patients.4 Less well characterized in terms of statistics, but certainly not marginal, are cases of severe community-acquired infections, 5 and numerous incidences of superficial skin lesions.6 This versatile pathogen is capable of colonizing almost every organ of the body, causing a wide range of diseases, from minor ailments, such as boils or skin abscesses, to life-threatening conditions including pneumonia, osteomyelitis, endocarditis or surgical
Abbreviations used: GST, glutathione-S-transferase; ETA, epidermolytic toxin A.

wound infection and septicemia. Moreover, this bacterium is responsible for several toxinoses, including food poisoning, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and the toxic shock syndrome.7,8 The estimated average cost of treatment for nosocomial infections due to S. aureus in the United States is greater than $10,000 per case,9 with almost 300,000 cases being reported annually.10 Moreover, the mortality rate in severe cases is high. The most frightening fact, however, is the well-documented increase of antibiotic resistance of this organism.11 Together with the lack of an effective vaccine, the efficacy of current antistaphylococcal therapies will inevitably become jeopardized in the not so distant future. Therefore, a substantial worldwide effort has been made to understand the S. aureus pathobiology with the ultimate aim of discovering novel vaccine candidates and drug targets. These aims have been augmented recently by the genomic

0022-2836/$ - see front matter q 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Spl Proteases from Staphylococcus aureus

271 proteins, and demonstrated positive regulation by the accessory gene regulator (agr), similar to that observed for a multitude of other well-documented virulence factors. Moreover, SplB and SplC were shown to possess the previously suggested proteolytic activity. In this study, we have developed an efficient expression system for the recombinant production of SplB and SplC proteases. Further, we describe a unique activation mechanism for protecting cells from premature activity of these enzymes. We have solved a crystal structure of the SplC protease, which allowed us to explain the mechanism of enzyme latency. In the free form, the SplC protease catalytic triad is blocked by an unusual conformation of an adjacent flexible occluding loop. Modeling of the substrate-binding site demonstrated that, like the V8 protease and epidermolytic toxins, the SplC protease possesses restricted substrate specificity. We hypothesize that the specificity is maintained by a distinguished S1 pocket and by a unique mechanism of a substrateinduced conformational switch. In the postulated mechanism, folding of the occluding loop upon binding of a substrate would activate the SplC catalytic machinery.

approach. The genomes of seven different S. aureus strains,12 and two Staphylococcus epidermidis strains13 are available in the public databases, providing a vast amount of information on the bacterial biology and genetics. A brief comparison of the syntenic (collinear) core of those chromosomes has allowed the identification of a handful of S. aureus genes not present in S. epidermidis that had been attributed to the pathogenic potential of the former.12 The primary source of intra- and interspecies variation in pathogenicity and resistance, however, originates from large non-syntenic regions, or the genome islands. These islands cluster well-documented virulence factors, such as the toxic shock syndrome toxin, leukotoxins and leukocidins, or exo- and enterotoxins to mention only some.13 Many of these genes appear in tandem repeats of slightly different forms, suggesting some islands may act as virulence "gene nurseries".12 Moreover, the genomic approach allowed the identification of several poorly characterized genes hosted at the islands among the thoroughly characterized deleterious factors. It is, therefore, justified to hypothesize that some of these proteins may contribute significantly to staphylococcal virulence and deserve thorough investigation. Among the genes identified is a cluster encoding six Spl proteins, which seems to be the most interesting in terms of its potential role in virulence. The first report on Spl proteins was contributed by Rieneck et al.,14 who have screened the Staphylococcal expression library with serum from an endocarditis patient to find a high level of antibodies against the SplC protein, thus demonstrating indirectly its production in the course of the disease. The authors have also remarked on the sequence homology of the identified protein with glutamylendopeptidase (the V8 protease) and epidermolytic toxins. The latter proteins are specific serine proteases with documented role in staphylococcal virulence. The V8 protease, cleaving only after dicarboxylic amino acid residues, has a substrate specificity too narrow to be considered as the sole supplier of nutrients for bacterial growth. Recently, this protease has been implicated in a number of rather unspecific proteolytic events during infection, involving both limited proteolysis of host proteins and the modification of bacteria protein repositories.15,16 The epidermolytic toxins are even more specific proteases, responsible for staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS), a disease affecting only young infants, characterized by splitting of the cellular layers of skin. Desmoglein 1, a desmosomal cadherin mediating cell­cell adhesion, was shown to be the target protein for epidermolytic toxins. The only other substrates apparently cleaved by the epidermolytic toxins are the melanocyte-stimulating hormones, but this reaction is seemingly physiologically irrelevant.17 Genetic characterization of the entire spl operon and the credit for the name of the group (Spl, serine protease-like) goes to Reed and colleagues.18 Those authors confirmed the secretory production of Spl

Results
Heterologous expression system for Spl proteases Using the plasmid designated pORF2 we have expressed the His-tagged, full-length SplC protein together with staphylococcal signal sequences (SPSplC-6xHis) yielding w20 mg of purified protein from 1 l of bacterial culture. The soluble protein obtained in this way was inactive in zymographic analysis on b-casein. Since the Gram-positive signal sequences are not recognized by Escherichia coli and therefore are also not cleaved, the expressed protein differed from the native protein by the addition of 36 amino acid residues on the N terminus. We hypothesized that this may account for the lack of activity. Using site-directed mutagenesis, a derivative of pORF2, pORF2del, was constructed, which lacked the signal sequence. However, the expressed Met-SplC-6xHis protein did not show proteolytic activity in zymographic assays, and both SP-SplC6xHis and Met-SplC-6xHis lacked activity against any of the synthetic substrates tested. The activity of the Met-SplC-6xHis recombinant protein might have still been affected by the expression plasmidderived additional N-terminal methionine residue or the C-terminal His-tag. The former possibility was tested by engineering a factor X cleavage site into pORF2 between the signal peptide and the mature SplC coding sequence (plasmid pORF2(X)). After factor X cleavage of the signal peptide, the recombinant protein (SplC-6xHis) differed from the native SplC only by the C-terminal His-tag. Nevertheless, it still lacked any detectable proteolytic

272 activity as determined by zymography. The only remaining possible hindrance to the activity of the enzyme was the presence of the additional His-tag on the C terminus. We have therefore expressed the SplC protein from the pGEX-5T plasmid with a cleavage site in the linker between the glutathioneS-transferase (GST) and the SplC protein engineered for factor X (pSplC(X)), releasing a recombinant SplC indistinguishable from the native protein (SplCrec). This protein, unfortunately, did not show any proteolytic activity. To resolve a discrepancy regarding the proteolytic activity of the native and the recombinant SlpC, we have attempted to purify this protein from the S. aureus culture supernatants. Since only a rudimentary description of the purification procedure was given by Reed et al.,18 we formulated our own purification protocol on the basis of the estimated isoelectric point of the protein. During the purification procedure, the activity was traced by zymographic analysis designed to detect the SplC protease activity.18 Reproducibly, this purification scheme yielded a protein of w22 kDa molecular mass, homogenous in SDS-PAGE, and with activity detectable in the zymography assay but without activity on chromogenic p-nitroanilide substrates. However, N-terminal sequencing (ENNVT) identified the purified protein as the SplB protease, leaving the question regarding the activity of the native SplC protein without a definite answer. Similar to the SplC protein, the SlpB protease was easily obtained as a recombinant protein using the pGEX-5T expression system. Interestingly, only the form with the N-terminal sequence of the native protein obtained by cleavage with factor X or enterokinase (SplBrec) possessed proteolytic activity, while the protein carrying an additional Gly-Ser dipeptide left by thrombin cleavage of the GST tag (Gly-Ser-SplB) was devoid of activity. Activation mechanism of the SplB protease The lack of activity of the Gly-Ser-SplB recombinant protein with two extra amino acid residues on the N terminus suggests that either this modification hinders proper protein folding or the N-terminal residue of the native protein is essential for proteolytic activity. To address the first possibility, 1D proton NMR analysis was performed on the recombinant Gly-Ser-SplB, SP-SplC-6xHis and Met-SplC-6xHis proteins. The NMR spectra revealed that both forms of SplC and Gly-Ser-SplB proteins were folded. This finding indicates indirectly that exact shaping of the N terminus is crucial for the activity of SplB as it is for the S1A family of trypsin-like proteases.19 Indeed, this assumption is in full agreement with findings emanating from the crystal structure of the V8 protease,20 clearly documenting the role of the first N-terminal residue in substrate specificity determination. Collectively, our data indicate that the SplB

Spl Proteases from Staphylococcus aureus

protease is maintained latent until the signal peptide is removed by signal peptidase. The crystal structure of the SplC protease To determine the structural basis for the lack of detectable activity of the SplC, we have determined the crystal structure of the protein (Met-SplC6xHis). The overall structure of the SplC protein reveals a trypsin-like fold (Figure 1). The structure consists of two perpendicular b-barrels interrupted by a short helix, Lys39­Asp44 (stabilizing the catalytic His40), and a longer helix at the C terminus (Pro192­Lys200). The active site is located at the interface of the barrels. The standard serine protease catalytic triad is preformed by His40, Asp78, Ser158 residues, while the oxyanion hole is shaped by the amide groups of Gly156 and Ser158. From the structure, it is apparent that the SplC protein is not in an active form due to a side-chain of the catalytic histidine residue being rotated outside the catalytic cleft (Figures 1 and 2) because of steric conflict with Gly175­Gly176 residues. Moreover, the Asn38 side-chain is rotated to the space freed by the imidazole ring of His40. A residue directly preceding Gly175­Gly176 (Tyr174) has the main-chain angles of 4ZK508 and jZK1508, while in the V8 protease 4ZK1258 and jZK358. This causes Gly175­Gly176 to push away the imidazole ring of His40. In addition, the glycine residues begin a much longer loop (Tyr174­Tyr184) of a conformation significantly different from that of the usual elongated b-strand seen in other trypsin-like serine proteases. The region Gly176­Glu183 has an interpretable electron density map only in one of the two molecules present in the asymmetric unit, indicating the flexibility of the area. However, the position of preceding Gly175 is defined and identical in both molecules regardless of crystal packing. The loop has two hydrophobic Ile residues (Ile177 and Ile180) unusually exposed to solvent. Since the two Val residues in positions 172­173 are unique to SplC, they most probably induce such an atypical configuration. The V8 protease, epidermolytic toxins and SplB have Ile-His in corresponding positions, while other Spl proteins differ in residues accommodated at these positions (Figure 3). The Tyr174 side-chain is placed similarly to the Trp imidazole ring of the V8 protease; however, the main-chain conformation of this residue is completely different. Thus, a significant change in this entire area has to take place to move Gly175 and Gly176 from the inhibiting positions and allow the His40 sidechain to shift into a catalytic orientation, thus enabling the proteolytic activity. In standard trypsin-like proteases, substrate specificity is determined by the S1 substrate-binding subsite. The S1 pocket of SplC, which is formed by Val173, Ile153, Val119 and Phe149, is completely hydrophobic, suitable to accept a medium-sized non-polar side-chain of the substrate.

Spl Proteases from Staphylococcus aureus

273

Figure 1. (a) Overall fold of SplC. The catalytic triad is shown yellow; the primary specificity region is shown orange. (b) A close-up of the active site of the protease. The steric conflict of the side-chain of catalytic His40 with Gly175­Gly176 of an adjacent loop is evident. The remaining part of the structure, crucial for proteolytic activity, is well formed. Coloring as in (a). The Tyr174­Tyr184 region, crucial for substrate recognition and activity, is shown dark blue.

The N-terminal Met1 residue is a cloning artifact and remains outside the molecule. This residue appears to have a flexible side-chain, as it is not seen in the electron density map. At the C terminus, three out of the six histidine residues of the His-tag are visible. Their side-chain NE atoms are bound to zinc atoms of the buffer. Comparison of SplC and other trypsin-like proteases The overall folds of the SplC protein and those of the recently published V8 protease20 are almost identical. The superimposition of the SplC structure with that of the V8 protease gave backbone residue ° per residue RMSD of 1.1 A, with that of epidermo° lytic toxin A (ETA) of 1.26 A, while with porcine ° trypsin the value is 1.31 A. When compared to the V8 protease, most significant differences appear in the regions between Glu85­Asn101 and Gly176­ Tyr184. The Glu85­Asn101 loop is located away

from the active site, and it is unlikely that it affects the protein function. The backbone traces and important residues of SplC and V8 protease are superimposed in Figure 4. The size of the positively charged S1 specificity pocket of the V8 protease is similar to that of the SplC protein; however, no N-terminal penetration is seen in the SplC molecule. The N terminus in the V8 protease is reportedly responsible for the substrate specificity determination, which is obviously not the case in SplC and is not a result of an extra Met1 residue in the recombinant protein (Figure 4(a)). The Tyr174­ Tyr184 region of SplC is longer than the corresponding Trp185­Phe192 region of the V8 protease. In the V8 protease, this region forms a b-strand, while it is flexible in the SplC molecule. Also in the ETA structure, this part of a chain is b-folded.21 In the V8 protease, His184 is important for stabilization of a polar S1 pocket. In the SplC protein structure it is replaced by Val173 and the entire S1 pocket is hydrophobic. Unlike the ETA structure, where the

274

Spl Proteases from Staphylococcus aureus

Figure 2. Surface representation of the SplC molecule. The catalytic triad (yellow) is blocked by Gly175­Gly176 and the whole Tyr174­Tyr184 loop region interferes with enzymatic activity. The specificity region built by Val119, Phe149, Ile153 and Val173 enables binding of a medium-sized hydrophobic residue.

oxyanion hole is blocked by Pro192, SplC shows an undisturbed trypsin-like conformation in this area.

Discussion
Spl proteases heterologous expression system The isolation of some Spl proteases from the staphylococcal culture supernatants has been described,18 and an alternative method is presented here. These procedures, however, have many

disadvantages. It is necessary to deal with an infectious pathogen and any genetic manipulations are difficult. A possibility of contamination with other proteases exists, especially with different Spls, most of which share quite similar isoelectric points and similar molecular mass. Moreover, the quantities of purified native proteases are sometimes vanishingly small. We therefore developed an efficient heterologous expression system. Our initial attempts with different SplC and SplB-expressing constructs (pOFR2, full-length SplC with signal sequences and C-terminal His-tag; pORF2del,

Figure 3. Sequence alignment of staphylococcal serine proteases. SplA-F, serine protease-like proteins A­F (AF271715); V8, glutamylendopeptidase (1QY6); ETA, epidermolytic toxin A (1EXF). Features discussed in the text are highlighted by open boxes: catalytic residues are shown yellow, the Tyr174­Tyr184-occluding loop is brown, other residues important for the function of the protein are red. Secondary structure features are visualized underneath the alignment by filled boxes, b-strands in blue, a-helices in red. The alignment was prepared with ClustalX.36 The Cterminal repetitive sequences of V8 and the N-terminal extension of ETA were omitted for clarity. Numbering according to Met-SplC-6xHis. Cloning artifacts (Met1 and His tag) are omitted from the alignment.

Spl Proteases from Staphylococcus aureus

275

Figure 4. Structure of SplC (red) superimposed on the V8 protease (blue). (a) An overall view of the whole model showing a high degree of structural similarity. (b) The detailed view of the active site and specificity region. The structures appear to be almost identical, except for the Tyr174­Tyr184 loop, which is b-structured in V8 while flexible in SplC. The "locked" state of the catalytic His40 is evident.

deleted signal sequences, additional Met residue on the N terminus, C-terminal His-tag; pSplB(T) and addition of a Gly-Ser dipeptide at the N terminus), though producing satisfactory amounts of proteins, have failed to yield active enzymes. Initial structure analysis of homologous serine proteases of a model family S1A pointed to the importance of a precise N-terminal trimming (the N-terminal amino group is involved in shaping the active site). However, the amino acid sequences of Spls and other S1B family members do not share the same features at the N terminus with S1A. Moreover, structures of epidermolytic toxins show a completely divergent arrangement of the N-terminal part of the molecule where it extends into an additional a-helix, which is not found in other S1B proteases. These reasons prompted us to hypothesize initially that the N-terminal residues in S1B are of little importance and test the above constructs. In the meantime, however, the threedimensional structure of another S1B family member, the V8 protease, became available,20 demonstrating that, unlike the S1A family of trypsin-like proteases and epidermolytic toxins, the N-terminal residue of the native protease is

involved in the substrate specificity determination. Consequently, we assumed a similar mechanism for the Spl proteases, which would have explained the apparent contradiction of the demonstrated activity of the native Spls and the lack of activity of the N-terminally modified recombinant proteins. Protection of cytoplasm against misdirected Spls; the activation mechanism The two constructs (pSplB(X) and pSplB(E)) engineered to express the SplB protein of exactly the same amino acid sequence as that of mature native enzyme produced the active SplB protease. We have therefore demonstrated that a precise processing of the N terminus is necessary for the SplB activity, similar to the S1A family of proteases, though, considering the structure of the V8 protease, is probably achieved in a different manner. All previously characterized staphylococcal proteases are produced as zymogens to ensure inactivity within the cytoplasm in an event the enzyme becomes misdirected instead of being secreted (M. Gruca, personal communication).22

276 Activation takes place only extracellularly in a proteolytic cascade. Indirect demonstration of the importance of such mechanism comes from heterologous expression studies where active enzymes are found to be deleterious to E. coli when expressed intracellularly. The staphylococcal cysteine proteases (staphopains A and B), in addition to propeptides, possess specific cytoplasmatic inhibitors.23 Mutants deficient in the latter show markedly decreased growth rates, while heterologous coexpression of an active protease and its inhibitor becomes possible.24,25 Epidermolytic toxins are the only exception, which is justified considering their extremely limited substrate specificity.17 The Spl proteases, on the other hand, have detectable activity but do not carry propeptides. No intracellular serine protease inhibitors have been described for S. aureus. Our data explain this apparent discrepancy. The signal sequence of SplB serves a double role, directing the protease to the extracellular compartment and assuring its inactive state, while inside the cell. Only after an exact N-terminal processing by a signal peptidase during extracellular export the enzymatic activity is liberated. We have attempted to produce the SplC protease using the same protocol as for SplB. Unfortunately, we were unable to show enzymatic activity in two of our constructs: the His-tagged construct (SplC6xHis) and the construct collinear with the native protein (SplCrec). Our NMR and crystallographic studies showed that the lack of activity was not due to improper folding. On the basis of the structural data, we hypothesize that SplC is most probably a protease with very limited substrate specificity and thus its activity could not have been demonstrated so far in the performed assays. These findings contradict the work by Reed et al.,18 who reported proteolytic activity of the SplC protease in casein zymography. The discrepancy may be explained by contamination of the SplC protein with a protease of similar molecular mass, possibly SplB. Indeed, our numerous attempts to purify native SplC monitoring proteolytic activity with casein zymography inevitably resulted in obtaining the SplB protease. The crystal structure of the SplC protease The structure of the SplC protein remains fully in agreement with the described biochemical properties. However, the activation mechanism of SplC is significantly different from that of SplB. The protein appears to be a serine protease with a well-formed active site. In the free form, the site is "locked" by an unusual Gly175­Tyr184 loop, pushing the sidechain of the catalytic triad His40 away from the active conformation. This kind of internal inhibition is similar to that described for the human progranzyme K. Only pronounced changes in the conformation of the loop allow for the proteolytic function of this internally inhibited protease.26 Similarly, in SplC, to allow the His40 imidazole ring to enter the active site cavity and form

Spl Proteases from Staphylococcus aureus

hydrogen bonds with Asp78 and Ser158 and to push Asn38 away, the Gly175­Ser182 loop must change its conformation. This may be achieved by rotating the Tyr174 main-chain bonds. It is reasonable to suggest that upon such a change, the proteolytic activity may manifest, as other functionally essential parts of the proteolytic machinery are well established. We hypothesize that binding a specific substrate to the protease can induce the changes described in the Gly175­Tyr184 region. This assumption is further supported by the presence of two hydrophobic residues, Ile177 and Ile180, exposed to solvent. These residues would interact with a ligand and allow for activation of the proteolytic function. Further defining the substrate­ protease interactions, analysis of the S1 specificity pocket suggests that it is suitable to accept only a medium-sized hydrophobic side-chain. All the above features allow us to conclude that the SplC protein is a highly specific protease, targeted to cleave after a hydrophobic region of the substrate.

Materials and Methods
Bacterial strains and plasmids The S. aureus laboratory strain 8325-4 was used for purification of native Spl proteases. E. coli host strain DH5a was used for all genetic manipulations and strains BL21(DE3) and BL21(DE3)pLysS (Invitrogen) for protein expression. The following plasmids were utilized throughout the study: (i) derivatives of pQE60 (Qiagen): pORF2, SplC with N-terminal staphylococcal signal sequences and the C-terminal His-tag, expressed protein designated SP-SplC-6xHis,14 pORF2del, SplC with an additional N-terminal Met residue and the C-terminal His-tag (protein designated Met-SplC-6xHis), pORF2(X), as pORF2, but with the factor X cleavage site (GIEGRYX) inserted between a signal peptide and the mature SplC coding region (protein designated SplC-6xHis); (ii) derivatives of pGEX-5T:27 pSplB(T), GST SplB fusion with the thrombin cleavage site (protein designated GlySer-SplB); pSplB(X) and pSplB(E), as above but with the factor X and enterokinase (GDDDDKYX) cleavage sites, respectively (protein designated SplBrec); pSplC(X), GST-SplC fusion with the factor X cleavage site (protein designated SplCrec). Protein expression and purification Purification of native SplB protease The SplB protease was purified from overnight, TSB culture supernatants of S. aureus 8325-4. The cells were separated by centrifugation and the supernatant was precipitated in 80% saturated ammonium sulfate at 4 8C. Precipitants were collected by centrifugation, resuspended in buffer A (50 mM sodium acetate, pH 5.5) and dialyzed extensively against the same buffer. The dialyzed proteins were applied onto a Q Sepharose Fast Flow column (Amersham Biosciences) and the unbound proteins were applied onto an SP Sepharose Fast Flow column (Amersham Biosciences). Proteins bound to SP Sepharose were eluted with a linear gradient of NaCl in buffer A. Fractions with conductivity between 27 mS/cm

Spl Proteases from Staphylococcus aureus

277
with Amido black. Zones of hydrolysis were visualized by destaining in 10% (v/v) acetic acid solution. Synthetic substrates An array of synthetic p-nitroanilide peptide derivative substrates was tested against SP-SplC-6xHis, Met-SplC6xHis and native SplB. A portion (2 mg) of the tested protein and a control of the same volume of PBS were incubated with 1 mM substrate in 100 mM Tris (pH 7.8), 100 mM NaCl, 4 mM EDTA, in a total volume of 200 ml for 16 h at 37 8C, followed by measurement of the absorbance at 405 nm. The following substrates were tested: D-VLKpNa; AAPV-pNa; N-methoxysuccinyl-AAPV-pNa; GP-pNa; Z-GP-pNa; N-Suc-AAPF-pNa; Ac-K-pNa; Z-KpNa; H-AFP-pNa; N-p-tosyl-GPK-pNa; L-BAPNA; BAPNA; GF-pNa; N-p-tosyl-GPL-pNa; Z-AP-pNa; bzFVR-pNa; glutamyl-L-FA-pNa; H-AAA-pNa; Z-LLEpNa; GR-pNa; Suc-AAV-pNA; Suc-AAPK-pNa; Suc-AAVA-pNa; Suc-AAPA-pNa; Bz-FVR-pNa; SucAAPI-pNa; Z-AV-pNa; MeSuc-AFAA-pNa. NMR measurements The 1D 1H NMR spectra were recorded at 27 8C on a Bruker DRX600 spectrometer. Protein crystallization and structure solution The purified Met-SplC-6xHis protein was concentrated by ultrafiltration to 10 mg/ml in the crystallization buffer and used for initial screening. Crystals appeared under several different conditions after a few weeks. The best crystals were obtained using Hampton Research Crystal Screen solution number 45 (0.2 M zinc acetate, 18% PEG 8000, 0.1 M sodium cacodylate, pH 6.5). The crystallization conditions were further optimized (the final solution was 6% PEG 8000, 0.2 M zinc acetate, 0.1 M sodium cacodylate, pH 7.5) to obtain single monocrystals of about 0.2 mm. Crystals were plunge-frozen after 30 s in the cryoprotectant solution containing 20% glycerol in the mother liquor. The diffraction data were measured on MPG/GBF beamline BW6 at DESY, Hamburg. Data were indexed, integrated and scaled with the XDS package.29 ° The native dataset, collected at 1.05 A, had a significant anomalous signal from zinc and, therefore, was treated as a remote-SAD experiment. Six heavy-atom sites were found using the SHELXD software. 30 Initial atom positions were refined using the autoSHARP software package.31 Resulting phases were improved by the DM program32 and used for an automated model building with the Arp/Warp software.33 The resulting model of about 80% completeness was inspected and finished manually with the Xfit program.34 Restrained refinement enforced by the Refmac5 software32 was followed by addition of water molecules by Arp/Warp.35 Data collection, phasing and refinement statistics are presented in Table 1. The model has a clear and readily interpretable electron density with the exception of the Gly176­Glu183 loop in the B-chain, indicating that this region is highly flexible. In both chains, residues Asp144 have their mainchain angles outside allowed areas in the Ramachandran plot; however, their electron density clearly indicates such configuration. Additionally, some solvent-exposed sidechains had no interpretable electron density. The above features were omitted from the final model. The final structure has an R-factor of 21.6% and Rfree of 24.9%.

and 37 mS/cm showing activity on zymographic analysis were pooled and dialyzed against buffer B (25 mM sodium acetate, pH 6.5). The proteins were then applied onto a MonoS column (Amersham Biosciences) and eluted with a linear gradient of NaCl in buffer B. The peak eluting between 20 mS/cm and 24 mS/cm was collected and subjected to gel-filtration chromatography on a Superdex 75pg column (Amersham Biosciences) equilibrated in PBS, yielding a homogenous preparation of the SplB protease. Purification of His-tagged proteins His-tagged proteins were purified form E. coli BL21(DE3), carrying the appropriate plasmids. The bacteria were grown overnight, harvested by centrifugation and lysed by sonication in buffer C (50 mM sodium phosphate (pH 8.0), 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole). The recombinant protein was separated on chelating Sepharose charged with nickel ions and eluted with 250 mM imidazole in buffer C. In the case of SplC-6xHis, the removal of a signal sequence by cleavage with factor X was performed at this stage according to the enzyme manufacturer's instructions, followed by dialysis to buffer D (50 mM sodium acetate, pH 5.0). In any other case, the protein was dialyzed directly to buffer D. The preparation was then applied to a Source S column (Amersham Biosciences) and bound proteins were eluted with a linear gradient of NaCl in buffer D. Fractions containing the main protein peak were pooled and applied to a Superdex s75pg gel-filtration column equilibrated either with PBS or crystallization buffer (5 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 50 mM NaCl). Purification of GST fusion proteins GST-tagged proteins were purified from E. coli BL21(DE3)pLysS (Invitrogen) carrying an appropriate plasmid. Expression of the recombinant protein was induced with 1 mM IPTG when the culture reached an absorbance at 600 nm of 0.8. Cells were collected 3 h after induction and lysed by sonication in PBS. Recombinant fusion protein was separated on glutathione Sepharose 4B (Amersham Biosciences). Thrombin (BioCentrum, Krakow) cleavage of the GST moiety was performed directly in elution buffer E (50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 10 mM reduced glutathione) followed by dialysis against buffer D. Enterokinase (Novagen) and factor X cleavage was performed after dialysis into a buffer recommended by the manufacturer and followed by dialysis against buffer D. The remaining steps of purification were performed as described for His-tagged proteins, since free GST did not bind to the ion-exchange column in the above conditions. Zymographic analysis Proteolytic activity of the purified protein samples was tested essentially as described by Arvidson et al.28 In brief, an appropriate amount of sample (2­10 mg) was mixed with Laemmli sample buffer (4!, without b-mercaptoethanol) and incubated for 15 min at room temperature. The samples were electrophoresed on 12% (w/v) polyacrylamide gel containing 0.1% (w/v) b-casein (Sigma) and SDS. The proteins were then renatured by incubation in 2.5% (v/v) Triton X-100 in water (2! 30 min) at room temperature with agitation. Gels were developed in 100 mM Tris (pH 7.8), 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, for 3 h with gentle agitation at 37 8C and stained

278
Table 1. Data collection and refinement statistics
A. Data collection Space group Cell constants ° a (A) ° b (A) ° c (A) ° Resolution range (A) ° Wavelength (A) Observed reflections Unique reflections Whole resolution range: Completeness (%) Rmerge I/s(I) Last resolution shell: ° Resolution range (A) Completeness (%) Rmerge I/s(I) B. Phasing ° Resolution used (A) Number of sites found/present Phasing power FOM Solvent content (%) C. Refinement No. of reflections ° Resolution (A) R-factor (%) Rfree (%) ° Average B (A2) RMS from ideal ° Bond lengths (A) Bond angles (deg.) Ramachandran statistics: Most favoured regions (No./%) Additionally allowed regions (No./%) Generously allowed regions (No./%) Disallowed regions (No./%) D. Content of asymmetric unit ° RMSD of monomers (A) No. of protein molecules No. of protein residues/atoms No. of solvent atoms No. of Zn atoms P212121 53.12 81.4 107.39 50­1.7 1.05 317,526 51,998 99.93 7.8 13.4 1.7­1.8 43.4 26.3 4.15 50­2.5 6/7 0.98 0.38 48.7 49,311 30­1.7 21.59 24.98 19.54 0.008 1.151 300/88.8 34/10.1 2/0.6 2/0.6 0.56 2 402/3156 224 7

Spl Proteases from Staphylococcus aureus

DFG SFB 533, awarded to T.A.H. and grants from the Commission of the European Communities: specific RTD programme Quality of Life and Management of Living Resources, QLRT-200101250, Novel non-antibiotic treatment of staphylococcal diseases and grant HPAW-CT-2002-80064 awarded to G.D. in the framework of The Archimedes Prize. The work was supported also by grants 158/E-338/SPB/5.PR UE/DZ 19/2003 and 2PO4A01129 (to J.P.) and 2PO4A00127 (to A.D.) from the Committee of Scientific Research (KBN, Poland). J.P. is a recipients of the award SUBSYDIUM PROFESORSKIE and G.D. is a recipient of a Scholarship for Young Scientists, both from the Foundation for Polish Science (FNP, Warszawa).

References
1. Sader, H. S., Jones, R. N., Gales, A. C., Silva, J. B., Pignatari, A. C. & SENTRY Participants Group (Latin America) (2004). SENTRY antimicrobial surveillance program report: Latin American and Brazilian results for 1997 through 2001. Braz. J. Infect. Dis. 8, 25­79. 2. NNIS System Report. (1998). National nosocomial infections surveillance (NNIS) system report, data summary from October 1986­April 1998, issued June 1998. Am. J. Infect. Control. 26, 522­533. 3. Diekema, D. J., Pfaller, M. A., Schmitz, F. J., Smayevsky, J., Bell, J., Jones, R. N., Beach, M. & SENTRY Partcipants Group (2001). Survey of infections due to Staphylococcus species: frequency of occurrence and antimicrobial susceptibility of isolates collected in the United States, Canada, Latin America, Europe, and the Western Pacific region for the SENTRY antimicrobial surveillance program, 1997­ 1999. Clin. Infect. Dis. 15, S114­S132. 4. Haley, R. W., Culver, D. H., White, J. W., Morgan, W. M. & Emori, T. G. (1985). The nationwide nosocomial infection rate. A new need for vital statistics. Am. J. Epidemiol. 121, 159­167. 5. Morin, C. A. & Hadler, J. L. (2001). Population-based incidence and characteristics of community-onset Staphylococcus aureus infections with bacteremia in 4 metropolitan Connecticut areas, 1998. J. Infect. Dis. 184, 1029­1034. 6. Noble, W. C. (1998). Skin bacteriology and the role of Staphylococcus aureus in infection. Br. J. Dermatol. 139, S9­S12. 7. Archer, G. L. (1998). Staphylococcus aureus: a wellarmed pathogen. Clin. Infect. Dis. 26, 1179­1181. 8. Lowy, F. D. (1998). Staphylococcus aureus infections. N. Engl. J. Med. 339, 520­532. 9. Roberts, R. R., Scott, R. D., II, Cordell, R., Solomon, S. L., Steele, L., Kampe, L. M. et al. (2003). The use of economic modeling to determine the hospital costs associated with nosocomial infections. Clin. Infect. Dis. 36, 1424­1432. 10. Emori, T. G. & Gaynes, R. P. (1993). An overview of nosocomial infections, including the role of microbiology laboratory. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 6, 428­442. 11. Cooper, B. S., Stone, S. P., Kibbler, C. C., Cookson, B. D., Roberts, J. A., Medley, G. F. et al. (2003). Systematic review of isolation policies in the hospital management of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus

Protein Data Bank accession code The structure factors and coordinates have deposited in the RSCB Protein Data Bank under accession code 2AS9.

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Klaus Bendtzen and Klaus Rieneck from The Institute for Inflammation Research, H:S Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark for a kind donation of pORF2 that has started our work on Spl proteases. Moreover, we thank Professor Wolfram Bode for very valuable remarks, Marcin Krajewski from the Max-PlanckInstitute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany for recording the NMR spectra and Ky-Anh Nguyen from the University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA for language corrections. This work was supported, in part, by The German Science Foundation, grant

Spl Proteases from Staphylococcus aureus

279
24. Shaw, L. N., Golonka, E., Szmyd, G., Foster, S. J., Travis, J. & Potempa, J. (2005). Cytoplasmic control of premature activation of a secreted protease zymogen: deletion of staphostatin B (SspC) in Staphylococcus aureus 8325-4 yields a profound pleiotropic phenotype. J. Bacteriol. 187, 1751­1762. 25. Wladyka, B., Puzia, K. & Dubin, A. (2005). Efficient coexpression of a recombinant staphopain A and its inhibitor staphostatin A in Escherichia coli. Biochem. J. 385, 181­187. 26. Hink-Schauer, C., Estebanez-Perpina, E., Wilharm, E., Fuentes-Prior, P., Klinkert, W., Bode, W. & Jenne, D. E. ° (2002). The 2.2-A crystal structure of human progranzyme K reveals a rigid zymogen with unusual features. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 50923­50933. 27. Berthold, H., Frorath, B., Scanarini, M., Abney, C. C., Ernst, B. & Northemann, W. (1992). Plasmid pGEX-5T: an alternative system for expression and purification of recombinant proteins. Biotechnol. Letters, 14, 245­250. 28. Arvidson, S., Holme, T. & Lindholm, B. (1973). Studies on extracellular proteolytic enzymes from Staphylococcus aureus. I. Purification and characterization of one neutral and one alkaline protease. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 302, 135­148. 29. Kabsch, W. (1993). Automatic processing of rotation diffraction data from crystals of initially unknown symmetry and cell constants. J. Appl. Crystallog. 26, 795­800. 30. Schneider, T. R. & Sheldrick, G. M. (2002). Substructure solution with SHELXD. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 58, 1772­1779. 31. De La Fortelle, E. & Bricogne, G. (1997). Maximumlikelihood heavy-atom parameter refinement in the MIR and MAD methods. Methods Enzymol. 276, 472­494. 32. Collaborative Computational Project, Number 4. (1994). The CCP4 suite: programs for protein crystallography. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 50, 760­763. 33. Perrakis, A., Morris, R. & Lamzin, V. S. (1999). Automated protein model building combined with iterative structure refinement. Nature Struct. Biol. 6, 458­463. 34. McRee, D. E. (1999). XtalView/Xfit--a versatile program for manipulating atomic coordinates and electron density. J. Struct. Biol. 125, 156­165. 35. Lamzin, V. S. & Wilson, K. S. (1993). Automated refinement of protein models. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 49, 129­149. 36. Thompson, J. D., Gibson, T. J., Plewniak, F., Jeanmougin, F. & Higgins, D. G. (1997). The ClustalX windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucl. Acids Res. 24, 4876­4882.

12. 13.

14.

15.

16. 17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22. 23.

aureus: a review of the literature with epidemiological and economic modeling. Health Technol. Assess. 7, 1­194. Lindsay, J. A. & Holden, M. T. (2004). Staphylococcus aureus: superbug, super genome? Trends Microbiol. 12, 378­385. Gill, S. R., Fouts, D. E., Archer, G. L., Mongodin, E. F., Deboy, R. T., Ravel, J. et al. (2005). Insights on evolution of virulence and resistance from the complete genome analysis of an early methicillinresistant Staphylococcus aureus strain and a biofilmproducing methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis strain. J. Bacteriol. 187, 2426­2438. Rieneck, K., Renneberg, J., Diamant, M., Gutschik, E. & Bendtzen, K. (1997). Molecular cloning and expression of a novel Staphylococcus aureus antigen. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1350, 128­132. Arvidson, A. (2000). Extracellular proteases. In Grampositive Pathogens (Fischetti, V. A., Novick, R. P., Ferretti, J. J., Portnoy, D. A. & Rood, J. I., eds), pp. 379­385, American Society for Microbiology, Washington, DC. Dubin, G. (2002). Extracellular proteases of Staphylococcus spp. Biol. Chem. 383, 1075­1086. Amagai, M., Matsuyoshi, N., Wang, Z. H., Andl, C. & Stanley, J. R. (2000). Toxin in bullous impetigo and staphylococcal scalded-skin syndrome targets desmoglein 1. Nature Med. 6, 1275­1277. Reed, S. B., Wesson, C. A., Liou, L. E., Trumble, W. R., Schlievert, P. M., Bohach, G. A. & Bayles, K. W. (2001). Molecular characterization of a novel Staphylococcus aureus serine protease operon. Infect. Immun. 69, 1521­1527. Hedstrom, L., Lin, T. Y. & Fast, W. (1996). Hydrophobic interactions control zymogen activation in the trypsin family of serine proteases. Biochemistry, 35, 4515­4523. Prasad, L., Leduc, Y., Hayakawa, K. & Delbaere, L. T. (2004). The structure of a universally employed enzyme: V8 protease from Staphylococcus aureus. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 60, 256­259. Cavarelli, J., Prevost, G., Bourguet, W., Moulinier, L., Chevrier, B., Delagoutte, B. et al. (1997). The structure of Staphylococcus aureus epidermolytic toxin A, an ° atypic serine protease, at 1.7 A resolution. Structure, 5, 813­824. Drapeau, G. R. (1978). Role of a metalloprotease in activation of the precursor of staphylococcal protease. J. Bacteriol. 136, 607­613. Rzychon, M., Sabat, A., Kosowska, K., Potempa, J. & Dubin, A. (2003). Staphostatins: an expanding new group of proteinase inhibitors with a unique specificity for the regulation of staphopains, Staphylococcus spp. cysteine proteinases. Mol. Microbiol. 49, 1051­1066.

Edited by I. Wilson (Received 25 August 2005; received in revised form 25 January 2006; accepted 26 January 2006) Available online 13 February 2006

