Structure

Previews
Anything a ClpA Can Do, Two ClpAs Can Do Better
Steven G. Burston1,*
1Department of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, School of Medical Sciences, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK *Correspondence: s.g.burston@bris.ac.uk DOI 10.1016/j.str.2009.03.002

Through the application of a technique they have developed to produce mixed-ring versions of ClpP, Maglica et al. investigate the impact of architecture and allostery on ClpAP proteolytic efficiency.
The cellular proteome is constantly changing to adapt to differing protein requirements that arise during the various stages of growth, development, and aging, as well as from the need to respond to potentially damaging environmental conditions, such as elevated temperature. This is achieved largely by the use of molecular chaperones to control the fidelity of folding. However, short-lived regulatory proteins and misfolded or damaged proteins are selectively targeted for degradation, a significant proportion of which is carried out by cylindrical, energydependent protease complexes (Bukau et al., 2006). One example is the E. coli ClpP, a tetradecameric serine protease arranged as two seven-membered rings stacked back-to-back enclosing a large chamber with multiple protease active sites that can be accessed by a narrow axial pore from either end of the cylinder (Wang et al., 1997). ClpP forms complexes with the AAA+-ATPases (ATPases associated with various cellular activities) ClpX or ClpA that recognize substrates via an 11-amino acid C-terminal tag, known as the ssrA tag, or via so-called N-end rule hydrophobic residues at the N terminus. ClpX and ClpA are hexameric ring structures that use the energy derived from ATP to unfold the substrate protein (Weber-Ban et al., 1999) and drive it through the axial pore of ClpP into the proteolytic chamber, where it is digested into small 5­10 amino acid length peptides. In archea and the eukaryotic cytosol, the 26S proteasome adopts a similar architecture, with the 20S core proteasome forming the proteolytic chamber, while at the heart of the 19S subunit that associates at either end is also a hexameric AAA-ATPase. In vitro ClpXP and ClpAP complexes can exist as 2:1 symmetric particles, where a ClpX/ClpA hexamer is bound at either end of the ClpP cylinder, or as 1:1 asymmetric particles, with only one end of ClpP occupied by the hexameric chaperone (Grimaud et al., 1998). However, given the high protein concentration of these proteins and the affinity of ClpP for either ClpX or ClpA, it is likely that the 2:1 symmetric particles predominate in vivo. The functional implications of two-fold symmetry have been unclear. Both 1:1 and 2:1 ClpAP complexes degrade casein at similar rates, while the same experiments using ClpXP revealed a doubling of the degradation rate with 2:1 complexes. The work of Maglica et al. (2009) in this issue sheds light on this interesting mechanistic question. They exploited a previous observation that the heptameric rings of ClpP can be separated by an increase in the ionic strength of the solution (Maurizi, 1991; Hinnerwisch et al., 2005) and found that they can be reassociated by decreasing the ionic strength and addition of glycerol. Thus, by making mutations in ClpP that either prevent the association of ClpA/ ClpX or inactivate the protease activity, they were able to generate mixed-ring versions of ClpP in which the two rings had different functional properties. The hetero-oligomeric ClpP complexes were then separated from the two starting homo-oligomers by use of an N-terminal histidine tag. This elegant procedure enabled the production of ClpP molecules that could only bind one ClpX or ClpA hexamer, thus allowing the functional characteristics of a 1:1 ClpAP (or ClpXP) to be compared directly with a 2:1 ClpAP (ClpXP). Measurements of the rate of protein substrate degradation showed that the 2:1 complex was twice as efficient as the 1:1 complex, indicating that protein substrate could be bound and processed by both of the hexameric ATPases bound simultaneously to both ends of the ClpP cylinder in the 2:1 complex. The reaction was then broken down into its component steps and the kinetics of substrate binding, unfolding, translocation, and degradation were analyzed separately using a variety of fluorescence techniques. Perhaps surprisingly, they found that, in all cases, each half of the symmetric 2:1 ClpAP complex appears to behave independently and essentially like an asymmetric 1:1 ClpAP. The efficiency of the 2:1 ClpAP complex therefore appears to be purely down to its ability to process two protein substrates from either end simultaneously. Do the two ``halves'' of ClpP behave entirely independently? It has been established for some time that the association of ClpA to wild-type ClpP results in the stimulation of the ClpA ATPase activity (Maurizi, 1991). This presumably is due to a coupling between ClpP and ClpA, which modulates the ATP hydrolytic cycle of ClpA and hence the processing of the protein substrate. Mutation of the nucleophilic serine in the active sites of ClpP to alanine renders the ClpP proteolytically incompetent, and the association of ClpA with this mutant no longer stimulates the ClpA ATPase (Maurizi, 1991). The precise structural basis for this is not entirely clear. However, there are a number of studies that would indicate that ClpP is able to undergo a conformational switch. For example, analysis of the high-resolution crystal structure of E. coli ClpP revealed that the N termini can adopt two distinct conformations: one in which the mobile N terminus extends out from the ClpP access pore; and one in which the N terminus extends downwards and is contained within the access channel, thus potentially controlling the substrate protein's entrance into the access channel (Bewley et al., 2006). Since the N terminus is also an important site of interaction between ClpP and either ClpA or ClpX, the structural dynamics of ClpP, which affect the conformation of the N terminus,

Structure 17, April 15, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved 483

Structure

Previews
therefore alter the network of interactions in the active site sufficiently to weaken the affinity of the product peptide for ClpP, thus resetting it for the next round of proteolysis. Additionally, it has been proposed that this conformational switching also opens equatorial pores near the active site through which the product peptides can exit the proteolytic chamber (Figure 1) (Gribun et al., 2005). Clearly there is a functional role for the structural dynamics observed in ClpP. Further biochemical studies on the individual steps in the ClpAP degradation, combined with structural studies, should provide additional insights into the full range of conformational changes that accompany substrate unfolding and degradation by these large cellular machines.

Figure 1. Conformational Plasticity of the ClpP Protease
The ClpP protease cylinder (blue) binds the hexameric ClpX or ClpA chaperone (orange) at both ends of the cylinder, where they recognize protein substrates and use the energy from ATP to unfold the protein substrate and translocate it into the ClpP protease; it is then digested into small peptide fragments near the ring-ring interface. There are at least two conformations of ClpP.(Left) The first conformation has the axial loops (dark green) at the N terminus near the entrance to the channel opened up to interact with ClpA. The second conformational state (right) has the axial loops closing the entrance to the channel and is perhaps also involved in release of the peptide products, although this has yet to be demonstrated.

REFERENCES Bewley, M.C., Graziano, V., Griffin, K., and Flanagan, J. (2006). J. Struct. Biol. 153, 113­128. Bukau, B., Weissman, J.S., and Horwich, A.L. (2006). Cell 125, 443­451.

will also likely affect the interaction with ClpA. This conformational switching in ClpP is also seen to affect the Ser-HisAsp catalytic triad in the M. tuberculosis ClpP1 structure (Ingvarsson et al., 2007), in particular breaking the interaction between the histidine and the serine. It may well be that substitution of the serine for alanine, which renders ClpP proteolytically inactive, also stabilizes one of the two conformations of ClpP, which in turn fails to stimulate the ATPase of ClpA. This raises the interesting question of whether the allosteric communication arises only from the conformation of the ClpP ring to which ClpA is bound (i.e., the proximal ring), which may well be the case if the two ClpP rings are behaving essentially independently, or whether the distal ring can exert allosteric effects on ClpA. Maglica et al. (2009) again made use of their technique for producing mixed-ring versions of ClpP to produce all possible ring combinations in which each ring could either be wild-type, unable to bind ClpA proteolytically inactive, or both. After monitoring the effect of binding

ClpA to these various mixed-ring mutants, they found that it did not matter whether the proteolytically inactive ClpP ring was proximal or distal to ClpA in order to stimulate the ClpA ATPase, thus indicating that the two rings of ClpP do not act independently, but rather each ring acts in agreement with the other. What exactly is the functional role of this conformational switching in ClpP? One possibility is that by coupling the conformational movements in ClpP with the ClpA or ClpX ATPase, the unfolding and translocation rates can be directly coupled to the rate of digestion and release of the small peptide products. For classical serine proteases, the enzyme-product complex is unstable due to the collapse of the hydrogen bond network during the formation of the tetrahedral intermediate from the acyl enzyme complex (Wilmouth et al., 2001). However, the X-ray structure of the Helicobacter pylori ClpP in complex with product peptide revealed that hydrogen bond network was, if anything, slightly strengthened (Kim and Kim, 2008). The conformational switching of ClpP may

Gribun, A., Kimber, M.S., Ching, R., Sprangers, R., Fiebig, K.M., and Houry, W.A. (2005). J. Biol. Chem. 280, 16185­16196. Grimaud, R., Kessel, M., Beuron, F., Steven, A.C., and Maurizi, M.R. (1998). J. Biol. Chem. 273, 12476­12481. Hinnerwisch, J., Reid, B.G., Fenton, W.A., and Horwich, A.L. (2005). J. Biol. Chem. 280, 40838­ 40844. ´ ¨ ¨ Ingvarsson, H., Mate, M.J., Hogbom, M., Portnoi, D., ´ Benaroudj, N., Alzari, P.M., Ortiz-Lombardia, M., and Unge, T. (2007). Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 63, 249­259. Kim, D.Y., and Kim, K.K. (2008). J. Mol. Biol. 379, 760­771. Maglica, Z., Kolygo, K., and Weber-Ban, E. (2009). Structure 17, this issue, 508­516. Maurizi, M.R. (1991). Biochem. Soc. Trans. 19, 719­723. Wang, J., Hartling, J.A., and Flanagan, J.M. (1997). Cell 91, 447­456. Weber-Ban, E.U., Reid, B.G., Miranker, A.D., and Horwich, A.L. (1999). Nature 401, 90­93. Wilmouth, R.C., Edman, K., Neutze, R., Wright, P.A., Clifton, I.J., Schneider, T.R., Schofield, C.J., and Hajdu, J. (2001). Nat. Struct. Biol. 8, 689­694.

484 Structure 17, April 15, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved

