Structure

In This Issue
Cyclotides before Tying the Knot
PAGE 842 Cyclotides are small cyclic peptides, with six conserved cysteine residues known to form disulfide bonds. Cemazar et al. now report a structure of a two-disulfide intermediate on the oxidative folding pathway of the cyclotide MCoTI-II from Momordica cochinchinensis. The results suggest that the native fold of the peptide is not the free energy minimum in the absence of the missing disulfide bridge and that, although there is not a large energy barrier, the peptide must transiently adopt an energetically unfavourable state before the final disulfide can form.

La Protein and Oligo(U) Sequences
PAGE 852 Eukaryotic La protein binds to nascent polymerase III transcripts, causing their stabilization and promoting correct folding and maturation. The N-terminal domain of La (LaNTD) contains a La motif and an RNA recognition motif that together specifically recognize the ´ oligo(U) sequences characteristic of the 3 ends of new Pol III transcripts. Comparative crystallographic study of different LaNTD:RNA complexes by Kotik-Kogan et al. identifies ´ a conserved set of interactions with the last two nucleotides at the 3-end of the RNA being the key to specific binding. Strikingly, alternative conformations of the protein and RNA in the complexes are also observed, indicative of an unexpected degree of plasticity in the modes of interaction. (Figure credits: Kotik-Kogan et al.)

Minute Structural Difference, Large Functional Consequence
PAGE 863 Proteins undergo constant structural fluctuation driven by thermal energy. It is well appreciated that large fluctuations can have a profound effect on protein function. Coureux et al. now combine cryogenic trapping, ultra-high resolution crystallography, and in-crystal photoactivation to study bacterial photoreceptor PYP and demonstrate that even minute structural differences can have dramatic functional effects. PYP crystals, which initially appeared to be structurally homogenous, contain two functionally distinct states, one highly sensitive and the other insensitive to light. Despite their pronounced functional differences, structural differences between the two states are on the picometer scale.

Relaying Information: EphA3 Tells The Story
PAGE 873 The kinase domain of ephrin receptor kinase A3 (EphA3) is activated by ephrin binding and receptor oligomerization, at which point two key tyrosines in the juxtamembrane region are phosphorylated. By crystallizing autoinhibited and active forms of the EphA3 kinase domain in conjunction with structural and enzymatic analysis of mutant forms of the kinase domain, Davis et. al. were able to observe a relay of coupled residues that transmits information from the juxtamembrane segment to the activation loop of the kinase domain. This pathway is highly conserved and likely delineates a molecular recognition pathway for most of the Eph RTKs.

Relaying Information: Ras GTPase Perspective
PAGE 885 Ras GTPases are conformational switches controlling cell proliferation, differentiation, and development. Despite their prominent role in many forms of cancer, the mechanism of conformational transition between inactive GDP- and active GTP-bound states remains unclear. Here, Gorfe et al. quantitatively assess the structural and dynamical features of active and inactive states and details of their interconversion. Furthermore, the authors describe a number of isoformspecific, long-range side chain interactions that define isoform specific pathways of communication between the nucleotide binding site and the C-terminal end of the protein essential for membrane attachment.

GPCRs and Cholesterol Love Affair
PAGE 897 Cholesterol is thought to be primarily involved in altering the cell membrane's fluidity and curvature. M.A. Hanson et al. report the cocrystal structure of the human b2-adrenergic receptor (AR) in complex with an inverse agonist, timolol, and a ubiquitous sterol, cholesterol. The authors confirm that cholesterol binding is physiologically relevant and that human b2AR has a unique ``cholesterol consensus motif.'' Sequence analysis of all known human GPCRs highlights the importance of this motif, revealing that GPCRs exhibit high sequence similarity in this region. Receptor/cholesterol interactions may play a role in defining the trafficking properties of receptors. (Figure credits: M.A. Hanson et al.)

Come! Quickly to the Nucleus
PAGE 906 The b-karyopherin/RanGTP system is a large family of cellular cargo transporters. Binding of diverse cargoes is due to the flexibility of the karyopherin transport receptors, and dissociation and fueling of ¨ the transport cycle is driven by the GTP hydrolysis. Here, Zachariae and Grubmuller reveal the dramatic structural fluctuations of the karyopherin importin-b. The authors propose that the stored energy and structural dynamics account for an exchange pathway, thus suggesting an explaination for the high observed nucleocytoplasmic transport rates. Karyopherins utilize a mechanism of entropy/enthalpy control that might be a general feature of highly flexible proteins involved in protein-protein interactions.

Structure 16, June 2008 ª2008 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved ix

Structure

In This Issue
Cytochrome P450cam between cis and trans
PAGE 916 Cis-trans isomerization of an Xaa-Pro amide bond provides a convenient structural switch for modulating protein function. OuYang et al. provide evidence that an Xaa-Pro switch is responsible for moving cytochrome P450cam between substrate binding and catalytic modes. Because crystallization often favors isolation of a single conformer, such isomerizations can be masked in diffraction-based structure determinations. This work demonstrates that solution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) methods, which can detect multiple conformations present in solution, provide a powerful tool for identifying Xaa-Pro switches.

Rod Arrestin Tetramer Looms in Darkness
PAGE 924 Rod photoreceptors demonstrate single photon sensitivity and an amazing dynamic range of seven orders of magnitude. This level of perfection is achieved through several unique features, including tight regulation of the availability of arrestin, a protein that stops rhodopsin signaling, via self-association. S.M. Hanson et al. describe the structure of the physiologically relevant tetrameric ``storage'' form of arrestin. The structure of the tetramer in solution explains its inability to bind rhodopsin, cooperativity of arrestin self-association, absence of species larger than tetramer, and inability of oligomers to bind rhodopsin. (Figure adopted from S.M. Hanson et al.)

Stressed DNA Goes for the Doughnut
PAGE 935 Tang et al. have determined the structure of bacteriophage ø29 (an asymmetric, tailed virus that infects the bacterium Bacillus subtilis) at subnanometer resolution. Here, the authors show (1) how the double-stranded DNA genome interacts with proteins in the phage head and (2) how the end of the DNA, confined in a narrow channel in the tail and under pressure from the packaged DNA in the head, is bent into an interesting, doughnut-shaped, toroidal structure. Discovery of this toroid provides insight into how DNA responds to physical stress and in this instance facilitates the delivery of a virus genome into a host.

Sweeter Side of Rhamnose Binding Lectins not Required
PAGE 944 Lectin-like domains are commonly found in proteins attached to the cellular exterior, and believed to play a role in carbohydrate recognition. Rhamnose binding lectins (RBL), a lectin-like class of proteins, are found in animal transmembrane receptors, although rhamnose is a very rare carbohydrate in animals. Here, Vakonakis et al. present the solution structure of RBL from the Latrophilin-1 (lat-1) synaptic receptor and characterize its carbohydrate binding properties. Sequence comparison with other RBL receptors shows that residues required for carbohydrate binding in lat-1 are often absent in other receptor RBL domains, indicating the binding is not critical for the function of these proteins.

Integrins' Conformation Balancing Act
PAGE 954 Integrins comprise a family of transmembrane heterodimeric cell surface receptors whose conformational changes transduce intra- and extracellular signals that play fundamental roles in a variety of cellular processes. Current models suggest a bent conformation for resting integrins, followed by extension, ``opening'' between the two subunits, and tail separation upon activation. Contrasting this view, a multiresolution approach employed by Rocco et al. shows that resting integrins are likely already extended and suggests that activation-induced head region rearrangements do not immediately lead to full tail separation. Thus, integrins appear to have plastic structure with a delicate conformational balance that can be strongly influenced by physiological and nonphysiological factors. (Figure credit: Rocco et al.)

Unique Look of Alg13
PAGE 965 Alg13 is the sugar donor binding subunit of a unique yeast bipartite glycosyltransferase. Despite its predicted similarities to conventional GT-B type glycosyltransferases, the solution structure of Alg13, determined by Wang et al., shows that Alg13 is structurally distinct among all glycosyltransferase sugar donor binding domains. Instead of having two tandem Rossmann folds, the first half of Alg13 is only an irregular a/b fold. The N-terminal linker of Alg13, usually part of the sugar acceptor binding domain, has been integrated into the main fold of Alg13, and the C-terminal of the protein possesses only two helices instead of the expected three.

Pumping Copper
PAGE 976 ATP-dependent copper pumps are responsible for maintaining Cu homeostasis by providing sufficient Cu for metalloenzyme biosynthesis but preventing oxidative damage to the cell by free Cu. Wu et al. present the structure of an intact Cu pump by cryoelectron microscopy. The authors construct pseudoatomic models for the intact protein and describe a conformational change between two reaction intermediates. Additionally, the N-terminal domain, which represents a class of specialized metal binding domains that characterize this family of pumps, was visualized. A structural model suggests a specific mechanism for Cu exchange and a regulatory role for this domain in copper transport.

x Structure 16, June 2008 ª2008 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved

