106

Thursday 9 November

Poster Session ­ New drug targets
during electroporation has been the only toxicity seen at this point in the trial. Expression of IL-12 was documented at the tumor site as well as tumor necrosis and lymphocytic infiltrate. Further evaluation of this method in melanoma and other tumors is warranted by the current trial.

bcl-b and Noxa. There was inhibition of cellular viability exhibited by trypan blue assay, while Ki67 and MIB1 markers exhibited inhibition of cell proliferation. BrdU, MTT and XTT assays exhibited inhibition of DNA synthesis and metabolic activity in CAV and endothelial cells. Finally, we observed induction of apoptosis or nuclear PCD type I, paraptosis (necrapoptosis) or cytoplasmic PCD type III and autophagic PCD type II leading to a bystander killing effect (BKE) of CAV and endothelial cells. Conclusion: We achieved to eradicate chemoresistant CAV and endothelial cells by using a functional genomic tool such as siRNAs in a pegylated liposomal formulation which inhibited DNA methylation re-establishing normal function and expression of vital tumor suppressor genes combined with the cytostatic and apoptotic action of vinorelbine-tartrate leading to the synergistic inhibition of angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, metastasis and cellular proliferation after the induction of type I, II, III PCD. 339 POSTER Implication of tumor suppressor maspin in the eradication of lung cancer C. Park, E. Nam, S. Yeom. Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Cancer Center, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea Our work focuses on identifying factors critical to the progression of lung cancer. Here, we investigated the possible role of maspin in this context. In breast and prostate cancers, maspin acts as a tumor suppressor capable of inhibiting motility, invasion and metastasis; in pancreatic cancer it functions as a malignant factor. Few studies to date have investigated the role of maspin in lung cancer, likely because it is not expressed in normal lung tissue. In the present study, we investigated whether engineered overexpression of maspin in NCI-H157 lung cancer cells cells, which do not express endogenous maspin, would suppress the tumorigenicity of this particular tumor cell type. NCI-H157 cells overexpressing maspin displayed a dramatically reduced growth rate compared to the parental cell line when subcutaneously implanted in athymic (nu/nu) mice. Furthermore, gene transfer of maspin suppressed the growth of established NCI-H157 tumors. The data suggest that maspin gene therapy and/or agents that increase maspin expression could have utility in the treatment of lung cancers. 340 POSTER Gene therapy with plasmid IL-12 delivered by electroporation in patients with malignant melanoma: results of first human Phase I trial R. Heller1,2,3 , R. DeConti3,4 , J. Messina3,5 , S. Andrews3 , P. Urbas3 , K. Ugen1,2 , C. Puleo3 , V. Sondak3,4 , A. Riker3,4 , A. Daud3,4 . 1 University of South Florida, Molecular Medicine, Tampa, Florida, USA; 2 University of South Florida, Center for Molecular Delivery, Tampa, Florida, USA; 3 H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Cutaneous Oncology, Tampa, Florida, USA; 4 University of South Florida, Department of Interdisciplinary Oncology, Tampa, Florida, USA; 5 University of South Florida, Pathology and Cell Biology, Tampa, Florida, USA Metastatic melanoma is a devastating disease lacking effective treatment. In the B16.F10 melanoma model, electroporation of plasmid encoding IL-12 (pIL-12) into established tumors resulted in an 80% cure rate as well as resistance of the cured mice to subsequent challenge with B16.F10 cells. Furthermore, minimal toxicity was observed when pIL-12 was delivered with electroporation as compared to untreated mice or mice that only received injection of pIL-12. These experiments provided the rationale for a Phase I safety, dose escalation and biological efficacy trial in patients with accessible subcutaneous metastases with melanoma. Methods and Study Design: The primary objective was to determine the toxicity and maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of intra-tumorally electroporated pIL-12. The secondary objectives were to determine the efficacy of this treatment and to evaluate local and systemic cytokine response. Patients received intra-tumoral injection of pIL-12 followed immediately by 1300 V/cm 100 ms duration electric pulses at the tumor site. Electroporation treatments were performed on days 1, 5 and 8. Each patient had a minimum of 2­4 tumors treated. Dose escalation was performed by varying the plasmid amount, (0.6 mg, 1.5 mg, 3 mg, 6 mg, 12 mg) three patients were treated per cohort. Results: Three patients were enrolled into each of five cohorts of this Phase I study. No Grade 2, 3 or 4 toxicity was noted. Patients expressed significant but transient pain during the administration of electric pulses (lasting a few seconds). Biopsies were done following treatment and showed significant necrosis of melanoma cells within the tumor in the majority of treated lesions. Significant lymphocytic infiltrate was seen in biopsies from patients in cohorts 3, 4 and 5. In addition, IL-12 expression was documented in the tumor samples biopsied but not in serum. Conclusion: This first-in-human phase I study demonstrated the feasibility and efficiency of in vivo electrogene delivery in humans. Transient pain

New drug targets
341 POSTER The discovery of MP529, a potent and selective aurora kinase inhibitor using CLIMB H. Vankayalapati, C. Grand, X. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Lamb, M. Lloyd, J. Sunseri, D. Bearss. SuperGen, Incorporated, Salt Lake City, USA Aurora A kinase is a validated target for a number of human malignancies, including pancreas, breast, prostate, ovarian and colorectal cancers. This serine-threonine kinase is of particular interest as of late, due to its important role in proper spindle formation at mitosis. Overexpression of Aurora A leads to dysregulation of the centrosome cycle resulting in the formation of multipolar mitotic spindles. The resulting abnormal mitotic events lead to genomic instability which is an underlying process in tumorigenesis. Previous studies have shown that inhibition of Aurora A kinase in tumor cell lines effectively disrupts mitosis, leading to monopolar spindles, multinucleate cells, growth arrest and eventually cell death. Through the use of our proprietary CLIMB drug discovery process, we have set out to identify and synthesize a new series of Aurora A kinase inhibitors. In traditional small molecule screening, as many as several million compounds may be tested in order to identify the few that interact selectively with a disease-related protein target. CLIMB can achieve similar results by screening as few as several hundred computationally selected compounds. CLIMB screening is based on the clustering of representative chemical structures and pharmacophores that embody our large virtual library of nearly 50 million compound structures. Using CLIMB, the Aurora A kinase crystal structure was used as a substrate for docking to generate a subset of leads based on calculated binding energies. These leads were then screened and ranked using a number of in silico physicochemical and ADMET prediction algorithms to determine which were most likely to be "drug-like". Biochemical enzyme-based assays with recombinant Aurora A kinase have revealed an array of candidates of the substituted (4-ptolylsulfamoyl-phenyl) amide class, the MP529 series. These compounds exhibit nanomolar activity or better against the Aurora A kinase enzyme, and have been carried forward into ex vivo and in vivo evaluations. In cell-based assays, mitotic markers of Aurora A kinase inhibition are seen, resulting in a reduction of tumor cell growth. Selected compounds from this series have been appraised in an in vivo xenograft context, and have been shown to be effective, while exhibiting a wide therapeutic window and desirable pharmacokinetic properties. The MP529 series represents a novel scaffold which improves upon the pharmacological activities of known Aurora kinase inhibitors. 342 POSTER A phase I dose-escalation and pharmacokinetic (PK) study of XL647, a novel spectrum selective kinase inhibitor, administered orally to patients with advanced solid malignancies (ASM) B.I. Sikic1 , H.A. Wakelee1 , A.A. Adjei2 , J. Halsey1 , J.L. Lensing2 , J.D. Dugay1 , L.J. Hanson2 , J.M. Reid2 , J.R. Piens2 . 1 Stanford University Medical Center, Oncology Division, Stanford, USA; 2 Mayo Clinic, Oncology Division, Rochester, USA Background: XL647 is an orally bioavailable small molecule inhibitor of multiple receptor tyrosine kinases involved in tumorigenesis, angiogenesis, and metastasis, including EGFR/ErbB1, ErbB2/HER2, VEGFR2/KDR, and EphB4. Methods: ASM patients (pts) were enrolled in successive cohorts to receive XL647 orally as a single dose on Day 1 with PK sampling, then on Day 4, pts received 5 consecutive daily doses with additional PK sampling. Pts continued treatment with XL647 for 5 consecutive days, followed by a 9-day observation period; cycles were repeated every 14 days. Pharmacodynamic plasma samples were collected from all pts and are undergoing analysis for mechanism-of-action related molecules. Pts were allowed to stay on study in the absence of unacceptable toxicity until evidence of disease progression. Results: A total of 41 pts have been treated across 11 dose levels: 0.06, 0.12, 0.19, 0.28, 0.39, 0.78, 1.56, 3.12, 4.68, and 7.0 mg/kg in liquid formulation, and then at a fixed dose of 350 mg in tablet formulation. One serious adverse event, grade 4 pulmonary embolism, was considered possibly related to study treatment in a pt dosed at 0.28 mg/kg. One pt at 3.12 mg/kg had a dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) of asymptomatic QTc prolongation as assessed by an electrocardiogram, resulting in expansion

