176 Wierenga RK, Hol WGM (1983). Predicted nucleotide-binding properties of p21 protein and its cancer-associated variant. Nature, 302, 842-845. Wiggs JL, Nordenskjoid M, Yandell D (1988). Prediction of the risk of hereditary retinoblastoma using DNA polymorphisms within the retinoblastoma gene. New England Journal of Medicine, 318, 151-157. Yaish P, Gazit A, Gilon C, Levitzki A (1988). Blocking of EGFdependent cell proliferation by E G F receptor kinase inhibitors. Science, 242, 933-935. Yandell DW, Tracey SD, Campbell BA, Dayton SH, Peterson R, Walton D (1989). Oncogenic point mutations in the human retinoblastoma gene: their application to genetic counselling. New England Journal of Medicine, 321, 168%1695.

M . H . Goyns and B. W. Hancock Yunis JJ (1983). The chromosomal basis of human neoplasia. Science, 221,227-236. Yunis JJ, Oken MM, Theologides A, Howe RB, Kaplan ME (1984). Recurrent chromosomal defects are found in most patients with non-Hodgkin's-lymphoma. Cancer Genetics and Cytogenetics, 13, 17-28. Yunis JJ, Mayer MG, Arnesen MA, Aeppli DP, Oken MM, Frizzera G (1989). bcl-2 and other genomic alterations in the prognosis of large-cell lymphoma. New England Journal of Medicine, 320, 1047-1054. Zimmerman LE (1986). Retinoblastoma and retinocytoma. In Ophthalmic Pathology: An Atlas and Textbook. 3rd edn, vol. 2, ed. Spencer WH, pp. 1292-1351. W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia.

Book Reviews

Neuro-Oncology Primary Malignant Brain Tumours. Edited by David G. T. Thomas. Edward Arnold, London, 1990. Pages: 303, Price: £50.00
The book is addressed to postgraduate physicians and scientists, and provides a useful mix of laboratory and clinical chapters. The reviewer cannot agree with a statement in the Preface however that 'all treatment of primary malignant brain tumours is palliative only' as the authors demonstrate that long-term survival can occur for tumours other than glioblastomas. Dr Darling provides a useful resume of in vitro techniques to inform the clinician, and the section by Professor Westmark usefully explains the molecular aspects for those unfamiliar with this area. Chapters on growth and aspects of carcinogenesis are clear, and also point to tumour models which may provide insight into the clinical situation. Dr Kingsley's chapter on neuroradiology deals well with some of the misconceptions in this field, and points out clearly the complementary nature of computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging. In vivo metabolism of brain tumours is comprehensively reviewed, though the conclusion that positron emission tomographic studies rule out microscopic hypoxia as one possible cause for the failure of radiotherapy cannot be considered totally valid. Very useful chapters on surgery and paediatric neuro-oncology follow, with excellent illustrations in the latter. Leibel and Sheline provide a good summary of the present position in the therapy of adult gliomas, and point us to possible new directions. Chemotherapy and immunotherapy are extensively covered and the importance of quality of survival is emphasized, as are the pitfalls of patient selection in this area. The final chapter on palliative care was missing it's reference list, but provided a useful coda to this book. Some clinicians would take issue with nasogastric or gastrostomy feeding for terminally unconscious patients, however, preferring subcutaneous hydration for patient comfort. At £50 the book is averagely priced by current standards. Despite its multiauthorship it reads well as a whole, and most of the chapters also have extensive references. There are other similar books in the field, but this would find a useful place in relevant departmental Libraries. DR NEWMAN

Cancer: Causes, Occurrence and Control. Edited by L. Tomatis et al. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1990. Pages: 352, Price:
£24.00 The current emphasis on prevention and early detection of cancer makes this a timely publication by the World Health Organisation. The book is sensibly divided in four sections - the occurrences, the causes, the early detection and, finally, the control of cancer through prevention and early detection. A detailed introduction by the editor-in-chief sets out the objectives and limitations of the publication. It also provides an interesting historic review of the various landmarks in epidemiology and therapy of the 'disease'. Section one deals with the worldwide incidences, describes and details the various epidemiological processes and ends with the epidemiology of cancers at specific sites. This style is continued in the rest of the sections. The current knowledge of the causes - the chemical agents including cytotoxic drugs, radiation, viruses etc. are dealt with in Section two. In common with all sections, there is an extensive and useful list of references at the end of each chapter. The last two sections are devoted to the rationale for early detection, the expected benefits of screening for cancers site by site and ends up with quantitative prediction of such benefits. It also highlights the necessity of the availability and proper provision of effective therapy for the benefits to accrue. With its many useful charts and tables, in addition to the detailed discussions, the appeal of the book will be broad. It would be of interest and prove to be valuable to many of the health care professionals, e.g. the health service planners, the medical and paramedical groups involved in public education programmes, not least to the clinical oncologists. As pointed out by the editor-in-chief in his introduction, the knowledge in the epidemiology field both at laboratory and clinical level is expanding rapidly with clearer understanding of the process of neoplasia. It is not possible for anyone to keep abreast of the information through diverse journals and books like this will help to summarize the state of the art and I would look forward to regular updates.

T. K. SARKAR

