Structure, Vol. 10, 301≠310, March, 2002, 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

PII S0969-2126(02)00716-5

Structural Basis for the Cyclization of the Lipopeptide Antibiotic Surfactin by the Thioesterase Domain SrfTE
Steven D. Bruner,1,5 Thomas Weber,2,5 Rahul M. Kohli,1 Dirk Schwarzer,2 Mohamed A. Marahiel,2 Christopher T. Walsh,1 and Milton T. Stubbs3,4 1 Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology Harvard Medical School 240 Longwood Avenue Boston, Massachusetts 02115 2 Biochemie Fachbereich Chemie Philipps-Universitat Marburg ® Hans-Meerwein-Straﬂe 35032 Marburg Germany 3 Rontgenstrukturanalyse ® Institut fur Pharmazeutische Chemie ® Philipps-Universitat Marburg ® Marbacher Weg 6 35032 Marburg Germany such as the anticancer agents bleomycin and epothilone and the immunosuppressants FK506 and rapamycin, which are biosynthesized on hybrid PKS/NRPS assembly lines [4]. All these multimodular enzymatic assemblies are organized with a common molecular logic for natural product acyl chain initiation, chain elongation, and chain termination, catalyzed by protein modules that pass the growing chain from N to C termini of the assembly lines (Figure 1). Monomer units, such as amino or carboxy acids for NRPS and acetate or propionate for PKS, are selected and installed as acyl/aminoacyl-S-enzyme intermediates on a carrier protein domain in each module. The reactive thiol group in each acyl carrier/peptidyl carrier protein domain is introduced as a 4 -phosphopantetheinyl arm by posttranslational priming by dedicated phosphopantetheinyl transferases [5]. Specialized domains located within the corresponding NRPS/ PKS modules can further modify the acylated substrates. Chain growth occurs as a series of translocating, elongating acyl/peptidyl-S-pantetheinyl carrier protein intermediates. The chain elongation chemistry in each module is by C-C bond formation in PKS assembly lines and by C-N amide bond formation in NRPS assembly lines, in upstream to downstream direction. When the full-length polyketide/polypeptide chain reaches the ultimate downstream carrier protein domain, the complete acyl chain is disconnected from its covalent thioester tether by a C-terminal thioesterase (TE) domain (Figure 1). The chain-terminating TE domains are 25≠35 kDa protein moieties named for their homology to fatty acyl thioesterases, first seen in fatty acid biosynthetic machinery and then characterized in the hydrolysis of myristoyl-S-ACP in bacterial bioluminescence pathways [6]. The TE domains of the thiotemplated PKS and NRPS assembly lines show more catalytic versatility for transfer of the full-length PK or NRP acyl chain. While some of these TE domains are hydrolases, e.g., those for vancomycin or daunomycin, others catalyze regio- and stereospecific macrolactonization or macrolactamization [7]. A celebrated example of polyketide macrolactonization is in the biogenesis of erythromycin, where the 14member macrolactone, 6-deoxyerythronolide B (DEB), is completed by the TE domain of DEB synthase (DEBS) [8]. Analogously, the macrolactam ring in the topical antibiotic bacitracin is created by the TE domain of bacitracin synthetase, using a lysine side chain amino group to form the cyclic natural product [9]. It has been known for some time that the TE domain of DEBS can function autonomously, from studies in which it was moved to different upstream modules of DEBS1 and DEBS2 subunits [10]. Isolated expression of the protein fragment resulted in hydrolytic thioesterase activity toward model substrates [11]. More recently, we
Key words: thioesterase; nonribosomal peptide synthesis; X-ray crystal structure; antibiotic biosynthesis; cyclic peptide formation; surfactant

Summary Many biologically active natural peptides are synthesized by nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS). Product release is accomplished by dedicated thioesterase (TE) domains, some of which catalyze an intramolecular cyclization to form macrolactone or macrolactam cyclic peptides. The excised 28 kDa SrfTE domain, a member of the / hydrolase enzyme family, exhibits a distinctive bowl-shaped hydrophobic cavity that hosts the acylpeptide substrate and tolerates its folding to form a cyclic structure. A substrate analog confirms the substrate binding site and suggests a mechanism for substrate acylation/deacylation. Docking of the peptidyl carrier protein domain immediately preceding SrfTE positions the 4 -phosphopantheinyl prosthetic group that transfers the nascent acyl-peptide chain to SrfTE. The structure provides a basis for understanding the mechanism of acyl-PCP substrate recognition and for the cyclization reaction that results in release of the macrolactone cyclic heptapeptide. Introduction A vast array of natural products of diverse therapeutic utility is synthesized by multimodular enzymes acting in assembly line fashion [1]. These include polyketide antibiotics and cholesterol-lowering drugs, produced by polyketide synthases (PKS), and nonribosomal peptide antibiotics of the lactam class, vancomycins, bacitracin and the immunosupressant drug cyclosporin, assembled by nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS) [2, 3]. In addition, there are polyketide/peptide hybrids,
4

Correspondence: stubbs@mailer.uni-marburg.de 5 These authors contributed equally to this work.

Structure 302

Figure 1. Surfactin Biosynthesis by the Modular Peptide Synthetase (A) The srf operon (top) with the three genes srfA-A, srfA-B, and srfA-C coding for the surfactin synthetase subunits shown below the genes. Bars indicate the positions of modules within the protein, whereas the individual domains are shown as colored balls: A, adenylation domain; PCP, peptidyl carrier protein domain; C, condensation domain; E, epimerization domain; TE, thioesterase domain. The 4 -phosphopantetheinyl cofactors with their active thiol groups are shown with the corresponding peptides attached at their current synthesis states. The growing peptide chain is passed from left to right, until the linear product at the last PCP domain is cyclized to the lipopeptide by the TE domain. (B) The SNAC (S-N-acetyl cysteamine) acyl peptide mimic can be cyclized by the genetically excised SrfTE domain. The native peptide (R DLeu) and the soluble substrate (R DOrn) are illustrated. The -hydroxy fatty acid (FA) is likely to be attached by the N-terminal C domain.

have demonstrated that excised TE domains from the NRPS catalysts tyrocidine synthetase (Tyc) and gramicidin synthetase (Grs) retain their intrinsic macrolactamization catalytic activity when presented with linear peptidyl thioesters [12≠14]. Remarkably, both the TycTE and GrsTE will also dimerize pentapeptidyl-SNAC (S-N-acetyl cysteamine, an analog of the phosphopantetheinylpeptide-thioester) substrates and then cyclize the decapeptide to form the antibiotic gramicidin S. Surfactin, a cyclic lipopeptide capable of lowering the surface tension of water by a factor of almost three, has an amphiphilic structure and has been reported to have antibiotic, antitumoral, antiviral, antimycoplasmic, and hypocholesterolemic properties (reviewed in [15]). Although the physiological function of surfactin is not clear, it has been suggested that it may play a role in promoting bacteria growth in hydrophobic environments, in increasing bioavailability of hydrophobic substrates, or in regulating cell attachment/detachment (reviewed in [16]). Surfactin has attracted attention as a potential biodegradable alternative to chemical surfactants in a wide range of applications, hindered only by the costs and difficulties of current production methods. The most striking feature of the TE domains of SrfA-C and other NRPS and PKS multimodular enzymatic assembly lines that make macrolactam and macrolactone natural products is the intramolecular cyclization outcome. The acyl-O-TE intermediate, formed by acyl transfer from the upstream acyl thioester donor, does not suffer hydrolysis (intermolecular capture by water) but is instead directed exclusively to intramolecular capture by a nucleophilic group in the acyl chain, producing the cyclic macrolactone. The genetically excised TE do-

main from the C terminus of the surfactin synthetase SrfA-C subunit (SrfTE) catalyzes a stereospecific and regiospecific macrolactonization, adding the hydroxyl oxygen of a 3-(R)-3-hydroxy acyl heptapeptidyl thioester onto the Leu7 carbonyl to produce the macrocyclic lactone characteristic of the biosurfactant (Figure 1) [14]. Recent structural data on proteins involved in nonribosomal peptide synthesis have provided considerable insights into the processes of substrate adenylation and thioester binding [17]. To understand the ability of C-terminal thioesterase domains to function as robust, portable macrocyclization catalysts in PKS and NRPS assembly lines, as in DEBS, Tyc, and Srf synthetases, requires insight into their architecture. In this paper, we present the structure of the SrfTE from B. subtilis JH642. SrfTE, a member of the / hydrolase enzyme family, exhibits a distinctive bowl-shaped active site cavity, closed in one of the two molecules present in the asymmetric unit. Soaking of substrate confirms the identity of the active site and suggests that the peptide substrate could fold into a cyclic conformation within the bowl. The positioning of the peptidyl carrier protein and its phosphopantheinyl prosthetic group could be modeled in a convincing manner. The chain-terminating macrolactonizing strategy for polyketide synthases and nonribosomal peptide synthetases can now be compared and dissected. Results Structural Features of SrfTE The SrfTE domain (the last 235 residues of the SrfA-C subunit; Figure 1) is a globular molecule of rough dimen-

Structural Basis for Peptide Cyclization by SrfTE 303

Figure 2. Overall Architecture of the Thioesterase Domain of Surfactin Synthetase (A) Ribbon representation of the dimer observed in the asymmetric unit (noncrystallographic diad axis vertical; helices, red; sheets, blue). The left monomer represents the `C' (`closed') conformation of the active site and the right monomer represents the `O' (`open') conformation. The lid region ( L1, L2, and L3), in green, surrounds the peptide binding pocket. The catalytic triad residues (Ser80, His207, and Asp107) are rendered as ball and stick models in gold. An unordered loop region of monomer `C' is shown as a dotted line. (B and C) Schematic diagram of the general secondary structure of the / hydrolyase family of enzymes (B) and surfactin thioesterase domain (C). Sheets, blue arrows; helices, red cylinders. The positions of the three conserved catalytic triad residues are indicated.

∞ sions 40 40 40 A3, with a pronounced cavity in the form of a bowl harboring the active site (Figure 2; see also Figure 6B). It exhibits the characteristic fold of / hydrolases but lacks the amino-terminal strand 1 and helix D and possesses only a vestigial 310 E helix (Figure 2) [18]. In common with other / hydrolases and with thioesterases, in particular [6, 19≠21], there is a catalytic triad composed of Ser80, His207, and Asp107 (residues numbered from the N terminus of the thioesterase domain; Figure 3). The active site serine residue, Ser80, is found at the signature sequence Gly-Xxx-Ser-Xxx-Gly of the "nucleophile elbow" between strand 5 and helix C. The adjacent backbone amide group of Ala81 together with Val27 (located between 3 and A) forms the oxyanion hole that would stabilize the tetrahedral intermediate in acyl-O-TE formation and breakdown. The catalytic base His207 is located between strand 8 and helix F. The final residue of the catalytic triad, Asp107, is located not in the turn between 7 and E but at the C-terminal end of strand 6. Such a noncanonical

positioning of the acid group has been observed for human pancreatic lipase [22, 23] and the active site glutamate of a bacterial esterase [24]. Two independent monomers are observed in the asymmetric unit, dimerizing via formation of two antiparallel sheets (Figure 2): one between the 8 strands of each monomer (resulting in a continuous 14-stranded sheet throughout the asymmetric unit) and one between the C-terminal peptides. Size exclusion chromatographic experiments reveal SrfTE to be monomeric (data not shown), so that we consider this dimerization to be a product of crystallization. The core / structure described above is common to each monomer, with an ∞ rmsd of 0.52 A for 209 of the 229 C atoms (Table 1). Significant deviations between the two monomers are observed for the region between 6 and L3. This "lid," reminiscent of lipases, consists primarily of three helices ( L1, L2, and L3) that reach over the active site (Figures 2 and 4). The lid is folded back in the `O' (`open') monomer, allowing unrestricted access to the active

Structure 304

Figure 3. Alignment of Peptide Cyclizing Thioesterase Domains from B. brevis Gramicidin Synthetase and Tyrocidine Synthetase with the Crystallized SrfTE Numbering refers to the SrfTE construct; TE domain sequences of GrsTE [36, 37] and TycTE [38] as published. The positions of the catalytic triad residues are indicated with asterisks. The secondary structure coloring scheme is the same as in Figure 2A. Conserved residues, orange; partially conserved residues, yellow.

site, with formation of a short antiparallel sheet between residues 110≠112 and 187≠188 not observed in the second monomer (Figure 2). The open lid appears to be stabilized by crystal contacts made by residues of L1 and L2. In contrast, the active site in the `C' (`closed') monomer is accessible only to small molecules. Here, residues Asp116≠Glu123 are not observed

in the electron density maps, suggesting flexibility in this region of the `C' monomer. In addition, two positions of L1 are apparent in the SeMet (apo) density (data not shown), one corresponding to that described here and a second (dominant) position representing a translation of one pitch of helix along its N-C axis, assigned according to the placement of Met130 used for phasing.

Table 1. Data Collection and Refinement Statistics Crystal ∞ Resolution (A) ∞ (A) Total Reflections Unique Reflections Completeness (%) Rsyma I / ( I )

MAD Phasing, Beamline DESY BW6 Apo-SeMet remote 16≠2.20 (2.24≠2.20) 0.95 131,495 Apo-SeMet peak 16≠2.28 (2.32≠2.28) 0.9799 116,576 Apo-SeMet inflection 16≠2.28 (2.32≠2.28) 0.9807 114,547 29,461 (1316) 26,628 (1335) 26,708 (1341) 96.0 (88.8) 96.6 (98.9) 96.8 (98.2) 0.044 (0.150) 21.59 (4.22) 0.044 (0.129) 19.44 (4.65) 0.034 (0.121) 22.82 (5.47)

Twelve sites found using SOLVE, mean FoM 0.21; mean combined FoM 0.69 after DM. SNAC-Soaked Complex, CHESS A1 SNAC complex Refinement, Complex Number of nonhydrogen protein atoms Number of solvent molecules Rworkingb (%) Rfreeb (%) ∞ Average B factor (A2) ∞ Rmsd bonds (A) Rmsd angles ( ) Ramachandran distributionc (% core, allowed, generous, disallowed)
a b c

25≠1.71 (1.77≠1.71) 0.979

663,308

62,391 (5717)

98.8 (92.5)

0.054 (0.370) 20.0 (4.0)

3766 242 22.2 23.6 31.48 0.0057 1.269 92.2, 6.8, 0.8, 0.3

Rsym is the unweighted R value on I of symmetry-related reflections ( hkl|Ihkl Ihkl |/ hklIhkl). Rworking Fcalchkl/ hkl|Fobshkl|; Rfree is calculated from 10% of reflections not used in model refinement. hkl|Fobshkl Determined using PROCHECK [39].

Structural Basis for Peptide Cyclization by SrfTE 305

Figure 4. Differences in the Active Site Conformation between Observed Monomers Ribbon representation of the superposition of the two monomers observed in the crystallographic dimer. Ribbon coloring is the same as in Figure 2A, except that the lid helices of the `O' (`open') conformer are shown in green and those of the `C' (`closed') conformer are shown in yellow. The positions of the catalytic triad (gold) and an observed sulfate ion (magenta) are rendered in ball and stick representation.

The differences between the two molecules in the asymmetric unit and their packing are presumably the cause of the observed crystal twinning. Active Site Defined by Acyl-Heptapeptide Ligand In order to further define the active site, SrfTE crystals were soaked with an analog of the N-acyl-heptapeptidyl-N-acetylcysteamine thioester (N-acyl-heptapeptidyl-SNAC) that was previously shown to be a cyclization substrate [14]. We used an N-acyl-heptapeptidyl-SNAC lacking the -hydroxy group on the fatty acyl chain, allowing for TE acylation but not the cyclizing deacylation half reaction. Electron density of the peptide SNAC-soaked native crystals reveals the presence of a leucine residue near the active site Ser80 in the `O' monomer (Figure 5). The form of the density is consistent with the free carboxylate of a cleaved product, with the Leu7 side chain pointing toward a pocket formed by the side chains of residues Ala81, Val27, Tyr156, and Tyr159, with Phe155 at the base. Unambiguous interpretation of the residual density is hampered by the fact that there are multiple binding modes of the substrate. However, continuous density running antiparallel to main chain segment Ala179≠Pro184 has a peptidic form, diminishing in the vicinity of Asp107 (Figure 5). Notwithstanding the difficulty of interpreting multiple overlapping conformations of a peptide as long as seven residues, we have been able to model a peptide of the sequence DLeu3-Val4Asp5-DLeu6-Leu7 via rotation of main chain torsion angles starting from one of the surfactin NMR structures [25] that could link the C-terminal amino acid residue to this density (see Figure 6). This describes a peptide binding pocket lined predominantly with aromatic and hydrophobic residues (Figure 5). The hydrophobic environment would appear to be well suited for the alkyl side chains in the heptapeptide substrate. The model results in an almost circular pentapeptide, whose main chain approaches Ser80 at its C terminus and Asp107 at its N terminus (Figure 6). Residues N-terminal to DLeu4 would reach away from the active site toward bulk solvent. Restricted Active Site in the `C' Monomer Analysis of the `C' monomer conformations reveals a closure of the active site bowl. In the apo `C'-dominant

conformation, Asp125 and Leu117 of helix L1 restrict access to the Leu pocket identified above (data not shown). In the complex, `C' Asp125 contacts the Ser80 hydroxyl group; residues prior to Ser124 are not observed in the electron density. The active site is further constricted due to an alternative side chain rotamer of `C' Trp186 in both apo and complex structures. Considering the influence of crystal contacts on the `O' conformation, we perceive the closed conformation to represent the ground state situation, as has been established for the structurally related lipases [18]; the observed variability of the lid in the `C' state, however, suggests that the lid is held only weakly. A Docking Site for Phosphopantetheinyl-PCP In NRPS assembly lines (Figure 1), the chain-terminating TE domain is immediately preceded by a dedicated PCP that donates the full-length -hydroxy-acyl-heptapepti∞ dyl chain, tethered as a thioester, on the 20 A-long phosphopantetheinyl (pan) arm. While the structure of this SrfA-C PCP domain is unknown, we have previously solved the solution structure of the related TycC3-PCP [26], which consists of a four-helix bundle whose C terminus sits at the end of its fourth helix. The active site serine that carries the covalently linked pan arm sits in a flexible seven-residue loop diametrically opposed to the N and C termini. In the `C' monomer of SrfTE, a sulfate ion (Figure 4) is coordinated by the backbone amide of Gly213 and the side chains of Asn36 (Lys in both GrsTE and TycTE) and Arg40 (Gln in GrsTE; Glu in TycTE; Figure 3). This sulfate may mimic the binding position for the phosphate of the phosphopantetheine prosthetic group. In combination with the short length of the five-residue linker between the C terminus of SrfA-C PCP and the N terminus of SrfTE, this provides two anchor points that allow docking of the C chain of PCP to SrfTE, as shown in Figure 6. Analysis of contact residues reveals conservation among the TEs and their dedicated PCPs, respectively. Conserved residues Leu37, Leu211, and partially conserved Leu216 (Ala in TycTE) in the immediate neighborhood of the phosphate binding site (Figure 3) might represent a binding site for the pan dimethyl group. ∞ The 20 A-long pan arm serves as a flexible tether for the growing chain (in this case the full-length N-acyl-

Structure 306

Figure 5. Peptide Binding Region of the Open Conformer (A) Stereodiagram of electron density maps of the active site region of the `O' (`open') conformer. |2Fo Fc| map (blue) contoured at 1.0 and an |Fo Fc| density map (yellow) contoured at 2.5 illustrate the partially ordered substrate peptide density. Protein residues, white; modeled leucine amino acid, red. (B) Surface representation of the peptide binding region. Amino acid side chains lining the active site bowl, red; catalytic triad residues, yellow.

heptapeptide thioester) that mediates transfer from the ultimate adenylation domain to the TE active site serine on the way to cyclization. The proposed positioning of a fully trans pan arm would allow its cysteamine thiol group to approach Ser80 at the active site along a groove delineated by residues from the core domain to the "south" and from the lid helix to the "north," thereby enabling acyl chain transfer to Ser80 (Figure 6). Discussion TE domains function in catalytic disconnection from the covalent linkage between the full-length peptidyl chain and the 4 -phosphopantetheinyl thiol arm of the most downstream carrier protein domain in most nonribosomal peptide synthetase assembly lines (Figure 1) [7]. TE domains fulfill the same chain termination roles in polyketide synthase assembly lines [1]. Sequence homology has indicated that both the PKS and NRPS TE domains belong to the superfamily of / hydrolases, with active site serine residues that act as catalytic nucleophiles to generate the canonical acyl-O-TE covalent enzyme intermediates, typical of this class of enzymes. The structure of the 28 kDa TE domain excised from the 144 kDa SrfA-C subunit of surfactin synthetase pre-

sented here validates these structural predictions and the fact that the conserved triad of Asp, His, and Ser form the catalytic site. The structures of two unique molecules of SrfTE in the asymmetric unit of our crystals show both closed and open active site conformations, characteristic of structurally homologous lipases. The SrfTE dimer observed in the asymmetric unit is likely not to be present in solution as the TE domain behaves as a monomer on gel filtration chromatography; the oligomerization state of the full SrfA-C subunit and the complete surfactin synthetase remain to be established. The influence of upstream domains of SrfA-C, particularly the immediate upstream donor PCP domain, on the TE domain conformation also remains to be determined in future studies. Based on the presence of an observed sulfate ion and the structure of the Tyc PCP domain, we have been able to dock the preceding 10 kDa PCP domain, such that ∞ its covalently linked 20 A-long phosphopantetheinyl arm is in a position to deliver the mature linear peptidyl chain to the TE domain active site (Figure 6). The growing chain that arrives at the most downstream SrfA-C PCP domain in the SrfA-C subunit of the surfactin synthetase assembly line should be the linear N-acyl-heptapeptidyl chain shown in Figure 1, where

Structural Basis for Peptide Cyclization by SrfTE 307

Figure 6. Model for Thioesterase Catalyzed Peptide Cyclization (A) Docking of PCP domain (yellow) to Srf TE (red and blue). Phosphopantetheine (pan), in green, is modeled along a cleft from the observed sulfate ion to the active site. The position of the pan attachment site on a flexible loop of the PCP is indicated with an asterisk. (B) Accessible surface representation of the SrfTE showing a modeled pan arm and a five-amino acid peptide in licorice representation. The proposed PCP interaction surface is tinted yellow.

the fatty acyl chain in amide linkage to Glu1 is the 3-(R)-3hydroxy-14-methyl-pentadecanoyl chain. The 3-hydroxy group acts as the intramolecular attacking nucleophile, after the acyl chain is covalently transferred and docked in the TE active site, to produce the 25-membered macrolactone ring of surfactin (Figure 7). In our studies, replacing the upstream domains of SrfA-A, SrfA-B, and SrfA-C with an N-acyl-heptapeptidyl-SNAC as soluble surrogate substrate to prove that the SrfA-C TE domain retained macrolactonization activity [14], we replaced DLeu3 with DOrn3 for solubility reasons and shortened

Figure 7. The -Hydroxy-Acyl-Heptapeptidyl-O-Ser TE Acyl Enzyme Intermediate Is Schematized in the Hydrophobic Active Site Bowl Intramolecular deacylation by the hydroxyl releases the macrolactonized surfactin from its covalent tethering to the TE domain (R, fatty acid chain).

the -hydroxy-acyl chain to -hydroxy-butyryl. Only the 3-(R), not the unnatural 3-(S) configuration of this soluble thioester, was competent for TE domain-mediated cyclization. For the cocrystallization studies reported here, we removed the -hydroxy group and used an N-heptylacyl substituent to prevent cyclization and increase the lifetime of bound ligand. In the observed electron density maps, the thioester linkage in the N-heptyl-heptapeptidyl-SNAC appears to be hydrolyzed, so that the free acyl-heptapeptide is found in the TE active site. The bound acyl-heptapeptide ligand illuminates several issues: first, as noted above, the conversion of disordered segments of the TE domain into ordered structures that define the active site microenvironment and second, the placement of Leu7, the residue that becomes tethered chemically to the TE domain in the acylO-TE covalent intermediate, in proximity to Ser80, the proposed catalytic nucleophile from homology arguments. The observed bound acyl-heptapeptide can be thought of as the product that would arise from adventitious hydrolysis of the acyl-heptapeptidyl-O-TE acyl enzyme intermediate; the carbonyl carbon of Leu7 can be brought into contact with Ser80O through minor displacements to mimic the anticipated acyl enzyme. How does the TE domain control the kinetic fate of the acylated enzyme intermediate for exclusive intramolecular cyclization? Two requirements come to mind. The first is the ability to allow population of a substrate conformer that places the hydroxyl of the N-terminal fatty acyl group close to the Leu7-O-Ser80 ester bond. The active site cavity of the TE is large enough to accommodate the N-( -hydroxy-acyl)-heptapeptidyl chain. Directed folding of the peptide chain within the bowl could lead to a favorable juxtaposition of the -hydroxy group and the ester bond, allowing deacylation with concomitant ring closure to generate the 25-membered macrolactone. The hydrophobic active site pocket is well suited to accommodate the bound acyl-heptapeptidyl intermediate and allow exploration of the acyclic con-

Structure 308

former that is set up to cyclize. Second, the hydrophobic microenvironment may aid in sequestration from bulk water, and the structuring of the loop in the presence of substrate may also serve to cap the active site and slow down competing hydrolysis of the peptidyl-O-TE. While the architectural scaffold of NRPS and PKS TE domains may be the same, with a conserved catalytic inventory of Asp, His, and Ser side chains in the active site and a common acyl-O-Ser-enzyme intermediate, the particular microenvironments will differ. Thus, some TEs direct all the flux to hydrolysis, as in vancomycin biosynthesis. Among macrocyclizing TE domains, the TycC TE carries out head to tail cyclization of a decapeptidyl-O-TE intermediate to make a macrolactam, while the EntF TE domain cyclotrimerizes dihydroxybenzoylserine moieties to enterobactin [7]. The DEBS3 TE makes a 14-member macrolactone ring from the linear heptaketidyl-O-TE acyl enzyme, and that acyclic precursor has four hydroxyl groups that allow the TE to preorganize a folded conformer for macrolactonization. Branched chain products are made not only by this SrfTE but also by the bacitracin synthetase TE, while a lariat structure macrolactone is made for daptomycin [9, 27]. How the peptidyl chains are folded to achieve these regioselective macrocyclizations will require more TE domain structural analysis. Many of the nonribosomal peptides that undergo macrocyclization by TEs have hydrophobic side chains and may presage hydrophobic pockets in their respective TE active sites. It is of interest that the solution structures of tyrocidine, gramicidine, and surfactin are amphiphilic, presenting both a hydrophobic and a hydrophilic face [28, 29] that could be stabilized by the aromatic bowl. Indeed, the preponderance of aromatic residues in the binding site would allow significant variation in peptide side chain moieties, as observed for TycTE [12, 13].

of an acyl-O-enzyme intermediate. Docking of the peptidyl carrier protein domain to SrfTE reveals how the acylpeptide-charged phosphopantetheinyl arm would approach the active site triad, allowing thioester bond cleavage through formation of the acylpeptide-O-SrfTE complex. In contrast to other / hydrolases, however, breakdown of this key acyl intermediate proceeds not via hydrolysis by an attacking water molecule but instead via intramolecular ester formation, resulting in the cyclic lipopeptide product. A striking aromatic bowl about the active site triad accommodates the acyl-peptide substrate, directing the peptide to fold in order to bring the attacking -hydroxy group of the substrate fatty acid in a position to deacylate the enzyme. Sequence similarity with other NRPS thioesterase domains indicates that SrfTE is a prototype for this class of enzymes. Finally, the complete chemical synthesis of many peptide antibiotics and other natural products of therapeutic and biotechnological interest are often frustrated by the need for stereo- and regioselective macrocyclization. Specifically engineered variants of TE domains can pave the way for the semisynthetic production of such compounds. The data presented here provide a basis for further experiments to elicit a detailed understanding of peptide cyclization, furthering the biotechnological design of novel therapeutic entities.
Experimental Procedures The C-terminal TE domain of B. subtilis SrfA-C (residues 1140≠1274) was expressed and purified as described [14], with the addition of a gel filtration step (Superdex 200, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). Selenomethionine-derivatized SrfA-C TE was produced by a published procedure [30]. Crystals were obtained by vapor diffusion in hanging drops against a reservoir solution containing 100 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 1.8 M ammonium sulfate, and 2% MPD. Five microliters of protein (10 mg/mL) and five microliters of reservoir solution were mixed, and crystals grew at 19 C in 2 days. Crystals were briefly soaked in reservoir solution and 15% glycerol, mounted in nylon loops, and flash frozen in an X-Stream cryostream (MSC Rigaku) at 173 C. Crystals for peptide soaking experiments were grown against reservoir solution containing 100 mM MES (pH 6.5), 34% PEG 5000 MME, and 125 mM ammonium sulfate at 22 C over 2 days. These crystals exhibited severe twinning, precluding native data set collection. Upon soaking for 48 hr in reservoir solution supplemented with 10% glycerol and 350 M surfactin linear peptide analog (heptanoic acid-Glu1-Leu2-DOrn3-Val4-Asp5-DLeu6-Leu7SNAC) and subsequent flash freezing in liquid nitrogen, twinning ∞ was less severe, and quality data could be collected to 1.7 A resolution (Table 1). MAD data sets were collected on the MPG/GBF wiggler beamline BW6/DORIS at DESY, Hamburg. Complex data sets were collected on the A1 line at CHESS. All data were indexed and scaled using DENZO/SCALEPACK [31]. All crystals belong to the space group P212121 (a 63.01, b 76.37, and c 119.71), with two SrfA-C TE molecules per asymmetric unit. Selenium atom sites and initial electron density maps were generated using the program SOLVE [32]. Density modification with the CCP4 program suite was used to improve map quality [33]. Protein models were built into the electron density using the programs O [34] and QUANTA98 (MSI software). Refinement was carried out using the CNS software package [35]. The final model contains two molecules per asymmetric unit: monomer `C' includes residues 2≠231, with an unordered loop not built (residues 116≠123) and residues Ser115, Asp135, Asn140, and Gln230 modeled as alanines, as no side chain electron density was evident in the final map. Monomer `O' includes residues 2≠231, with residues Glu137 and Gln230 modeled as alanines.

Biological Implications Nonribosomal peptide synthetases are large multimodular enzymes that catalyze the synthesis of cyclic, cyclic branched, and linear peptides of diverse structures and a wide range of biological activities in an assembly line mechanism. Such peptides can act as antibiotics (isopenicillin, vancomycin, and bacitracin), siderophores (enterobactin, vibriobactin, and yersiniabactin), or immunosuppressives (cyclosporin, rapamycin, and FK506). These enzymes are built up of individual modules, responsible for substrate recognition, modification, and peptide bond formation, that can be subdivided into distinct catalytic domains. The lipopeptide antibiotic surfactin is assembled on a three-protein seven-module NRPS containing 24 domains (see Figure 1). The chain termination step in this universal assembly line mechanism, the directed acyl-S-enzyme breakdown, is catalyzed in most cases by a unique thioesterase (TE) domain. SrfTE, whose structure is the focus of this work, releases the final product by macrocyclization. SrfTE belongs to the superfamily of / hydrolases, representatives of which include enzymes of such diverse function as lipases, esterases, peptidases, and thioesterases, with a common mechanism via formation

Structural Basis for Peptide Cyclization by SrfTE 309

Acknowledgments We are grateful to Inge Schuler for invaluable technical assistance ® and to John Trauger and Tom Hollis for helpful discussions. We thank Greg Verdine and Tom Ellenberger for generously allowing the use of their facilities, Gleb Bourenkov and Hans Bartunik of the MPI beamline, DESY, for providing assistance with data collection, and Gerhard Klebe for encouragement and support. This work was supported by NIH grant GM 20011 (C.T.W.), the Cancer Research Fund of the Damon Runyon-Walter Winchell Foundation (S.D.B.), Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Fonds der Chemischen Industrie (M.A.M.), and Graduiertenkolleg "Proteinfunktion auf atomarer Ebene," Marburg (M.T.S.). Received: July 17, 2001 Revised: November 27, 2001 Accepted: December 17, 2001 21. References 1. Cane, D.E., and Walsh, C.T. (1999). The parallel and convergent universes of polyketide synthases and nonribosomal peptide synthetases. Chem. Biol. 6, R319≠R325. 2. Marahiel, M.A. (1997). Protein templates for the biosynthesis of peptide antibiotics. Chem. Biol. 4, 561≠567. 3. Staunton, J., and Wilkinson, B. (2001). Combinatorial biosynthesis of polyketides and nonribosomal peptides. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 5, 159≠164. 4. Du, L., and Shen, B. (2001). Biosynthesis of hybrid peptidepolyketide natural products. Curr. Opin. Drug Discov. Devel. 4, 215≠228. 5. Walsh, C.T., Gehring, A.M., Weinreb, P.H., Quadri, L.E., and Flugel, R.S. (1997). Post-translational modification of polyketide and nonribosomal peptide synthases. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 1, 309≠315. 6. Lawson, D.M., Derewenda, U., Serre, L., Ferri, S., Szittner, R., Wei, Y., Meighen, E.A., and Derewenda, Z.S. (1994). Structure of a myristoyl-ACP-specific thioesterase from Vibrio harveyi. Biochemistry 33, 9382≠9388. 7. Keating, T.A., Ehmann, D.E., Kohli, R.M., Marshall, C.G., Trauger, J.W., and Walsh, C.T. (2001). Chain termination steps in nonribosomal peptide synthetase assembly lines: directed acyl-S-enzyme breakdown in antibiotic and siderophore biosynthesis. ChemBioChem 2, 99≠107. 8. Staunton, J., and Wilkinson, B. (1997). Biosynthesis of erythromycin and rapamycin. Chem. Rev. 97, 2611≠2629. 9. Konz, D., Klens, A., Schorgendorfer, K., and Marahiel, M.A. ® (1997). The bacitracin biosynthesis operon of Bacillus licheniformis ATCC 10716: molecular characterization of three multimodular peptide synthetases. Chem. Biol. 4, 927≠937. 10. Pieper, R., Gokhale, R.S., Luo, G., Cane, D.E., and Khosla, C. (1997). Purification and characterization of bimodular and trimodular derivatives of the erythromycin polyketide synthase. Biochemistry 36, 1846≠1851. 11. Gokhale, R.S., Hunziker, D., Cane, D.E., and Khosla, C. (1999). Mechanism and specificity of the terminal thioesterase domain from the erythromycin polyketide synthase. Chem. Biol. 6, 117≠125. 12. Trauger, J.W., Kohli, R.M., and Walsh, C.T. (2001). Cyclization of backbone-substituted peptides catalyzed by the thioesterase domain from the tyrocidine nonribosomal peptide synthetase. Biochemistry 40, 7092≠7098. 13. Trauger, J.W., Kohli, R.M., Mootz, H.D., Marahiel, M.A., and Walsh, C.T. (2000). Peptide cyclization catalysed by the thioesterase domain of tyrocidine synthetase. Nature 407, 215≠218. 14. Kohli, R.M., Trauger, J.W., Schwarzer, D., Marahiel, M.A., and Walsh, C.T. (2001). Generality of peptide cyclization catalyzed by isolated thioesterase domains of nonribosomal peptide synthetases. Biochemistry 40, 7099≠7108. 15. Peypoux, F., Bonmatin, J.M., and Wallach, J. (1999). Recent trends in the biochemistry of surfactin. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 51, 553≠563. 16. Rosenburg, E., and Ron, E.Z. (1999). High- and low-molecular17.

18.

19.

20.

22.

23. 24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31. 32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

mass microbial surfactants. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 52, 154≠162. Weber, T., and Marahiel, M.A. (2001). Exploring the domain structure of modular nonribosomal peptide synthetases. Structure 9, R3≠R9. Nardini, M., and Dijkstra, B.W. (1999). / hydrolase fold enzymes: the family keeps growing. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 9, 732≠737. Li, J., Derewenda, U., Dauter, Z., Smith, S., and Derewenda, Z.S. (2000). Crystal structure of the Escherichia coli thioesterase II, a homolog of the human Nef binding enzyme. Nat. Struct. Biol. 7, 555≠559. Bellizzi, J.J., III, Widom, J., Kemp, C., Lu, J.Y., Das, A.K., Hofmann, S.L., and Clardy, J. (2000). The crystal structure of palmitoyl protein thioesterase 1 and the molecular basis of infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 4573≠4578. Devedjiev, Y., Dauter, Z., Kuznetsov, S.R., Jones, T.L., and Derewenda, Z.S. (2000). Crystal structure of the human acyl protein ∞ thioesterase I from a single X-ray data set to 1.5 A. Struct. Fold. Des. 8, 1137≠1146. Schrag, J.D., Winkler, F.K., and Cygler, M. (1992). Pancreatic lipases: evolutionary intermediates in a positional change of catalytic carboxylates? J. Biol. Chem. 267, 4300≠4303. Winkler, F.K., D'Arcy, A., and Hunziker, W. (1990). Structure of human pancreatic lipase. Nature 343, 771≠774. Bourne, P.C., Isupov, M.N., and Littlechild, J.A. (2000). The atomic-resolution structure of a novel bacterial esterase. Struct. Fold. Des. 8, 143≠151. Bonmatin, J.M., Genest, M., Labbe, H., and Ptak, M. (1994). Solution three-dimensional structure of surfactin: a cyclic lipopeptide studied by 1H-NMR, distance geometry, and molecular dynamics. Biopolymers 34, 975≠986. Weber, T., Baumgartner, R., Renner, C., Marahiel, M.A., and Holak, T.A. (2000). Solution structure of PCP, a prototype for the peptidyl carrier domains of modular peptide synthetases. Struct. Fold. Des. 8, 407≠418. Wessels, P., von Dohren, H., and Kleinkauf, H. (1996). Biosynthe® sis of acylpeptidolactones of the daptomycin type. A comparative analysis of peptide synthetases forming A21978C and A54145. Eur. J. Biochem. 242, 665≠673. Hull, S.E., Karlsson, R., Main, P., Woolfson, M.M., and Dodson, E.J. (1978). The crystal structure of a hydrated gramicidin S-urea complex. Nature 275, 206≠207. Kuo, M., and Gibbons, W.A. (1979). Total assignments, including four aromatic residues, and sequence confirmation of the decapeptide tyrocidine A using difference double resonance. Qualitative nuclear overhauser effect criteria for beta turn and antiparallel beta-pleated sheet conformations. J. Biol. Chem. 254, 6278≠6287. Hendrickson, W.A., Horton, J.R., and LeMaster, D.M. (1990). Selenomethionyl proteins produced for analysis by multiwavelength anomalous diffraction (MAD): a vehicle for direct determination of three-dimensional structure. EMBO J. 9, 1665≠1672. Otwinowski, Z.M.W. (1996). Processing of X-ray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode. Methods Enzymol. 276, 307≠326. Terwilliger, T.C., and Berendzen, J. (1999). Automated MAD and MIR structure solution. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 55, 849≠861. Collaborative Computational Project, Number 4 (1994). The CCP4 suite: programs for protein crystallography. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 50, 760≠763. Jones, T.A., Zou, J.Y., Cowan, S.W., and Kjeldgaard, M. (1991). Improved methods for binding protein models in electron density maps and the location of errors in these models. Acta Crystallogr. A 47, 110≠119. Brunger, A.T., Adams, P.D., Clore, G.M., DeLano, W.L., Gros, P., Grosse-Kunstleve, R.W., Jiang, J.S., Kuszewski, J., Nilges, M., Pannu, N.S., et al. (1998). Crystallography and NMR system: a new software suite for macromolecular structure determination. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 54, 905≠921. Saito, F., Hori, K., Kanda, M., Kurotsu, T., and Saito, Y. (1994). Entire nucleotide sequence for Bacillus brevis Nagano Grs2

Structure 310

gene encoding gramicidin S synthetase 2: a multifunctional peptide synthetase. J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 116, 357≠367. 37. Turgay, K., Krause, M., and Marahiel, M.A. (1992). Four homologous domains in the primary structure of GrsB are related to domains in a superfamily of adenylate-forming enzymes. Mol. Microbiol. 6, 529≠546. 38. Mootz, H.D., and Marahiel, M.A. (1997). The tyrocidine biosynthesis operon of Bacillus brevis: complete nucleotide sequence and biochemical characterization of functional internal adenylation domains. J. Bacteriol. 179, 6843≠6850. 39. Laskowski, R.J., Macarthur, M.W., Moss, D.S., and Thornton, J.M. (1993). PROCHECK: a program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 26, 283≠290. Accession Numbers Atomic coordinates for SrfTE have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank under accession code 1jmk.

