ABB
Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 464 (2007) 130­137 www.elsevier.com/locate/yabbi

An intrinsic ATPase activity of phospho-MEK-1 uncoupled from downstream ERK phosphorylation
Cynthia M. Rominger a, Michael D. Schaber a, Jingsong Yang a, Richard R. Gontarek a, Kurt L. Weaver b, Timothy Broderick b, Luke Carter b, Robert A. Copeland c, Earl W. May c,*
Department of Enzymology and Mechanistic Pharmacology, GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals, 1250 South Collegeville Road, Collegeville, PA 19426, USA b Department of Gene Expression and Protein Biochemistry, GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals, P.O. Box 13398, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA c Department of Oncology Biology, GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals, 1250 South Collegeville Road, Mail Code UP1450, Collegeville, PA 19426, USA Received 19 January 2007, and in revised form 30 March 2007 Available online 17 April 2007
a

Abstract We have developed a highly sensitive assay of MEK-mediated ATP hydrolysis by coupling the formation of ADP to NADH oxidation through the enzymes pyruvate kinase and lactate dehydrogenase. Robust ATP hydrolysis is catalyzed by phosphorylated MEK in the absence of the protein substrate ERK. This ERK-uncoupled ATPase activity is dependent on the phosphorylation status of MEK and is abrogated by the selective MEK kinase inhibitor U0126. ADP production is concomitant with Raf-mediated phosphorylation of MEK. Based on this finding, a coupled Raf/MEK assay is developed for measuring the Raf activity. A kinetic treatment derived under steady-state assumptions is presented for the analysis of the reaction progress curve generated by this coupled assay. We have shown that inhibitory potency of selective Raf inhibitors can be determined accurately by this assay. Ó 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: MAPK signal transduction; MEK; Raf; ERK; Intrinsic ATPase; Kinase; Inhibitor; Screening assay

The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)1 signal transduction pathway is a critical component of cellular growth, differentiation and response to stress. Within this pathway, MAP kinase (Raf) activates--through specific phosphorylation--MAP kinase (MEK). MEK in turn phosphorylates, and thus activates, MAP kinase (ERK). The activation of ERK then leads to phosphorylationdependent regulation of a number of transcription factors, including the AP-1 components c-Fos and c-Jun. The protein kinase components of this pathway have been widely recognized as potential targets for intervention in aberrant
*

Corresponding author. Fax: +1 610 917 6665. E-mail address: Earl.May@gsk.com (E.W. May). 1 Abbreviations used: MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase; DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; PEP, phosphoenol pyruvate; BSA, bovine serum albumin; DTT, 1,4-dithiothreitol. 0003-9861/$ - see front matter Ó 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.abb.2007.04.004

cell proliferation, in diseases such as cancer, inflammatoryand autoimmune-diseases. Hence, a number of groups have set out to identify selective inhibitors of individual enzymes of the MAPK pathway [1]. MEK activity is critical to the MAPK pathway, and inhibitors of the MEK family of protein kinases have been identified and shown to inhibit downstream ERK phosphorylation and concomitant cellular proliferation in several cell types. The compounds U0126 [2] and PD 098059 [3] were among the first selective MEK inhibitors to be identified through random library screening methods. The vast majority of known protein kinase inhibitors function by competing with ATP for binding to their enzyme targets [4]. In contrast, U0126 and PD 098059 share the novel feature of being noncompetitive with respect to both substrates of the enzymatic reaction (ATP and ERK). While both of these compounds are potent and cell-permeable inhibitors of MEK, neither

C.M. Rominger et al. / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 464 (2007) 130­137

131

compound is optimal for pharmacological use in humans. More recently, two analogues of PD 098059 (PD 184352 and PD 0325901), which bind MEK in a way similar to U0126 and PD 098059, have entered human clinical trials for the treatment of cancer [5,6]. Because of the potential utility of MEK inhibitors in human medicine, there has been considerable interest in understanding the enzymatic mechanism of MEK catalysis. It is well established that phosphorylation of the downstream substrate ERK is the key physiological function of MEK. The details of the reaction mechanism for MEK-catalyzed phosphorylation of ERK were reported by Horiuchi et al. [7]. The enzyme follows a bi­bi random ternary complex mechanism in which both substrates must bind together to form an intermediary MEK­ATP­ERK complex, but the order of substrate binding is not compulsory. Thus productive catalysis can be initiated either by formation of a MEK­ATP binary complex, followed by subsequent ERK binding, or by formation of a MEK­ ERK complex with subsequent ATP binding. In the studies of MEK-mediated phosphorylation of ERK, it has been assumed that phosphoryl transfer does not occur until the phospho-acceptor substrate ERK is bound to MEK. Indeed, the random ordered mechanism described by Horiuchi et al. [7] requires this restriction on productive ATP hydrolysis. In the present paper we demonstrate, however, that MEK is capable of catalyzing an intrinsic ATPase reaction. To our knowledge, no evidence has been reported previously of a basal ATP hydrolysis activity of MEK that is uncoupled from ERK phosphorylation. We show that while this activity is uncoupled from ERK phosphorylation, the two reactions share some common determinants of MEK activity. Like ERK phosphorylation, the uncoupled ATPase activity of MEK is dependent on the phosphorylation state of MEK and it can be inhibited by the ATP-noncompetitive MEK inhibitor U0126. We developed a coupled assay of B-Raf activity based on the intrinsic ATPase activity of MEK. Kinetic analysis of the coupled system is presented, and the advantages and limitations of this assay are discussed.
Materials and methods Chemicals and reagents
ATP was purchased from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Inc. Buffers (MOPS, MES and Tris), EGTA, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), NADH, MgCl2, NaCl, Brij-35, sucrose, phosphoenol pyruvate (PEP), b-glycerol phosphate, phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, and bovine serum albumin (BSA) were from Sigma­Aldrich. Tween 20 and U0126 were purchased from Calbiochem, and 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT) was from Roche. GW429274 was synthesized by the Medicinal Chemistry Department of GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceutical Company as previously described (compound 4 of Lackey et al. [8]).

Dundee Kinase Consortium and was $80% pure as judged by SDS­ PAGE with silver staining. The enzyme was stored at À80 °C in storage buffer (50 mM Tris­HCl, pH 7.5, 270 mM sucrose, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EGTA, 0.1% 2-mercaptoethanol, 0.02% Brij 35, 1 mM benzamidine, 0.2 mM PMSF). MEK-1: non-phosphorylated (non-activated) human MEK-1 was overexpressed in Escherichia coli BL21[DE3]/pRR692 as an N-terminal fusion to GST. After purification on glutathione Sepharose-4FF, the GST tag was cleaved with TEV protease. The cleaved MEK-1 was further purified by glutathione Sepharose affinity chromatography followed by size exclusion chromatography on Superdex-200. The final enzyme preparation was P76% pure as judged by SDS­PAGE with silver staining. It was stored at À80 °C in PBS + 5% glycerol. PhosphoMEK (88% pure) was supplied by Upstate as a fusion with N-terminal GST and C-terminal His6 tags; this enzyme was activated by the supplier using C-Raf and was re-purified using nickel/NTA agarose. PK/LDH: rabbit muscle pyruvate kinase and lactate dehydrogenase was acquired from Sigma­Aldrich as a 100· stock (1000 U/ml PK, 700 U/ml LDH) and stored at À20° in buffered aqueous glycerol solution (50%).

Measurement of MEK ATPase activity stimulated by B-Raf
Reactions monitoring the MEK ATPase were assembled in two parts. First, an appropriate amount of 2· Activator Mix was prepared: 0.5 nM V600E B-Raf (or as indicated), 20 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 0.01% Tween 20, 1 mM DTT, 5 mM EGTA, 0.1 mg/ml BSA, 10 mM MgCl2. Then the appropriate amount of 2· Enzyme Mix was prepared: 0.6 lM MEK (or as indicated), 2 mM ATP, 20 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 0.01% Tween 20, 1 mM DTT, 5 mM EGTA, 0.1 mg/ml BSA, 10 mM MgCl2, 1.8 mM NADH, 2 mM PEP, 2· PK/LDH. For experiments containing inhibitors, 1 ll of compounds diluted in 100% DMSO was delivered to the bottom of each well of a dry 96-well reaction plate (USA Scientific Plastics, Greiner #5665-0101). Following the addition of 24 ll of 2· Activator Mix to each well, reactions were started by delivery of 25 ll of 2· Enzyme mix. Final reaction conditions were as follows (or as reported): 0.25 nM V600E B-Raf, 300 nM MEK, 1 mM ATP, 20 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 0.01% Tween 20, 1 mM DTT, 5 mM EGTA, 0.1 mg/ ml BSA, 10 mM MgCl2, 900 lM NADH, 1 mM PEP, 10 U/ml PK, 7 U/ml LDH, 5% DMSO. Reaction progress was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 340 nm (A340) every 30 s at room temperature for 4 h (or as reported) on a Spectramax Plus plate reader (Molecular Devices, Inc.). Standard curves were used to convert the A340 values to moles of ADP formed. A low basal signal measured in the absence of added ATP is likely due to carryover of nucleotide from enzyme preparations. Progress curves were fit to a second-order polynomial equation as described in Results. For concentration-response plots of B-Raf activity, the acceleration coefficients were tabulated, and the percent maximal acceleration due to B-Raf was plotted as a function of inhibitor concentration. Three parameter (maximum value, midpoint (IC50), and Hill coefficient) fits were conducted on the concentration response curves. Assays of the intrinsic ATPase activity of commercially obtained phospho-MEK were performed in a similar fashion, except that the Activator Mix was not included for these reactions.

Inorganic phosphate detection
Detection of inorganic phosphate was performed using the EnzChek Phosphate Assay Kit from Molecular Probes according to the supplier's instructions. Reactions were prepared as for the standard ATPase assay with the following changes: 400 lM 2-amino-6-mercapto-7-methyl-purine riboside (MESG) was used as a substrate instead of 900 lM NADH, and 1 U/ml PNP was used as the coupling enzyme instead of 1· PK/LDH. Inorganic phosphate evolution was monitored over time by following the increase of the absorbance at 360 nm of the MESG cleavage product 2amino-6-mercapto-7-methyl-purine.

Enzyme sources
B-Raf: full-length His-tagged Human B-Raf V600E (clone number DU630, molecular weight 88,479) was acquired from the University of

132

C.M. Rominger et al. / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 464 (2007) 130­137

Quantitative Western blot analysis
Aliquots (30 ll) from various time points in the ATPase reactions were added to 10 ll 4· Laemmli sample buffer and incubated for 2 min at 80 °C. Samples were loaded on 12% Bis­Tris polyacrylamide gels (Invitrogen) and electroblotted to nitrocellulose membranes. Blots were incubated for 30 min in blocking buffer (Rockland, Gilbertsville, PA) followed by incubation for 16 h at 4 °C with primary antibodies diluted 1:1000 in TBS-T (50 mM Tris 7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 0.1% Tween 20) + 5% BSA. The primary antibodies used were: for phospho-MEK detection, rabbit-anti-phospho-MEK and for total MEK detection, rabbit-anti-MEK (Cell Signaling Technology). Following the primary antibody incubations the blots were washed in TBS-T and reacted in the dark for 1 h at 24 °C with a 1:5000 dilution of goat-antirabbit-AlexaFluor680 (Molecular Probes) prepared in 0.5· Rockland blocking buffer. Detection of antibody binding was with the Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (Li-Cor Biosciences), and the intensity of bands was quantified with Odyssey Application Software v1.2.

Results The intrinsic ATPase activity of phospho-MEK A generic scheme for measuring MEK-catalyzed ADP production via coupling to the PK/LDH system is illustrated in Fig. 1. We initially attempted to use this assay to follow indirectly the MEK-catalyzed phosphorylation of its downstream substrate, ERK. In the process of validating this assay format we ran a control experiment in which the ERK protein was absent. To our surprise we found that phosphorylated MEK was capable of catalyzing robust ATP hydrolysis to ADP in the absence of ERK. As illustrated in Fig. 2, this intrinsic ATPase activity is dependent on MEK phosphorylation by one of the upstream Raf kinases; the non-phosphorylated form of MEK is devoid of this activity. The ATPase activity was also abrogated by saturating concentrations of the MEK inhibitor U0126 (Fig. 2). Thus phosphorylation state and small molecule inhibitors that affect the protein kinase activity of MEK likewise affect the intrinsic ATP hydrolysis activity of this enzyme. We confirmed that the activity observed in the PK/LDH coupled assay was due to MEK-catalyzed ATP hydrolysis by measuring the other hydrolysis product of the reaction, inorganic phosphate. We observed a stoichi-

Fig. 2. An intrinsic ATPase activity, dependent on MEK phosphorylation. A series of experiments were conducted using the PK/LDH system to measure the production of ADP in a reaction containing 1 mM ATP by monitoring the decrease in NADH absorbance at 340 nm. h: 200 nM unphosphorylated MEK, n: 200 nM phospho-MEK + 100 lM U0126, s: 200 nM phospho-MEK.

Fig. 1. A generic scheme for measuring the MEK-catalyzed production of ADP via coupling to the PK/LDH system.

ometric relationship between ADP and inorganic phosphate production, both catalyzed by phosphorylated MEK (data not shown). The intrinsic ATPase activity of phospho-MEK yields essentially linear progress curves of ADP production with time over a range of phospho-MEK and ATP concentrations. There is some slight curvature associated with these progress curves, which may be the result of autophosphorylation by phospho-MEK of a small subpopulation of non-phosphorylated MEK in the commercial samples of phospho-MEK (vide infra). Nevertheless, the progress curves are reasonably well fit by a linear function. This behavior allows us to titrate ATP into the assay at a fixed phospho-MEK concentration of 50 nM. We find that the initial velocity of ATP hydrolysis is a saturable function of ATP concentration, as expected for an enzymatic reaction (Fig. 3a). From fitting of the data in Fig. 3a to the Michaelis­Menten equation we obtain a velocity plot (Fig. 3b) from which we can estimate the steady-state kinetic constants for this reaction. These values are summarized in Table 1, where they are compared with the steady-state kinetic constants for MEK-catalyzed ERK phosphorylation [7]. We see from this table that the value of kcat is greater for the uncoupled ATPase activity than that for the ERK-kinase activity of MEK, by a factor of ca. 45-fold. It has been suggested that for some kinases ADP release, following phospho-acceptor peptide/protein product release, is rate-limiting to overall kinase turnover [9]. If this is the case for MEK, it may be that this rate limitation is relieved for the uncoupled ATPase reaction, thus accounting for the increased value of kcat. The acceleration of kcat is counterbalanced by a ca. 16-fold increase in the KM for ATP for the uncoupled reaction. The combination of these two opposing effects results in very comparable values (within 3-fold of one another) of catalytic efficiency (as measured by the second-order rate constant, kcat/KM) for the two MEK-catalyzed reactions.

C.M. Rominger et al. / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 464 (2007) 130­137

133

Fig. 4. Effect of ERK concentration on the uncoupled production of ADP by phospho-MEK. A three parameter (maximum value, midpoint (IC50), and Hill coefficient) fit is conducted on the concentration­response data, yielding an IC50 of 420 ± 15 nM.

dent with the measured KM of ERK in the MEK catalyzed phosphorylation reaction [7]. These data suggest that formation of the MEK­ERK­ATP ternary complex is sufficient to abrogate the uncoupled ATPase activity of MEK.

The coupled B-Raf activity assay To characterize further the dependence of this ATPase activity on MEK phosphorylation status, we titrated phosphorylated MEK in the ATPase assay and found that the initial velocity of ADP production was a linear function of phospho-MEK concentration over the range 0­200 nM (data not shown). These findings provide a unique tool for the development of a coupled assay to measure B-Raf activity. In this assay (Fig. 1), B-Raf initiates the phosphorylation of MEK to its active form, phospho-MEK (P-MEK). The ATPase activity of P-MEK is then followed continuously by the PK/LDH reactions. As shown in Figs. 2 and 5, in the absence of B-Raf unphosphorylated MEK displays no intrinsic ATPase activity. When B-Raf is included in the assay, however, we observe an accelerating ADP production as phospho-MEK formation is catalyzed by B-Raf (Fig. 5). That this increasing rate of ADP production is associated with increasing concentration of phospho-MEK was confirmed by direct measurement of phospho-MEK concentration by Western blotting at different time points within the acceleration phase of the progress curve (data not shown). The complete reaction progress curve (ADP vs. time) of such a coupled assay contains three phases as illustrated by the reaction catalyzed by 2 nM B-Raf in Fig. 6a. The initial phase is associated with the basal ATPase activity from MEK or contaminating P-MEK in the MEK preparation (observed at very low level in the current assay). The following acceleration phase represents B-Raf catalyzed conversion of MEK to P-MEK. After the complete conversion of MEK, the reaction reaches the final phase

Fig. 3. (a) The dependence of the uncoupled ATPase activity of MEK on ATP concentration. Various concentrations of ATP were delivered to reactions with 50 nM phospho-MEK. ATP concentration range, j: 2000 lM, .: 1500 lM, d: 1000 lM, h: 800 lM, n: 600 lM, ,: 400 lM, e: 200 lM, s:100 lM, ·: 50 lM, +: no ATP. (b) The velocity of uncoupled ATP hydrolysis is a saturable function of ATP concentration. The velocities (from the slopes of linear fits of the data) of the reactions in (a) are plotted as a function of ATP concentration and fit to the Michaelis­Menten equation. Table 1 Steady-state kinetic constants for MEK uncoupled ATPase activity compared to those for MEK-mediated ERK-kinase activity Kinetic constant kcat (sÀ1) ATP KM (lM) kcat/KM (·10À3 MÀ1 sÀ1)
a

Uncoupled ATPase activity 0.810 ± 0.003 90.7 ± 14.8 8.9

ERK-kinase activitya 0.018 ± 0.001 5.58 ± 1.00 3.3

Data from [7].

While the two enzymatic reactions of MEK have similar catalytic efficiencies, they appear to be mutually exclusive reactions. Titration of the MEK ATPase assay with the down stream phospho-acceptor protein ERK leads to a concentration-dependent diminution of the uncoupled ATP hydrolysis, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Interestingly, the midpoint of this concentration­response plot (i.e., the IC50 for ERK inhibition of MEK ATPase activity) occurs at an ERK concentration of 420 ± 15 nM, which is coinci-

134

C.M. Rominger et al. / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 464 (2007) 130­137

Fig. 5. B-Raf phosphorylation of MEK initiates ATP hydrolysis. Progress curves of PK/LDH coupled reactions using 100 nM of unphosphorylated MEK with 1 mM ATP. n: MEK without B-Raf, e: 0.25 nM B-Raf without MEK, d: 0.25 nM B-Raf with MEK.

where the rate of ATP hydrolysis remains constant with no further change. In this coupled assay, the rate of ATP hydrolysis is determined by taking the first derivative (d[ADP]/dt) at any given time and is proportional to the amount of PMEK formed up to that time. The complete first derivative replot is hyperbolic with the transition phase followed by an asymptote representing the final phase, in which PMEK stays constant and is no longer formed (Fig. 6b). In this plot, the Y-intercept represents the ATPase activity at time zero and thus equals the activity of the initial phase shown in Fig. 6a. A plot of the rate of ATP hydrolysis (the first derivative) versus time is shown in Fig. 6b. In the presence of 2 nM B-Raf, the reaction results in significant MEK to P-MEK conversion and as a result, all three phases described above can be seen in the reaction progress curves (Fig. 6a and b). In this case, a kinetic treatment of the full progress curve is required for data analysis. However, in the presence of 0.2 nM B-Raf, the MEK to PMEK conversion during the reaction time frame is limited. Under this condition, only the early region of the progress curve (the initial phase and part of the acceleration phase) is observed (Fig. 6a), and the first derivative representing the formation of P-MEK is linear over time with no significant leveling-off (Fig. 6b). That the final phase has not been reached in this reaction is also evident from the observation that this reaction has not achieved the same terminal velocity as that in reaction at 2 nM B-Raf (Fig. 6a). With the same MEK concentration, all reactions that have reached the final phase should display the same final rate. Below we present a steady-state analysis for the B-Rafmediated phosphorylation of MEK that meets the following two criteria. First, the MEK to P-MEK conversion is limited so that the MEK concentration can be considered as a constant throughout the reaction. Second, during the entire course of the reaction, the change of [ATP] is not large enough to significantly affect the steady-state rates of B-Raf and P-MEK reactions. For a system under the above assumptions, the rate of ATP hydrolysis (the derivative d[ADP]/dt) is a linear func-

Fig. 6. (a) Progress curves of a B-Raf titration from 0.01 to 2 nM with 100 nM MEK. Progress curves at 2 and 0.2 nM B-Raf are in bold lines. The three phases are indicated on the progress curve at 2 nM B-Raf. The progress curve at 0.2 nM B-Raf has not reached the final phase during the course of the reaction. (b) First derivative replots of reaction progress curves at 2 and 0.2 nM B-Raf. The transition and the final phases are shown on the progress curves with 2 nM B-Raf. At 2 nM B-Raf, rate of ATP hydrolysis does not change after 60 min, suggesting that all MEK has been converted to P-MEK. However, at 0.2 nM B-Raf, the rate of ATP hydrolysis increases linearly within 120 min. The early scattering of data points is due to low signals at the beginning of reactions. (c) The acceleration coefficients derived from the data in (a) plotted as a function of B-Raf concentration.

tion of time and can be defined by Eq. (1). The amount of product (ADP) formation over time is thus defined by Eq. (2) which is derived by integrating Eq. (1) between 0 and t. Coefficient a is related to the B-Raf catalyzed MEK reaction and will be defined in the following derivation. It is clear from Eqs. (1) and (2) that coefficients b and c

C.M. Rominger et al. / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 464 (2007) 130­137

135

represent the concentrations of phospho-MEK and ADP, respectively, at time zero ([phospho-MEK]0 and [ADP]0). Under perfect assay conditions these two coefficients should both be zero, reflecting the absence of phosphoMEK and ADP at the initiation of the reaction. In practice, however, we found that it was most convenient to fit the progress curves to the empirical form of Eq. (2), in which the coefficient a is a constant reflecting the acceleration phase of the progress curve. d½ADP=dt ¼ 2at þ b ½ADP ¼ at þ bt þ c
2

ð1Þ ð2Þ

The slope 2a in the derivative vs. time plot (Eq. (1)) equals the ratio of P-MEK activity over time. Under steady-state conditions, P-MEK activity can be described by the Michaelis­Menten equation and hence a definition of the slope 2a can be written as the following: 2a ¼ k MEK ½phospho-MEK½ATP=ðK ATP þ ½ATPÞ=t cat M ð3Þ

where k MEK is the kcat value for the uncoupled ATPase cat activity of phospho-MEK and K ATP is the Michaelis conM stant of ATP for the phospho-MEK ATPase reaction. Since the steady-state assumption is also valid for the BRaf reaction (MEK >> B-Raf), the rate of the B-Raf catalysis ([P-MEK]/time) can also be described by the Michaelis­Menten equation as the following: ½Phospho-MEK=t ¼ k Raf ½Raf½MEK=ðK MEK þ ½MEKÞ cat M ð4Þ where k Raf is the kcat value of the Raf kinase activity and cat K MEK is the Michaelis constant for non-phosphorylated M MEK in the Raf kinase reaction, [MEK] is the concentration of non-phosphorylated MEK used in the reaction and is considered as a constant due to limited conversion to PMEK. By substituting Eq. (4) into (3), we get 0 10 1 1 @ k MEK A@k Raf ½RafA cat cat a¼ ð5Þ K MEK 2 1 þ K ATP M 1þ M
½ATP ½MEK

Again, under the steady-state assumption, coefficients b and c can be defined by the following equations: b¼ k MEK cat
M 1 þ ½ATP

carried out most of our subsequent analyses, the rate of ATP hydrolysis increases linearly with time within the 120 min reaction time, indicating limited MEK to P-MEK conversion (Fig. 6b). In addition, since pyruvate kinase is present in the assay in excess, the ATP in the reaction is constantly regenerated from ADP and PEP and can therefore be assumed constant. Hence, at 0.2 nM B-Raf within 120 min, our current assay meets the requirement for the steady-state treatment with limited conversion of MEK to P-MEK and no ATP depletion. For reaction progress curves generated at higher B-Raf concentrations, the early region that gives a linear first derivative plot can be used for the steady-state analysis. Data in Fig. 6a were replotted by taking the first derivative of product formation with respect to time (d[ADP]/ dt), as a function of time. Values of a at each concentration of B-Raf were determined by fitting the early linear portion of the replot at each B-Raf concentration into Eq. (1). As illustrated in Fig. 6c, the value of this coefficient is a linear function of B-Raf concentration, as expected from the form of Eq. (5). If the acceleration phase of the progress curves is indeed due to B-Raf-mediated formation of phospho-MEK, we should also observe a hyperbolic dependence of the acceleration coefficient a, on the initial concentration of non-phosphorylated MEK in the assay, again according to Eq. (5). This is confirmed by the MEK titration experiment (Fig. 7). The fitted K MEK is M 1.4 lM. To establish further that the acceleration phase of the progress curve was dependent on B-Raf activity, we tested the effect of a specific inhibitor of the Raf enzyme on the reaction. When the Raf inhibitor GW429374 was titrated into an assay system containing 0.25 nM B-Raf and 300 nM MEK, the progress curves displayed an inhibitor concentration-dependent diminution of the acceleration phase (Fig. 8a). A replot of the a coefficient value as a function of inhibitor concentration displays the sigmoidal concentration dependence expected for enzyme inhibition (Fig. 8b). Fitting of these data to a standard Langmuir isotherm [10] yields an IC50 for GW429374 inhibition of B-Raf activity of 12.7 ± 0.7 nM. This value is consistent

K ATP

½phospho-MEK0

ð6Þ ð7Þ

c ¼ ½ADP0

When the MEK concentration is held constant at 100 nM, and the B-Raf concentration is titrated (0­2 nM) in the assay, we observe changes in the acceleration phase of the progress curve (Fig. 6a). Similar progress curves are also observed if C-Raf is used in place of B-Raf for these experiments (not shown). The rate of ATP hydrolysis at various time points was derived from the first order derivative of the progress curve. While in the presence of 2 nM B-Raf, all the MEK has been converted to P-MEK within 60 min; in the presence of 0.2 nM B-Raf with which we

Fig. 7. The acceleration coefficients derived from the progress curve data were generated at various MEK concentrations. These data are fitted to Eq. (5) to generate a K MEK of 1.4 lM. M

136

C.M. Rominger et al. / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 464 (2007) 130­137

Fig. 8. Effects of the Raf inhibitor GW429374 on the progress curves for the B-Raf/MEK assay system. (a) Progress curves for the Raf inhibitor GW429374, at varying concentrations from 10 lM followed by 10 half-log dilutions to 0.03 nM, 0.25 nM B-Raf and 300 nM MEK1. (b) Fractional activity, derived from acceleration coefficients from the data in (a), fit to a standard Langmuir isotherm yields an IC50 for GW429374 inhibition of BRaf activity of 12.7 ± 0.7 nM.

with previous reports of the potency of this compound for inhibiting Raf [8]. In independent experiments we found that GW429374 had no direct effect on the ATPase activity of phospho-MEK (data not shown). Discussion Most protein kinases that have been investigated to date have been shown to follow a ternary complex reaction mechanism, with either a random or compulsory order of substrate binding. The MEK-catalyzed phosphorylation of ERK also follows a sequential mechanism with a random order of substrate addition. In the current study, a previously unknown intrinsic ATPase activity of phospho-MEK was defined. That this ATPase activity is directly catalyzed by MEK, and not the result of some contaminating enzyme, was demonstrated by the effects of MEK phosphorylation status, of a specific small molecule inhibitor of MEK (U0126), and of the presence of the downstream phospho-acceptor protein ERK on the observed ATPase activity. To further minimize the possi-

bility of a contaminating enzyme, KM determinations were conducted with three separate phospho-MEK preparations from two different purification protocols. Despite a range in purities (76%, 85%, and 98%), the measured KM values were close (91 ± 15, 77 ± 6, and 44 ± 4 lM; data not shown). All of these studies suggest that the intrinsic ATPase activity of MEK is sensitive to the same perturbations that affect the protein kinase activity of this enzyme. As expected, inclusion of the downstream protein substrate ERK was found to be inhibitory to uncoupled ADP production (Fig. 4). These data imply that the same ATP-binding active site is utilized by MEK for both ATPhydrolyzing activities. This intrinsic ATPase activity is not unique to MEK kinase. Despite the common utilization of a ternary complex mechanism by many kinases, there are known examples of kinases that demonstrate a basal ATPase activity that is uncoupled from phosphorylation of their protein substrate. Examples of kinases demonstrating this uncoupled ATPase activity include bovine brain protein kinase [11], phosphorylase kinase [12], p38 [13], and the MAP kinase ERK2 [14]. The uncoupled ATPase kcat of these other four kinases are 50- to 125-fold lower than their corresponding kinase kcat values. In contrast, the ATPase kcat of MEK is 55-fold greater than that of its kinase activity. However, as with MEK, the intrinsic ATPase activities of phosphorylase kinase, p38, and ERK2 all favor the same enzyme activation state as their respective kinase activities. One interesting characteristic of systems containing a branched ATPase pathway is that, when the transferase reaction is monitored, the substrate double titration experiment always generate intersecting double-reciprocal lines, regardless of whether the reaction follows a sequential or a ping-pong mechanism [15]. The exact mechanism should be determined by further inhibition and binding studies. The discovery of this ATPase activity of MEK is surprising, given that this activity would presumably be a futile expenditure of cellular ATP supplies in the context of signal transduction. What, if any, physiological role this uncoupled ATPase activity might play is unclear at present. Despite our inability to assess the physiological relevance of the uncoupled ATPase activity of MEK, this activity provides a convenient basis for in vitro assays of both MEK and Raf enzymatic activities. In particular, the coupled Raf/MEK assay format described here could prove useful in the study of selective inhibitors of either of these enzymes. Such a coupled assay has several advantages over the regular one-enzyme assay. First, with the coupling reaction catalyzed by the reporter enzyme, the signal generated by the target enzyme is significantly amplified. In the current study, for example, a low B-Raf concentration (<1 nM) is sufficient to produce robust signals. Second, with the coupled system, alternative assay formats can be evaluated including those that are only applicable to the reporter enzyme. For example, to determine directly the phosphorylation of MEK by B-Raf, a filter binding assay is usually used to measure the retention of

C.M. Rominger et al. / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 464 (2007) 130­137

137

the radioactive phospho-MEK on a filter membrane. This type of assay is discontinuous, time-consuming, and requires the use of radioactivity. By coupling to the MEK ATPase activity, the reaction can be monitored continuously and is less labor-intensive. Third, protein kinase assays typically employ the use of peptide substrates. The question remains whether the peptide substrates behave identically to the protein substrates. For example, studies on p38 MAP kinase a with peptide or protein substrates suggest that the kinetic mechanism of the protein kinase may change dependent on which substrate is used [16,17]. With the coupled assay, a physiologically relevant reporter enzyme can be used as the substrate of the target enzyme. Hence the assay is more reflective of the cellular activity of the target enzyme, as long as the assay signal is proportional to the concentration of the activated reporter enzyme. The kinetic analysis of the coupled assay presented in this paper is only valid when no significant substrate depletion (ATP) occurs and when the conversion of MEK to P-MEK is limited such that the MEK concentration is considered constant over the reaction time course. Under this condition, the first derivative of ADP production is linear over time. Such a linear relationship should always be checked before the application of the current steady-state kinetic analysis. In cases where such conditions are not met, a full progress curve analysis is required to appropriately analyze the data. This analysis is beyond the scope of the current paper. It is also worth noting that using the steady-state analysis, inhibitors of either the target enzyme or the reporter enzyme will diminish the acceleration coefficient a. Therefore, it is important to test inhibitors against the reporter enzyme separately. Despite some of the limitations of the coupled assay system, we believe that it can be widely applied to inhibitor discovery and characterization in the context of drug discovery efforts.

Acknowledgments The authors thank Peter Tummino, Zhihong Lai, and Symon Erskine for helpful discussions and comments on the manuscript. References
[1] J.S. Sebolt-Leopold, R. Herrera, Nat. Rev. Cancer 4 (2004) 937­947. [2] M.F. Favata, K.Y. Horiuchi, E.J. Manos, A.J. Daulerio, D.A. Stradl, W.S. Feeser, D.E. Van Dyk, W.J. Pitts, R.A. Earl, F. Hobbs, R.A. Copeland, R.L. Magolda, P.A. Scherle, J.M. Trzaskos, J. Biol. Chem. 273 (1998) 18623­18632. [3] D.T. Dudley, L. Pang, S.J. Decker, A.J. Bridges, A.R. Saltiel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92 (1995) 7686­7689. [4] P. Cohen, Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 1 (2002) 309­315. [5] J. Reinehart, A.A. Adjei, P.M. LoRusso, D. Waterhouse, J.R. Hecht, R.B. Natale, O. Hamid, M. Varterasian, P. Asbury, E.P. Kaldjian, S. Gulyas, D.Y. Mitchell, R. Herrera, J.S. Sebolt-Leopold, M.B. Meyer, J. Clin. Oncol. 22 (2004) 4456­4462. [6] P.M. LoRusso, A.A. Adejei, M. Varterasian, S. Gadgeel, J. Reid, D.Y. Mitchell, L. Hanson, P. DeLuca, L. Bruzek, J. Piens, P. Asbury, K. Van Becelaere, R. Herrera, J.S. Sebolt-Leopold, M.B. Meyer, J. Clin. Oncol. 23 (2005) 5281­5293. [7] K.Y. Horiuchi, P.A. Scherle, J.M. Trzaskos, R.A. Copeland, Biochemistry 37 (1998) 8879­8885. [8] K. Lackey, M. Cory, R. Davis, S.V. Frye, P.A. Harris, R.N. Hunter, D.K. Jung, O.B. McDonald, R.W. McNutt, M.R. Peel, R.D. Rutkowske, J.M. Veal, E.R. Wood, Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 10 (2000) 223­226. [9] J. Lew, S.S. Taylor, J.A. Adams, Biochemistry 36 (1997) 6717­6724. [10] R.A. Copeland, Evaluation of Enzyme Inhibitors in Drug Discovery: A Guide for Medicinal Chemists and Pharmacologists, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, 2005. [11] G.W. Moll, E.T. Kaiser, J. Biol. Chem. 251 (1976) 3993­4000. [12] H.K. Paudel, G.M. Carlson, J. Biol. Chem. 266 (1991) 16524­16529. [13] G. Chen, M.D. Porter, J.R. Bristol, M.J. Fitzgibbon, S. Pazhanisamy, Biochemistry 39 (2000) 2079­2087. [14] C.N. Prowse, J. Lew, J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 99­103. [15] R.C. Nordlie, Methods Enzymol. 87 (1982) 319­353. [16] P.V. LoGrasso, B. Frantz, A.M. Rolando, S.J. O'Keefe, J.D. Hermes, E.A. O'Neill, Biochemistry 36 (1997) 10422­10427. [17] A.E. Szafranska, K.N. Dalby, FEBS J. 272 (2005) 4631­4645.

