The AAA+ superfamily -- a myriad of motions
´ ´ Paul A Tucker1 and Laszlo Sallai2
ATPases associated with various cellular activities are aptly named. They are the engines that drive processes such as protein degradation, protein refolding, s54-dependent transcriptional activation, DNA helicase activity, DNA replication initiation, and cellular cargo transport. Recent structural information derived from biochemical studies, electron microscopy (EM), small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), and X-ray crystallography are beginning to show how, at an atomic level, some of these systems use the conformational changes generated during the ATP hydrolysis cycle. Structural highlights in the processes mentioned are provided by work on ClpX and p97, ClpB, PspF and NtrC, RuvBL1, DnaA and the papillomavirus E1 initiator protein and dynein. The results emphasize the versatility of the AAA+ core domain.
Addresses 1 EMBL Hamburg Outstation, c/o DESY, Notkestrasse 85, D22603 Hamburg, Germany 2 1st Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweiss University, Koranyi S u. 2/A, 1083 Budapest, Hungary Corresponding author: Tucker, Paul A (tucker@embl-hamburg.de) and ´ ´ Sallai, Laszlo (sallailaci@freemail.hu)

with contributions to the stability of the nucleotide-binding site made by arginine residues (the so-called `arginine fingers') from the adjacent protomer. Such a cyclic arrangement means that conformational changes generated by nucleotide binding and/or hydrolysis can be transmitted to an adjacent protomer allowing a sequential process that transduces ATP hydrolysis into mechanical motion, although ATP hydrolysis at random positions, or in concert within the oligomer, is also possible. The purpose of this article is not to provide a comprehensive review of the proteins containing this domain, but rather to emphasize what has been suggested in the past few years as to how the proteins transduce the energy derived from ATP hydrolysis. To do this, we will describe the newer results according to the type of biological process in which the AAA+ superfamily member is involved.

Protein unfolding and degradation
AAA+ domains in the form of one or two hexameric rings are essential parts of protease and chaperone machines whose function is to unwind polypeptide chains and deliver these through the central pore either to a protease subunit/chamber or to the refolding machinery. Prokaryotes do not contain 26S proteosomes found in eukaryotes, but they do contain large chambered proteases such as ClpXP and HslUV, which like the 19S regulatory subunit of the 26S proteosome include AAA+ domaincontaining proteins.
ClpXP

Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2007, 17:641­652 This review comes from a themed issue on Catalysis and regulation Edited by William N Hunter and Ylva Lindqvist

0959-440X/$ ­ see front matter # 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. DOI 10.1016/j.sbi.2007.09.012

Introduction
AAA+ proteins or, more correctly, proteins containing one or more AAA+ domains, belong to the much larger family of `P-loop' nucleoside triphosphate-binding proteins. AAA+ protomers consist of two core subdomains, one with two helices on one side and three on the other of a five-stranded parallel b-sheet, in a b2­b3­b4­b1­b5 arrangement, with an (ab)5 topology (the a/b subdomain), and the second an (a)4 subdomain (the a subdomain), by which the AAA+ proteins can be recognized [1]. The nucleotide-binding site is located between the two subdomains (Figure 1). Different clades of the superfamily have different insertions into this core structure, which have functional significance (reviewed in [2]). Sequence motifs identifying AAA+ proteins are the Walker A (the P-loop) and Walker B motifs and the sensor 1 and sensor 2 regions (Figure 1). AAA+ domains typically, but by no means always, form hexameric rings
www.sciencedirect.com

ClpXP consists of a hexameric ClpX AAA+ ring capping a barrel formed by two heptameric ClpP protease rings. In an elegant study, covalently linking active and inactive subunits of ClpX, it has been shown [3] that the mechanical work is generated by ATP hydrolysis in a single subunit of the AAA+ hexamer. The mechanism of action is by random, rather than concerted or sequential, ATP hydrolysis events.
FtsH

Aspects of the function, mechanism, and regulation of the AAA+-containing protease, FtsH, have been reviewed in [4]. Two more recent structures of the cytosolic region of FtsH from Thermus thermophilus [5] and Thermotoga maritima [6] provide information not available from the previously determined structures of the AAA+ domain alone which, although determined to high resolution, is monomeric and does not have nucleotide bound [7] in one case, or forms a spiral with 65 symmetry [8] in another case. The two new structures are similar in that the ring of protease domains has sixfold symmetry, however the AAA+ ring has twofold symmetry in T. maritima and
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2007, 17:641­652

642 Catalysis and regulation

Figure 1

(a and b) Detail of two AAA+ domains in yellow and green with the a subdomain a lighter shade. The yellow molecule is shown with bound ADP and Mg2+ in a gray ball and stick representation. The Walker A motif (GxxxxGK[T/S]), mutations in which inhibit nucleotide binding, is colored blue. The Walker B motif (hhhhDE), mutations in which reduce the efficacy of ATP hydrolysis, is shown in red. The sensor 1 region at the end of b4 (often N or T) is shown in cyan. The sensor 2 region at the end of a7 is shown in magenta. Mutations in either sensor 1 or sensor 2 regions can impair ATP hydrolysis. The arginine fingers in the second region of homology in the adjacent protomer are colored purple. (c) Representative AAA+ domain protein, Hsl1UV, showing the organization of the hexameric AAA+ ring (pink/yellow and red looking down the central axis) and its connection to the functional domains, in this case a protease (salmon/light green and green).

threefold symmetry in T. thermophilus. This asymmetry occurs despite the fact that in both cases all AAA+ domains contain bound ADP. This structural information, coupled with the sixfold symmetry observed in the structure of the isolated protease domain of the Aquifex aeolicus ortholog [5], suggests that it is the protease domain that provides the driving force for hexamerization allowing the AAA+ domain to adopt different relative positions to mechanically translocate the substrate through the central pore into the protease domain via a tunnel. In each structure there are six independent molecules and superimposing the AAA+ domains (Figure 2a and b) shows that the number of different orientations of the protease domain relative to the AAA+ domain follows the symmetry. There are three different orientations for the T. maritima structure and two for the T. thermophilus structure, suggesting that crystal packing may well influence the relative orientation of the AAA+ domain to the protease hexamer, rather than being due to the existence of `open' and `closed' conformations. Despite this note of caution, the maximum movement (Figure 2c and d) is for the part of the AAA+ domain that sits above the center of the ring of protease domains, in
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2007, 17:641­652

agreement with a pulling mechanism once the protein to be degraded has been recognized.
p97

Proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum need to be transferred to the cytosol for degradation by the proteasome. In this process, called ER-associated degradation (ERAD), the cytosolic p97 AAA+-containing protein is known to be important. p97 is especially interesting because its function (ERAD, membrane fusion, transcription factor processing, and spindle disassembly) varies according to the adaptor proteins to which it binds. p97 and its homologs have been reviewed in some detail recently [9]. The monomer has an N-terminal domain (N), which is the primary site for binding of the adaptors, and two AAA+ domains (D1 and D2). It forms hexameric structures containing two AAA+ rings (Figure 3a), which have been the subject of structural investigations by electron microscopy (EM), small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) [10], and macromolecular crystallography (MX) [11]. The results are not totally in agreement and the mechanism of action is still unclear. The balance of evidence suggests
www.sciencedirect.com

The AAA+ superfamily -- a myriad of motions Tucker and Sallai 643

Figure 2

(a) Cartoon representations superimposing the AAA+ domains of the Thermus thermophilus (pink and light blue) and Thermotoga maritima (blue, red, and green) FtsH proteins. (b) The same representations superimposing the hexamerization domains showing as well the structure of the isolated hexamerization domain (lemon). (c) and (d) are two extreme orientations showing the movement of the AAA+ domain relative to the hexamerization domain and indicating how this movement might feed a polypeptide into the protease domain.

that the D1 ring binds ADP relatively tightly, whereas the protomers of the D2 ring are the active ATPases. Thus the conformational switch of the ATP cycle is passed from the D2 ring through the D1 ring to the N-domain. From four medium-resolution crystal structures [11], the major structural change occurs upon nucleotide binding and then again following nucleotide release from the D2 protomer. It involves the ordering of the two arginine fingers in the D2 sensor 2 region (Figure 1) in the ATPbound state, affects the rigidity of the D2 a-domain, and results in small changes in the relative orientation of the domains and subdomains (Figure 3b). The SAXS results, whilst disagreeing in the extent of the changes, also show movement of the N-domains during the ATP hydrolysis cycle of the D2 protomers [10]. Interestingly mutation of the arginine fingers in D2 has been shown to abolish ATPase activity, whereas the same mutations in D1 reduce ubiquitin binding [12]. The more recent structural work has concentrated on investigating complexes with the adaptor proteins. The p97/Ufd1­Np14 complex is involved in ERAD and regulated ubiquitin-dependent processing. The Ufd1­ Np14 complex has been shown from cryoEM reconstructions to be an elongated heterodimer [13]. In the same paper using negative stain EM the Ufd1­Np14 heterodimer was shown to occupy only one site at the periphery of the p97 hexamer. It is possible that the binding affects the conformation of the other N-domains preventing a second interaction. The heterodimer was shown to bind GST-tagged ubiquitin, presumably via the N-terminal domain, the structure of which has been determined by
www.sciencedirect.com

NMR [14]. The yeast Udf1 N-terminal domain contains distinct mono-ubiquitin-binding and a poly-ubiquitinbinding sites and is similar in structure to the N-domain of p97. Np14, which binds to the C-terminal region of Udf1, also has an ubiquitin-binding domain, the structure of which has recently been reported [15]. In the same paper, the interaction surface between the Np14 UBD domain and the p97-N-domain (Figure 3c) was mapped by chemical shift perturbation studies to a negatively charged groove between the two subdomains of the p97-N-domain. It seems that a number of adaptor proteins bind to the same p97-N region by subtly different ubiquitin-like motifs, thus making binding highly specific but mutually exclusive. The p97/p47 complex is involved in membrane fusion. Based upon cryoEM reconstructions of the complex in the presence of AMPNP and ADP, 1H-15N HSQC NMR identifying the p47 SEP domain as a trimerization domain, the crystal structure of the p97(N-D1)/p47 UBX domain complex, and the solution structure of the three p47 domains, Beuron et al. [16] have proposed a model (Figure 3d) of how the domain motions that take place during the ATP hydrolysis cycle of the hexameric p97 leads to a rearrangement of the three p47 UBA domains which in turn might drive t­t SNARE (soluble NSF attachment receptor) disassembly. The structural information is of great general importance because the implication is that, in this case at least, there is no sequential ATP hydrolysis cycle, however it should be realized that the adaptors themselves could easily influence the mechanism.
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2007, 17:641­652

644 Catalysis and regulation

Figure 3

(a) The organization of p97 (PDB ID 1yql). The D2 AAA+ ring is colored blue, light blue, and magenta; the D1 AAA+ ring red, pink, and tan; and the Ndomains green, light green, and yellow. (b) The approximate domain and subdomain rotations observed upon release of ADP (adapted from [11]). The N-domain is colored tan, the a/b, and a subdomains of D1 colored gray and pink and those of D2 blue and green. (c) The interaction between the ubiquitin-binding domain of Np14 and the N-terminal domain of p97 as determined from NMR spectroscopy. (d) The proposed rearrangement of p47 domains within the p97­p47 complex when p97 has AMPPNP (left) and ADP (right) bound. The rotation (left, lower arrow) of the p97-N-domains (blue) and the bound p47 UBX domains (yellow) generate a splaying (left, red arrow) of the UBA domains (red). The trimeric SEP domains (orange) remain bound to the center of the AAA+ ring (reproduced from [16]).

Aggregate disassembly
AAA+-containing proteins are also involved in disassembly of large protein aggregates that have escaped proteolysis. Molecular chaperones and their importance in protein quality control have been reviewed in [17].
ClpB

ClpB has an N-terminal domain followed by a two AAA+ domains (D1 and D2) separated by the M domain (Figure 4a), the a3 helix of which has been reported [18] to be required for DnaK-dependent shuffling of aggregated
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2007, 17:641­652

proteins. It has been shown, for the T. thermophilus protein, that the two AAA+ cassettes do not need to be covalently linked for chaperone activity [19]. Separately the domains differ, with D1 alone having no ATPase activity and weak nucleotide binding, whilst the D2 is very active. Upon complex formation oligomerization is re-established and D1 appears to repress the activity of D2 suggesting that ATP hydrolysis in D2 drives the threading motor, whilst D1 modulates the chaperone activity. The T. thermophilus and its trap mutant (so called because this double Walker B mutant, E271A/E668A, traps substrate) has been used to
www.sciencedirect.com

The AAA+ superfamily -- a myriad of motions Tucker and Sallai 645

Figure 4

(a) The structure of a monomer of ClpB showing the two AAA+ domains, D1 and D2, in green and blue. The M domain in red is inserted into the a subdomain of D1. The N-terminal domain is colored cyan. (b) Based on modeling the monomer structure into electron micrographs of ClpB in different nucleotide-binding states it seems that, in the ATP-bound state, the loop at D1 of the central pore is stabilized allowing highaffinity substrate binding in which Tyr243 (purple) plays an important role (reproduced from [20]). (c) The AAA+ domain of VPS4B in the same orientation as for the ClpB D2 domain, showing the insertion of the b-domain (tan) into the a subdomain of the AAA+ unit. (d) The proposed model for ESCRIT-III disassembly by VPS4 (reproduced from [22]), in which ATP binding stabilizes dodecamerization, thus recruiting the LIP5 adaptors. The MIT domains (yellow balls) interact with ESCRIT-III, and allow it to be removed through the central pore.

visualize, by cryo-electron microscopy, the two proteins in ATP, AMPPNP, ADP and Apo states, and to provide models (based on the monomeric ClpB structure) in each state [20]. The work shows a difference between the ATP-bound trap mutant and AMPNP-bound native enzyme suggesting that AMPNP is not a good ATP analog. In the ATP activated state, the loops surrounding the central pore of D1 are stabilized suggesting that this feature of this state is responsible for substrate binding (Figure 4b). This is similar to HslUV, where ATP and Mg2+ are required for tight substrate binding.

a hydrophobic surface are important for phospholipid binding by both molecules.
VPS4

Maintenance of organelle function
PEX1

PEX1, which is required for correct peroxisomal function, has, like p97, the N-D1­D2 domain architecture and is predicted to have a hexameric structure. It is thought to interact with the peroxisomal membrane via a phospholipid-binding region in the N-domain [21]. The structure of PEX1-N is known and is very similar to that of the Ndomain of p97. Structural and sequence alignments suggest that an arginine residue (R144 in PEX1-N) and
www.sciencedirect.com

VPS4 is essential in the process of multivesicular body sorting, and is of particular interest because it is necessary for the budding of HIV-1. The structures of the AAA+ domain [22] as well as the N-terminal MIT domain (which interacts with the C-terminal half of ESCRIT-III [23]) have been reported. The full-length proteins dimerize in solution but form double-ring structures upon binding ATP. The AAA+ region (Figure 4c) is interesting because it contains a b-domain insert into the a subdomain, has an additional b-strand at the N-terminus and an additional helix at the Cterminus contributing to the core a/b subdomain. The b-domain interacts with adaptor proteins, but the budding of HIV-1 was inhibited by mutations in the loop assumed to be at the center of the modeled double-ring structure. The model suggests a mechanism whereby ESCRIT-III lattices can be disassembled from the endosomal membrane (Figure 4d).
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2007, 17:641­652

646 Catalysis and regulation

Transcriptional activator proteins
The s54-dependent transcription in bacteria relies on the activity of enhancer-binding proteins (EBPs) that act at distant activator sites on the DNA (reviewed recently in [24]). Most of these proteins consist of three domains, the N-terminal regulatory (R), the central AAA+ (C), and the C-terminal DNA-binding (D) domain. The energy of ATP is used to facilitate the formation of the `open' complex of the a2bb0 s54 RNA polymerase (RNAP) at the promoter region of the DNA. Structural studies during recent years have attempted to elucidate the activation mechanism of EBPs and the initiation of s54-driven transcription. In the inactive state, EBPs usually form dimers that bind to tandem sites in prokaryotic enhancers. Upon activation, by phosphorylation, they form oligomers that are capable of hydrolyzing ATP and initiating transcription. The protein family contains at least two classes depending whether an R deletion construct is active (negative regulation by the R domain) or inactive (positive regulation). The general nitrogen regulatory protein 1 (NtrC1) from the hyperthermophile A. aeolicus and the C4-dicarboxylate transport transcriptional regulatory protein DctD from Sinorhizobium meliloti belong to the first class, whereas NtrC from Salmonella typhimurium, the phage shock protein F (PspF) from Escherichia coli, and the hydrogenase G (ZraR) from S. typhimurium are members of the second class. The L1 (between the R and C domains) and L2 (connecting the C and D domains) linkers structurally distinguish the two classes. L1 in NtrC1 and DctD forms a pseudo-coiled-coil structure, which is part of the R domain dimerization interface that is responsible for keeping the C domain in the inactive state. In contrast to this, the R domain of NtrC is monomeric in solution, and the L1 linker is unstructured. The PspF protein lacks the R domain, but is positively regulated by the PspA membrane protein that is considered to be an `escaped' R domain of PspF. The structure of the L2 linker, between the C and D domains, anticorrelates with that of the L1 linker. A C-terminal helix, responsible for the dimerization of the D domains, is present in NtrC and ZraR, while it is missing in NtrC1 and DctD [25]. In negative regulation, the R domains, which consist of five a-helices and five b-strands, form homodimers that inhibit the intrinsic ATPase activity of the C domain dimer. Phosphorylation of the R domain leads to a conformational change that allows the C domain to assemble the oligomeric ring and thus activate the transcription. Solution structures of the apo and Mg2+/BeF3À-activated DctD R domain derived from SAXS data superimpose well with the phosphorylated R domain dimers of NtrC1 [26]. Upon activation, a change in the position of the wellconserved T79 in NtrC1 leads to a rearrangement of a5 and b5 that destabilizes the R domain dimer. The pseudo-coiled-coil structure of the L1 linker, that is the
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2007, 17:641­652

continuation of a5, is a key component of the activation procedure as well. In the `off' state, it forms a pair of crossed helices repressing the C domain, whilst in the `on' state they are no longer in contact, allowing the C domains to oligomerize. In agreement with this, deletion of the R domain yields constitutively active NtrC1 [25]. By contrast, for the positively regulated NtrC the presence of the R domain is essential for activity. The Cterminal part of the L2 linker between the C and D domains forms two a-helices that are responsible for the dimerization of the protein in the `off' state. SAXS and EM data showed that, in the `on' state, the R domain of one subunit in the hexamer contacts the C domain of the adjacent protomer and stabilizes the ring structure at the outer edge. It is probable that the phosphorylationdependent activation proceeds through the stabilization of back-to-front dimers instead of front-to-front dimers that merge to form the hexamer [27] (Figure 5a). The oligomeric structure of the EBPs in the active state raises the question as to whether oligomerization itself has any significant role in coupling ATP hydrolysis to transcriptional activation. As stated before, there are a number of possible ways of hydrolyzing ATP in the ring -- either simultaneously (concerted model), or sequentially/rotationally (nonconcerted model) or randomly. For PspF it has been shown that ADP and ATP can be present at the same time in the hexamer, that ADP increases the rate of hexamerization, and that the ATPase activity of PspF depends upon the ADP concentration. Heterologous nucleotide occupancy correlated with the highest ATPase activity, so for the nucleotide hydrolysis of the AAA+ proteins the nonconcerted model has been proposed, where ATP hydrolysis is coordinated between subunits [28]. In the interactions between adjacent subunits in the hexamer, two highly conserved arginine fingers located at the protomer interface play a crucial role, by sensing the nucleotide changes in the binding pocket and affecting the conformation of the adjacent protomer. Comparison of high-resolution structures of apo-PspF1­275, AMPPNP-PspF1­275, ATP-PspF1­275, and ADP-PspF1­275 gave insights into the nucleotide-driven conformational changes of the AAA+ domain. The signal leading to conformational change of the C domain originates from the Walker B motif via the interaction between N64 and E108. N64 senses the change caused by nucleotide hydrolysis that induces the movement of linkers 1 and 2 and helices 3 and 4. These minor changes in the nucleotide-binding pocket located in the cleft between the a helical and a/b subdomains then lead to larger motions and reorientation of the subdomains. Upon phosphate release, the interaction between N64 and E108 is disrupted leading to the ADP-bound state of the domain [29]. SAXSbased solution structures of the AAA+ domain of NtrC1 in complex with AMPPNP, ADP-BeFx, ADP-AlFx (a transition-state analog, where the x indicates uncertain
www.sciencedirect.com

The AAA+ superfamily -- a myriad of motions Tucker and Sallai 647

Figure 5

(a) Schematic (reproduced from [27]) showing the different structural principles of positive and negative regulation by s54-dependent activators. The regulatory (R), central AAA+ (C), and effector (D) domains are indicated. For positive activation phosphorylation facilitates ring assembly, whereas in negative regulation phosphorylation stabilizes an alternative dimer, which is not able to prevent ring assembly. (b) In the center, in cartoon representations, is shown the PspF structure in ADP (blue), ATP (green), and Apo (red) forms. The residues locking loops 1 and 2 are shown in ball and stick representation as are those transmitting the signal through linker 1. To the left is shown a hexamer with the location of the GAFTGA loops in the center. It is thought (right) that when loops 1 and 2 are locked the s54 subunit of the RNAP cannot be engaged, but when the linker L1 is locked loops 1 and 2 can interact with s54 (adapted from [29]). (c) A ribbon representation of RuvBL1 with the domains DI, DII, and DIII colored blue, red, and green. The bound ADP is shown in black ball and stick representation. DII is unique and is inserted between the a/b (blue) and a (green) subdomains of the AAA+ unit. For comparison the bacterial helicase RuvB is overlayed in purple. (d) A cartoon representation of the E1 helicase from bovine papillomavirus colored according to subunit. ADP is shown in black ball and stick representation and the ssDNA is shown in the central pore in red. The insets show the difference in structure between the helicase clade of AAA+ proteins (red) and the more canonical AAA+ structure (blue) from a member of the H2 insert clade.

www.sciencedirect.com

Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2007, 17:641­652

648 Catalysis and regulation

stoichiometry), or ADP confirmed that binding of the ATP analogs stabilizes the oligomeric form of the protein and its binding to s54. Hydrolysis of ATP and the subsequent phosphate release drive the conformational change needed to form the open complex [30] (Figure 5b). Loops 1 and 2 located on the opposite side of the DNAbinding domain contact the Region I of the s54 factor and couple the energy of ATP hydrolysis to the conformational change necessary to form the `open' complex [31]. Region I is positioned in the À12 promoter region of the DNA in the `closed' complex to make a repressive interaction with a fork junction DNA structure. Upon activation by EBPs, this interaction is disrupted resulting in the formation of the `open' complex. During the nucleotide hydrolysis cycle, the conformation of the highly conserved GAFTGA sequence in loop 1 changes dramatically to engage the s54 subunit, as has been shown for NtrC [27], PspF [29], and NtrC1 [30]. For PspF it has been demonstrated that T148, in the GAFTGA loop, transmits the conformational change generated by nucleotide hydrolysis to loop 2, which, in turn, provides the mechanical force needed for the GAFTGA loop to contact the s54 factor [32]. Based on cryoEM studies, at least two GAFTGA regions interact with s54, but the exact number is not yet known [31]. Data on NtrC support this model and provide evidence that the loop 1 region in the hexameric ring forms a raised rim in the activated state, but then relaxes in the ADP-bound state [27]. The invariant T148 in the GAFTGA motif also plays a role in sensing DNA conformation in the promoter region downstream of the s54-binding site and transmits this signal to the RNAP-s54 holoenzyme via the Region I domain during `open' complex formation [33]. The D domains of ZraR, PspF, and NtrC form dimers and are located on the opposite side of the s54-binding region. The enhancer region of glnA regulated by NtrC has two tandem motifs for binding EBPs, but the DNA sequence upstream of the promoter contains additionally some lowaffinity binding sites. Dimers of NtrC bind to these sites, and the formation of the oligomeric structure upon activation strongly induces DNA bending and hence the tight association of the DNA with the ring, thus facilitating transcriptional initiation [27].

expressed protein in the eukaryotic kingdom that participates in many cellular functions including transcription, chromatin remodeling, repair, and apoptosis. As a motor protein, it drives branch migration of the Holliday junction during homologous recombination in complex with RuvA and RuvC. The crystal structure of the human RuvBL1 protein in complex with ADP published recently revealed a hexameric ring consisting of protomers with a threedomain structure (DI, DII, and DIII) (Figure 5c). In a functional sense DI and DIII form the AAA+ domain, whereas DII is a new domain and is unique to RuvBL1 in this protein family, since it is inserted between DI and DIII and separates the Walker A and B motifs by about 170amino acid residues. A structure-based search using the seven b-strands of DII revealed a conformation typical for DNA-binding proteins involved in DNA metabolism. This finding has been confirmed by DNA-binding experiments, which show that RuvBL1 can bind to dsDNA, ssDNA, and ssRNA in a nonsequence-specific manner. The structure of RuvBL1 shows an ADP molecule present at the interface between DI and DIII, the access to which is blocked by oligomerization [34]. As a consequence, and in a similar fashion to RuvB (which requires the presence of RuvA to hydrolyze ATP), RuvBL1 interacts and forms a heterodimer with RuvBL2 (or TIP48). Complex formation is essential for ATPase activity of both AAA+ proteins, but DNA had no effect on the function of the complex. Electron micrographs of the complex show two hexameric rings with C6 symmetry and although nucleotide-binding experiments demonstrate a low turnover rate for ATP hydrolysis by the complex, this may be because of the absence of some additional proteins required for optimal ATPase activity [35].
Helicases

Replication and recombination proteins
AAA+ proteins are key components of DNA replication and repair complexes. This family of AAA+ proteins can be regarded as molecular motor proteins as well, since they drive protein complexes along the DNA in many cellular processes. Recent structural studies have attempted to elucidate how the energy of ATP hydrolysis is coupled to melting of DNA and movement along it.
RuvBL1

RuvBL1 (or TIP49), a homolog of the bacterial DNAdependent ATPase and helicase RuvB, is a widely
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2007, 17:641­652

DNA replication initiates at specific sites called origins of replication (ori) with initiator proteins that bind to the ori sequence (DNA replication reviewed in [36] recently). The papillomavirus initiator protein E1 belongs to the helicase superfamily III that form hexameric rings and, although members of the AAA+ family of ATPases, are dissimilar from other clades in the arrangement of the a subdomain. Unlike most of the helicases that require ssDNA for entry, the E1 protein is able to melt dsDNA and unwind it in a 30 ! 50 direction. Upon initiation of replication, dimers of E1 proteins bind to dsDNA at the ori sequence to form a double hexamer, which is able to unwind dsDNA. The crystal structure of a bovine papillomavirus E1 protein comprising the AAA+ and oligomerization domains in complex with ssDNA and ADP-Mg2+ revealed two hexamers encircling opposing ssDNA strands (Figure 5d). In contrast to the oligomerization domains, the AAA+ domains do not have exact sixfold symmetry. In a similar manner to the GAFTGA motif­s54 interaction in the case of EBPs, the DNA contacts the oligomeric ring at the interior of the ring via a flexible hairpin. These hairpins resemble
www.sciencedirect.com

The AAA+ superfamily -- a myriad of motions Tucker and Sallai 649

a right-handed spiral staircase interacting with the sugarphosphate backbone of the ssDNA. One hairpin out of the 12 in the double hexamer does not contact DNA, and this suggests a cyclic translocation mechanism. The height of the hairpin correlates with the type of nucleotide bound in the subunit, and is likely to be the structural basis of the DNA translocation mechanism of the helicase. Each subunit contacts one unique nucleotide of the ssDNA and ratchets the DNA in one direction using ATP hydrolysis, providing a general model for the ATP-dependent movement of hexameric helicases [37]. The crystal structure of the AMPPNPbound bacterial initiator DnaA protein and EM studies on the Drosophila melanogaster origin recognition complex (ORC) confirmed the nucleotide-dependent conformational changes observed in the core of the oligomeric ring of the E1 protein. In contrast to the bovine papillomavirus E1 hexameric assembly, the ORC comprises five AAA+ domains [38,39]. The DNA and ADP-AlFx-treated sample of the archeon MCM complex, which is a model of the eukaryotic MCM2-7 replicative helicase, assembled as double hexamers and heptamers, respectively, in EM experiments. The three-dimensional structure of the MCM protein consisting of three domains was reconstructed [38] using the crystal structure of the N-terminal domain of the MCM protein and the AAA+ and D domain of ZraR [40] that suggested the conformational change upon ATP hydrolysis. Based on this model, DNA binding induces the transition from the heptameric to the hexameric ring that affects the interface between subunits, disrupting the nucleotide-binding pocket when DNA is absent or reconstituting it when DNA is present [41]. The righthanded helix structure of these helicases from the prokaryotic, eukaryotic, and viral kingdoms indicates that helical AAA+ oligomeric substructures may be a feature of all DNA replication initiators.

and intermediate chains, constitute the dynein complex and participate in the cargo-binding process at the base of the molecule. In the past few years, structural and biochemical studies on this class of AAA+ ATPases have attempted to understand the mechanochemical energy coupling. Energy of ATP hydrolysis is transmitted to the microtubule-binding stalk for force production. In principle, nucleotide hydrolysis may induce conformational changes in the stalk, tail, or the flexible linker between the motor unit and the tail (Figure 6). The flexibility of the tail has been confirmed by EM studies in which the tail, labeled with an FAB tag, showed that it could be located at various positions around the planar ring [44]. Using the electron
Figure 6

Molecular motor proteins
Dynein

The dynein family consists of large motor complexes that use the energy of nucleotide hydrolysis to drive intracellular transport along cytoskeletal filaments and thus power a wide variety of cellular transport functions. Based on structural and functional criteria, the dynein family has been divided into two classes, the axonemal and cytoplasmic dyneins. A dynein has from one to three heavy chains of >500 kDa each consisting of an N-terminal domain ($160 kDa), to which other protein complexes can bind, and a motor domain of $380 kDa (reviewed in [42]). 3D electron micrographs of a cytoplasmic dynein have shown that the motor unit is a seven-lobed ring consisting of six AAA+ domains on a single polypeptide chain together with a C-terminal domain that is the twice of the size of any AAA+ subunit and probably functions in regulating the hydrolysis cycle [43]. A wide variety of accessory proteins, referred to as light, light intermediate
www.sciencedirect.com

(a) A model of the motor unit of dynein, which contains six AAA+ domains, produced by fitting homologous models of the various domains into an EM reconstruction. A color-coded schematic is shown as an inset. The stalk binds to microtubules and the tail binds to other dyneins. (b) The AAA1­AAA4 domains are thought to be relatively rigid but ATP hydrolysis in AAA5 and AAA6 generates conformational changes that power a movement of either stalk or tail relative to the central motor unit (reproduced from [45]). Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2007, 17:641­652

650 Catalysis and regulation

° density map at 25 A of a cytoplasmic dynein [41], a homology model of the motor unit has been constructed. Based on normal mode analysis, the highly conserved AAA1­AAA4 domains form a rigid structure, whereas the less conserved AAA5­AAA6 and C-terminal domains constitute the variable side of the motor that is involved in large-scale motions. It has been proposed that subunits AAA1­AAA4 provide the motor with a stationary backbone against which forces generated by nucleotide hydrolysis can act. Conformational changes in the rigid part of the complex propagate through the C domain, AAA6 and AAA5 and terminate with a movement of the microtubule-binding stalk. These domain reorientations induce a flexible movement of the stalk or tail about the junction connecting them to the motor unit, thus generating the power stroke [45]. Cryo-electron tomographic studies on axonemal dynein published recently suggested that the tail is static relative to the motor ring and the microtubule, whilst the stalk is apparently flexible. As a consequence, nucleotide hydrolysis causes the microtubule-binding stalk to rotate relative to the more rigid tail [46]. In contrast to this, in vitro motility assays using genetically biotinylated cytoplasmic dyneins showed two modes of microtubule sliding activity. A robust microtubule sliding was driven by the power stroke of the tail, whereas the other, much slower motion might be caused by biased Brownian motion or by active tilting of the stalk against the AAA ring [47]. Taken together, the conformational changes generated by ATP hydrolysis may well be different in cytoplasmic and axonemal dyneins, and further work is needed to resolve this question.

physiological and secondly because it is well documented that crystal contacts are able to stabilize specific, possibly nonphysiological, conformations. It may be that the low resolution often observed in crystals of oligomeric AAA+ proteins is, in part, because of an intrinsic asymmetry in the hexamer, which is `averaged' in the crystal structures. SAXS or EM reconstructions do not have the resolution to resolve changes at an atomic level but have proven very useful in visualizing gross structural changes that occur because the smaller changes, due to processes in the ATP hydrolysis cycle, have been amplified. EM, SAXS and NMR techniques also have their limitations. EM reconstructions require recognition of different particle classes in the ensemble and a failure to identify all classes results in the averaging out of structural features. SAXS has limited degrees of freedom available for testing models and the results depend crucially on the atomic models that usually provide the prior information. NMR, although in many respects the best technique to use for understanding dynamic processes at an atomic level, suffers from the difficulty of analyzing large oligomeric assemblies. It is our opinion that we will only start to understand these processes clearly at an atomic level when it is possible to image single individual molecules, or possibly if the approach used by Martin et al. [3] can also generate asymmetric molecules for structural work.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:  of special interest  of outstanding interest 1. 2. Ammelburg M, Frickey T, Lupas AN: Classification of AAA+ proteins. J Struct Biol 2006, 156:2-11. Erzberger JP, Berger JM: Evolutionary relationships and structural mechanisms of AAA+ proteins. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 2006, 35:93-114.

Conclusions
The AAA+-containing proteins continue to provide a varied and fascinating insight into the ways in which nature has adapted a relatively simple cassette to function in a wide variety of processes, across all kingdoms of life, by harnessing ATP hydrolysis to generate mechanical movement. AAA+ domains frequently form hexameric rings, however the way in which these are used, by random or sequential or concerted hydrolysis in the protomers forming the ring, differs from system to system. Indeed in some systems one or more of the rings simply provide a scaffold and ATPase activity is apparently unimportant, although the rings may be used to propagate the mechanical movement. Our understanding of the mechanisms by which movement is generated, and at which stages in the ATPase cycle it is generated, remains limited. One reason for this is that the structural tools at our disposal all have their limitations, especially when trying to understand nonequilibrium systems. So, for example, to look at the structure of an ADP-saturated system for a hexamer, where the process of energy transduction involves sequential or random hydrolysis must always have the potential of generating artifacts. Crystallographic work must be treated with caution, firstly because the crystallization conditions are often far from
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2007, 17:641­652

3. 

Martin A, Baker TA, Sauer RT: Rebuilt AAA+ motors reveal operating principles for ATP-fuelled machines. Nature 2005, 437:1115-1120. In this paper, the authors constructed single-chain pseudo-hexamers consisting of combinations of active or inactive ClpX subunits. They were able to show, using these constructs, that the ClpX power stroke results from ATP hydrolysis in a single subunit and consequently, for ClpX at least, concerted or sequential ATP hydrolysis is not required to translocate the polypeptide. 4. Ito K, Akiyama Y: Cellular functions, mechanism of action, and regulation of FtsH protease. Annu Rev Microbiol 2005, 59:211-231.

5. 

Suno R, Niwa H, Tsuchiya D, Zhang X, Yoshida M, Morikawa K: Structure of the whole cytosolic region of ATP-dependent protease FtsH. Mol Cell 2006, 22:575-585. In this and the following paper, the structure of the cytosolic part of FtsH from different thermophiles is reported. The structures are similar, though in one case two, and in the other case three, distinct conformations are observed. They agree in that the protease domain forms a hexamer whereas the AAA+ domains (which all have bound ADP) vary in orientation, suggesting a mechanism whereby threading of the polypeptide into the protease active site can occur. Bieniossek C, Schalch T, Bumann M, Meister M, Meier R, Baumann U: The molecular architecture of the metalloprotease FtsH. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006, 103:3066-3071. See the note in Ref. [5]. www.sciencedirect.com

6. 

The AAA+ superfamily -- a myriad of motions Tucker and Sallai 651

7.

Krzywda S, Brzozowski AM, Verma C, Karata K, Ogura T, Wilkinson AJ: The crystal structure of the AAA domain of the ° ATP-dependent protease FtsH of Escherichia coli at 15 A resolution. Structure 2002, 10:1073-1083. Niwa H, Tsuchiya D, Makyio H, Yoshida M, Morikawa K: Hexameric ring structure of the ATPase domain of the membrane-integrated metalloprotease FtsH from Thermus thermophilus HB8. Structure 2002, 10:1415-1423. Pye VE, Dreveny I, Briggs LC, Sands C, Beuron F, Zhang X, Freemont PS: Going through the motions: the ATPase cycle of p97. J Struct Biol 2006, 156:12-28.

8.

22. Scott A, Chung HY, Gonciarz-Swiatek M, Hill GC, Whitby FG,  Gaspar J, Holton JM, Viswanathan R, Ghaffarian S, Hill CP, Sundquist WI: Structural and mechanistic studies of VPS4 proteins. EMBO J 2005, 24:3658-3669. This paper reports that the crystal structure of the AAA+ region of human VPS4B shows a b-domain insert into the a subdomain which is shown to be involved in binding to the adaptor protein LIP5. ATP appears necessary to form higher oligomers, which are then able to bind the adaptors. 23. Scott A, Gaspar J, Stuchell-Brereton MD, Alam SL, Skalicky JJ, Sundquist WI: Structure and ESCRT-III protein interactions of the MIT domain of human VPS4A. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005, 102:13813-13818. 24. Rappas M, Bose D, Zhang X: Bacterial enhancer-binding proteins: unlocking sigma54-dependent gene transcription. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2007, 17:110-116. 25. Doucleff M, Chen B, Maris AE, Wemmer DE, Kondrashkina E, Nixon BT: Negative regulation of AAA+ ATPase assembly by two component receiver domains: a transcription activation mechanism that is conserved in mesophilic and extremely hyperthermophilic bacteria. J Mol Biol 2005, 353:242-255. 26. Nixon BT, Yennawar HP, Doucleff M, Pelton JG, Wemmer DE, Krueger S, Kondrashkina E: SAS solution structures of the apo and Mg2+/BeF3S-bound receiver domain of DctD from Sinorhizobium meliloti. Biochemistry 2005, 44:13962-13969. 27. De Carlo S, Chen B, Hoover TR, Kondrashkina E, Nogales E,  Nixon BT: The structural basis for regulated assembly and function of the transcriptional activator NtrC. Genes Dev 2006, 20:1485-1495. This paper reports that a nice combination of SAXS and EM data show that the GAFTGA loop is raised or more ordered in the activated ADP-AlF3 as opposed to the ADP-bound state. 28. Joly N, Schumacher J, Buck M: Heterogeneous nucleotide occupancy stimulates functionality of phage shock protein F, an AAA+ transcriptional activator. J Biol Chem 2006, 281:34997-35007. 29. Rappas M, Schumacher J, Niwa H, Buck M, Zhang X: Structural  basis of the nucleotide driven conformational changes in the AAA+ domain of transcription activator PspF. J Mol Biol 2006, 357:481-492. This paper is a detailed crystallographic analysis of PspF in different nucleotide-bound states, suggesting the mechanism by which ADP binding allows the GAFTGA loop to adopt a conformation that prohibits interaction with the s54 subunit of the RNAP. When ATP is bound changes in the orientation of the linker between b2 and a3 result in destabilization of this conformation. 30. Chen B, Doucleff M, Wemmer DE, De Carlo S, Huang HH, Nogales E, Hoover TR, Kondrashkina E, Guo L, Nixon BT: ATP ground- and transition states of bacterial enhancer binding AAA+ ATPases support complex formation with their target protein, sigma54. Structure 2007, 15:429-440. 31. Rappas M, Schumacher J, Beuron F, Niwa H, Bordes P, Wigneshweraraj S, Keetch CA, Robinson CV, Buck M, Zhang X: Structural insights into the activity of enhancer-binding proteins. Science 2005, 307:1972-1975. 32. Schumacher J, Joly N, Rappas M, Bradley D, Wigneshweraraj SR, Zhang X, Buck M: Sensor I threonine of the AAA+ ATPase transcriptional activator PspF is involved in coupling nucleotide triphosphate hydrolysis to the restructuring of sigma 54-RNA polymerase. J Biol Chem 2007, 282:9825-9833. 33. Dago AE, Wigneshweraraj SR, Buck M, Morett E: A role for the conserved GAFTGA motif of AAA+ transcription activators in sensing promoter DNA conformation. J Biol Chem 2007, 282:1087-1097. 34. Matias PM, Gorynia S, Donner P, Carrondo MA: Crystal structure  of the human AAA+ protein RuvBL1. J Biol Chem 2006, 281:38918-38929. This paper reports that the crystal structure of human RuvBL1 shows, in contrast to the prokaryotic RuvB protein, an extra DNA/RNA-binding domain of unknown function, inserted in the a/b subdomain of the AAA+ core. Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2007, 17:641­652

9.

10. Davies JM, Tsuruta H, May AP, Weis WI: Conformational  changes of p97 during nucleotide hydrolysis determined by small-angle X-ray scattering. Structure 2005, 13:183-195. In this paper, small-angle X-ray scattering, to relatively large scattering ° angles (0.7 AÀ1) was used to investigate the p97 solution structure in Apo, AMPPNP, ADP-AlFx, and ADP states, indicating different shapes, especially with regard to the positioning of the N-domain. 11. DeLaBarre B, Brunger AT: Nucleotide dependent motion and  mechanism of action of p97/VCP. J Mol Biol 2005, 347:437-452. In this paper, the conformational variations between Apo and AMPNP, ADP-AlF3 and ADP-bound states of p97 were explored using X-ray crystallography. Despite the relatively low resolution of the structures, a description of the relative domain movements between states is given. 12. Pye VE, Beuron F, Keetch CA, McKeown C, Robinson CV,  Meyer HH, Zhang Z, Freemont PS: Structural insights into the p97-Ufd1­Np14 complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007, 104:467-472. In this paper, using negative stain EM single-particle averaging, the authors show that only one Ufd1­Np14 complex binds per p97 hexamer, and that ubiquitin binds to the Ufd1 part of the adaptor complex. 13. Wang Q, Song C, Irizarry L, Dai R, Zhang X, Li CC: Multifunctional roles of the conserved Arg residues in the second region of homology of p97/valosin-containing protein. J Biol Chem 2005, 280:40515-40523. 14. Park S, Isaacson R, Kim HT, Silver PA, Wagner G: Ufd1 exhibits the AAA-ATPase fold with two distinct ubiquitin interaction sites. Structure 2005, 13:995-1005. 15. Isaacson RL, Pye VE, Simpson P, Meyer HH, Zhang X, Freemont PS, Matthews S: Detailed structural insight into the p97-Npl4­ Ufd1 interface. J Biol Chem 2007 [Epub ahead of print]. 16. Beuron F, Dreveny I, Yuan X, Pye VE, McKeown C, Briggs LC,  Cliff MJ, Kaneko Y, Wallis R, Isaacson RL et al.: Conformational changes in the AAA ATPase p97­p47 adaptor complex. EMBO J 2006, 25:1967-1976. In this paper, the differences in shape of the p97/p47 complex in ADPbound and AMPNP-bound states are described using cryo-EM singleparticle averaging. The complex has a 6:3 stoichiometry with clear differences in the positioning of the N-domains and the p47 adaptor. 17. Bukau B, Weissman J, Horwich A: Molecular chaperones and protein quality control. Cell 2006, 125:443-451. 18. Haslberger T, Weibezahn J, Zahn R, Lee S, Tsai FT, Bukau B, Mogk A: M domains couple the ClpB threading motor with the DnaK chaperone activity. Mol Cell 2007, 25:247-260. 19. Beinker P, Schlee S, Auvula R, Reinstein J: Biochemical coupling of the two nucleotide binding domains of ClpB: covalent linkage is not a prerequisite for chaperone activity. J Biol Chem 2005, 280:37965-37973. 20. Lee S, Choi JM, Tsai FT: Visualizing the ATPase cycle in a  protein disaggregating machine: structural basis for substrate binding by ClpB. Mol Cell 2007, 25:261-271. In this paper, cryo-EM reconstructions of ClpB in Apo, ADP, and AMPPNP states are described. The ATP state was investigated using a double Walker B mutation that binds but does not hydrolyze ATP. Arguably the most important finding is that ATP is essential for highaffinity substrate binding, and the structural reason for this is described. 21. Shiozawa K, Goda N, Shimizu T, Mizuguchi K, Kondo N, Shimozawa N, Shirakawa M, Hiroaki H: The common phospholipid-binding activity of the N-terminal domains of PEX1 and VCP/p97. FEBS J 2006, 273:4959-4971. www.sciencedirect.com

652 Catalysis and regulation

35. Puri T, Wendler P, Sigala B, Saibil H, Tsaneva IR: Dodecameric structure and ATPase activity of the human TIP48/TIP49 complex. J Mol Biol 2007, 366:179-192. 36. Johnson A, O'Donnell M: Cellular DNA replicases: components and dynamics at the replication fork. Annu Rev Biochem 2005, 74:283-315. 37. Enemark EJ, Joshua-Tor L: Mechanism of DNA translocation in  a replicative hexameric helicase. Nature 2006, 442:270-445. In this paper, the crystal structure of the papillomavirus E1 helicase in complex with single-stranded DNA shows the DNA in the central pore of the hexameric ring. Observed variations in the orientation of the DNAbinding hairpin lead to the suggestion that the helicase functions in a sequential manner such that, in a complete cycle, each protomer binds, and hydrolyzes, ATP, releases ADP and translocates one nucleotide through the pore. 38. Erzberger JP, Mott ML, Berger JM: Structural basis for ATP dependent DnaA assembly and replication-origin remodeling. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2006, 13:676-683. In this paper, the crystal structure of DnaA with bound AMPPCP shows the four molecules in the asymmetric unit forming a right-handed filament with 81 symmetry. The bound nucleotide mimics ATP, which is known to be required for selfassembly of DnaA at replication origins. This spiral AAA+ assembly occurs in the replication initiators in all three domains of life. 39. Clarey MG, Erzberger JP, Grob P, Leschziner AE, Berger JM, Nogales E, Botchan M: Nucleotide-dependent conformational changes in the DnaA-like core of the origin recognition complex. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2006, 13:684-690.

40. Sallai L, Tucker PA: Crystal structure of the central and Cterminal domain of the sigma(54)-activator ZraR. J Struct Biol 2005, 151:160-170. 41. Costa A, Pape T, van Heel M, Brick P, Patwardhan A, Onesti S: Structural studies of the archaeal MCM complex in different functional states. J Struct Biol 2006, 156:210-219. 42. Hook P, Vallee RB: The dynein family at a glance. J Cell Sci 2006, 119:4369-4371. 43. Samso M, Koonce MP: 25 Angstrom resolution structure of a cytoplasmic dynein motor reveals a seven-member planar ring. J Mol Biol 2004, 340:1059-1072. 44. Meng X, Samso M, Koonce MP: A flexible linkage between the dynein motor and its cargo. J Mol Biol 2006, 357:701-706. 45. Serohijos AW, Chen Y, Ding F, Elston TC, Dokholyan NV: A  structural model reveals energy transduction in dynein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006, 103:18540-18545. In this paper, a structural model of the force generating mechanism of the motor protein dynein is proposed based on recent EM reconstructions and homology models of the different domains. 46. Nicastro D, Schwartz C, Pierson J, Gaudette R, Porter ME, McIntosh JR: The molecular architecture of axonemes revealed by cryoelectron tomography. Science 2006, 313:944-948. 47. Shima T, Kon T, Imamula K, Ohkura R, Sutoh K: Two modes of microtubule sliding driven by cytoplasmic dynein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006, 103:17736-17740.

Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2007, 17:641­652

www.sciencedirect.com

