Biochimie 71 (1989) 997-1004 (~) Soci6t6 de Chimie biologique/Elsevier, Paris

997

Carbohydrate uptake in the oral pathogen Streptococcus mutans: mechanisms and regulation by protein phosphorylation
Gary R. JACOBSON, Jeffrey LODGE and Florence POY Department o f Biology, Boston University, 2 Cummington St., Boston, M A 02215, USA
(Received May 16, 1989, accepted May 29, 1989)

Summary - Streptococcus mutans is the primary etiolo.gical agent of dental caries in man and other
animals. This organism and other related oral streptococci use carbohydrates almost exclusively as carbon and energy sources, fermenting them primarily to lactic acid which initiates erosion of tooth surfaces. Investigations over the past decade have shown that the major uptake mechanism for most carbohydrates in S. mutans is the phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP)-dependent phosphotransferase system (PTS), although non-PTS systems have also been identified for glucose and sucrose. Regulation of sugar uptake occurs by induction / repression and inducer exclusion mechanisms in S. mutans, but apparently not by inducer expulsion as is found in some other streptococci. In addition, ATP-dependent protein kinases have also been indentified in S. mutans and other oral streptococci, and a regulatory function for at least one of these has been postulated. Among a number of proteins that are phosphorylated by these enzymes, the predominant soluble protein substrate is the general phospho-carrier protein of the PTS, HPr, as had previously been observed in a variety of Gram-positive bacteria. Recent results have provided evidence for a role for ATP-dependent phosphorylation of HPr in the coordination of sugar uptake and its catabolism in S. mutans. In this review, these results are summarized, and directions for future research in this area are discussed.

streptococcal protein kinases/bacterial phosphotransferase system/sugar uptake regulation~Streptococcus
mutans

Introduction
Streptococcus mutans is a common bacterial species found in the oral cavity of man and other animals. A considerable body of evidence links dietary sucrose and colonization of human tooth surfaces by S. mutans with the development of coronal dental caries ("tooth decay"), although other oral bacteria appear to be involved as secondary invaders (for reviews see [1, 2]). Because S. mutans and related oral streptococci use carbohydrates nearly exclusively as carbon and energy sources, fermenting them primarily to lactic acid which initiates the erosion of tooth enamel, much interest has been focussed in the last decade on the mechanisms and regulation of carbohydrate uptake in these organisms. In this review, we briefly summarize evideoce concerning uptake mechanisms for carbohydrates in

S. mutans and related streptococci, and then discuss the regulation of these uptake activities, with an emphasis on the probable role of an ATP-dependent kinase in regulating glucose and sucrose uptake in S. mutans. Our discussion will be limited to the oral streptococci because another article in this issue (Reizer et al.) presents an excellent review of kinase-mediated regulation in other Gram-positive organisms including other streptococci not commonly found in the human oral cavity (e.g., S. pyogenes and S. faecalis).

Mechanisms of carbohydrate uptake in
S. m u t a n s

The phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP)-dependent carbohydrate phosphotransferase system (PTS), first discovered by Roseman and coworkers [3],

998

G.R. Jacobson et al.

appears to be the primary mechanism of sugar uptake in S. mutans and other oral streptococci, at least at low (micromolar) substrate concentrations. The PTS catalyzes the concomitant transport and phosphorylation of its carbohydrate substrates at the expense of intracellular PEP (reviewed in [4, 5]) as follows: PI-'P + HPr,
Enzyme I

phospho-(N- 1-histidyl)-HPr + pyruvate

phospho-HPr +

Enzyme II o X s u g a r ( o/ u t ) (Enzyme Ili)

HPr + sugar-phosphate(~n) Enzyme I and HPr (a small, heat-stable phosphocarrier protein) are soluble, cytoplasmic proteins that participate in the transport of all sugars recognized by the PTS. In contrast, the Enzymes II are sugar-specific and membrane-bound, and comprise the actual permeases of the PTS. Enzymes III are also generally sugar-specific, but are soluble, and are required for only some sugars transported by the PTS in any given bacterial species. For those sugars not requiring an Enzyme III, the function of this phosphocarrier protein appears to be incorporated in the structure of the Enzyme II itself as a cytoplasmic domain (el. [6]). The phosphotransfer reactions depicted above proceed with the obligatory involvement of covalent phospho-protein intermediates of all of the PTS proteins, Enzyme I (N-3-histidyl), HPr (N-l-histidyl), Enzyme III or Ill-like domain of Enzyme II (N-3-histidyl) and Enzymes II (cysteinyl or histidyl) which phosphorylate one another with PEP as the initial phospho-donor. In S. mutans, PTSs specific for glucose [7], mannitoi and glucitol [8, 9], lactose [10], sucrose [11-13], mannose [14, 15], fructose [16, 17], maltose [18], and N-acetylglucosamine and trehalose (F. Poy and G. Jacobson, unpublished observations) have all been identified. For most of these the corresponding Enzyme II (and Enzyme III, if required) is inducible by growth on the cognate sugar. There is some evidence that lower affinity, non-PTS uptake systems may exist in S. mutans and other oral streptococci for both glucose [ 19- 21 ] and sucrose [ 19, 22, 23]. Many of the components of the PTS of S. mutans and related streptococci have been well characterized. Enzyme I has been purified flom S. mutans [24] and S. salivarius [25], and appears to be a dimer of ca. 68 000 kDa subunits as in other bacteria. Purified HPrs from S. salivarius [25] and S. mutans [24, 26] also showed no

remarkable properties distinguishing them from the HPrs of other Gram-positive bacteria apart from an unusually high content of alanine in these proteins [24-26]. Enzymes IIl specific for fructose [16] and lactose [27] have also been purified from S. mutans and studied. Although no sugar-specific Enzyme II has yet been purified from oral streptococci, the gene (scrA) encoding the sucrose-specific Enzyme II of S. mutans has recently been cloned and its nucleotide sequence has been determined [28]. From the deduced amino acid sequence, a molecular weight for this protein of 69 983 was calculated, consistent with the size of a membranebound protein expressed in Escherichia coli minicells harboring a plasmid containing this gene. The S. mutans Enzyme II scr was also shown in these studies to be active when expressed in E. coli as long as Enzyme I and HPr of S. mutans were used in the assay [28]. Sequence comparisons showed that the 491amino-acid N-terminal sequence of this protein was very hydrophobic and homologous to sucrose-specific Enzymes II from Bacillus subtilis and from enteric bacteria, while the remaining C-terminal sequence was homologous to the soluble glucose-specific Enzyme III from Salmonella typhimurium [28]. Thus the S. mutans Enzyme II set is an example of a PTS protein in which the Enzyme II and Enzyme III functions are combined in the same molecule (see above). Our earlier report [26] of a protein in S. mutans extracts that had properties expected for a sucrose-specific Enzyme III is thus likely explained by endogenous proteolysis of Enzyme II scr prior to protein purification. The high-affinity sucrose PTS of S. mutans has an apparent K m for sucrose of ca. 70/xM [13, 23, 29]. Mu dE insertion mutations in the scrA gene abolish high-affinity PEP-dependent phosphorylation of sucrose, as might be expected [28]. However, strains carrying these insertions still catalyze a lower-affinity PEP-dependent phosphorylation of sucrose with an apparent g m of ca. 350/zM. This low-affinity "sucrose PTS" is apparently a high-affinity trehalose PTS that also recognizes sucrose. Of 12 mono- and disaccharides tested, including the monosaccharide components of sucrose, glucose and fructose, only trehalose was able to inhibit PEP-dependent phosphorylation of sucrose in these insertion mutants. Furthermore, the K~ for trehalose was found to be 10/~M, 35-fold lower than the K m of this system for sucrose. Finally, this system was 5-fold more active in trehalose-grown cells than

Sugar transport and regulation in S. mutans

999

in sucrose-grown cells, suggesting that its induction was more specific for trehalose than sucrose (F. Poy and G. Jacobson, manuscript in preparation). This system may be the same as the lowaffinity "sucrose PTS" previously observed by Slee and Tanzer [23] which has a similar g m for sucrose. In contrast to the PTS-mediated transport systems described above, non-PTS transport mechanisms that have been postulated for glucose [19-21] and sucrose [19, 22, 23] in S. mutans are still poorly characterized. A glucose uptake system was found in a strain defective in glucose PTS activity that had an apparent g m of ca. 100/xM and was inhibited by compounds that might be expected to collapse the proton electrochemical gradient [21]. A role for the proton motive force in the uptake of sucrose by a lowaffinity system has also been postulated [19], but neither of these systems has yet been further characterized.

S. mutans

Regulation of carbohydrate uptake in by induction / repression

The PEP-dependent uptake of many carbohydrates in S. mutans is inducible by growth on the respective substrate [8-13, 15, 16, 23, 30]. Presumably, the synthesis of the sugar-specific Enzyme II, at least, is the target of this regulation. For disaccharides~ a phospho-sugar hydrolase is also necessary before the product of PTSmediated transport can enter glycolysis. It is interesting to note that whereas phospho-/3galactosidase is coinduced in S. mutans along with the lactose PTS [30], sucrose 6-phosphate hydrolase appears to be constitutively synthesized [31] while the sucrose PTS (Enzyme II) is inducible [11, 13]. Recently, it was shown that although the gene encoding sucrose 6-phosphate hydrolase (scrB) is adjacent to that encoding the sucrose-specific Enzyme II (scrA, see above), they are divergently transcribed from opposite DNA strands [28] which could explain their noncoordinate regulation. The existence of 2 additional open reading frames in this region of the S. mutans chromosome that could encode proteins homologous to known bacterial regulatory proteins [28], was also intriguing. However, elucidation of the exact mechanisms by which the synthesis of PTS proteins are regulated by induction/repression in the oral streptococci awaits further molecular genetic analyses of this and other sugar-specific PTS "operons".

A second type of "induction/repression" of the high-affinity glucose and sucrose PTSs of S. mutans has also been observed. Cells growing on an excess of glucose or sucrose were found to have lower activities of the respective PTSs than cells growing under sugar limitation [20, 22, 32]. In these studies it was postulated that sugarexcess cells use predominantly the non-PTS transport systems for accumulation of these sugars, whereas the PTS was the major system for sugar uptake at low substrate concentrations. This was attributed to "derepression" of the glucose and sucrose PTSs under the latter conditions. However, we regard it as highly unlikely that these results can be explained solely by a classical derepression (induction) of transcription of enzyme synthesis at low sugar concentrations. Indeed, at least part of this effect is due to activation of preexisting PTS proteins (probably at least HPr) through a mechanism that may involve an ATP-dependent protein kinase ([29]; and see below). Nonetheless, recent reports [33, 34] suggest that modulation of the levels of PTS Enzyme II activities may also occur as a function not only of sugar availability, but also of pH and nitrogen availability. The mechanism(s) of these types of regulation remain to be determined.

Regulation by inducer exclusion and inducer expulsion
Inducer exclusion is a regulatory mechanism that has been studied most extensively in the Gramnegative enteric bacteria (reviewed in [4], and [5]). In this type of regulation, PTS sugars, especially glucose, exclude (inhibit the uptake of) non-PTS sugars, such as lactose in the enteric bacteria, thus preventing further induction of these uptake systems. The mechanism involves the binding of the nonphosphorylated form of the glucose-specific Enzyme III of the PTS to proteins whose activities are required for induction (for example, the lactose permease), resulting in the inhibition of these activities [4, 5]. The role of this regulatory process is presumably to allow the cell to grow exclusively on the more efficiently metabolized substrate (e.g., glucose) in a medium containing a mixture of potential carbon sources, and explains at least partially the diauxic growth of E. coil, for example, in a medium containing both glucose and lactose. In S. mutans, a type of inducer exclusion has been observed as well. Diauxic growth of this organism occurs in media containing glucose and

1~

G.R. Jacobson et ai.

either mannitol or glucitol (sorbitol) [35], or in media containing glucose and lactose [36]. In all these cases, growth occurs first on glucose, and induction of either the hexitol or the lactose transport systems occurs only after exhaustion of glucose in the medium. In glucose PTS mutants, however, glucose is unable to prevent induction of these transport systems [35, 36]. In S. mutans, mannitol, glucitol, and lactose are all taken up by the PTS, whereas in enteric bacteria lactose is a non-PTS sugar. Thus, the mechanism of inducer exclusion in S. rnutans is likely to be simply the result of more effective competition of the glucose-specific Enzyme II than the Enzymes Ii specific for the hexitols and lactose for the general PTS phospho-carrier proteins, Enzyme I and HPr (see also [37]). Other mechanisms similar to those observed in the enteric bacteria, however, cannot yet be ruled out. For example, recent evidence suggests that melibiose utilization, which is probably not mediated by the PTS in S. rnutans, is nonetheless severely impaired in general PTS mutants (G. Jacobson, et al., unpublished observations). Such a result would be expected if the PTS regulates melibiose uptake via a non-PTS uptake system in S. mutans by a mechanism similar to that observed in the enteric bacteria. In contrast to inducer exclusion, regulation of sugar uptake by inducer expulsion has been well documented only in Gram-positive bacteria [37]. Inducer expulsion was first observed in S. pyogenes as the ability of sugars such as glucose to elicit the rapid excretion of accumulated nonmetabolizable analogs of lactose, such as thiomethyl /3-galactoside (TMG), from cells [38]. TMG had been accumulated in these experiments as TMG-phosphate via a lactose PTS, and the mechanism involved the rapid dephosphorylation of intracellular TMG followed by its expulsion. Further experiments established that the ability of glucose (and other energy sources) to stimulate TMG expulsion was probably due to their ability to increase the intracellular ATP concentration, and that fi'ee TMG was probably expelled by the lactose-specific Enzyme !I of the PTS [39]. The role of ATP in this process may be to stimulate an intracellular phosphatase that cleaves TMG-phosphate to free TMG [39, 40], and the overall role of inducer expulsion may be to prevent accumulation of high levels of intracellular sugar-phosphates that are deleterious to the cell [37]. Although inducer expulsion has been observed in S. pyogenes [38, 39] and S. lactis [40],

we have been unable to observe this phenomenon in S. mutans. Thus in S. mutans cells that were pregrown on lactose, washed, and then allowed to accumulate [14C]TMG as TMG-phosphate through the lactose PTS, no expulsion of labeled TMG was observed upon subsequent adchtion of 1 mM glucose or sucrose over a period of at least 5 min at 37oC (J. Lodge and G. Jacobson, unpublished observations). Under similar conditions in S. pyogenes, the half-time for expulsion of TMG elicited by glucose is less than I min [38]. Therefore, if inducer expulsion of lactose PTS substrates occurs in S. mutans, the conditions for eliciting this regulatory response must be very different in this organism compared to other streptococci. These results do not rule out, however, that inducer expulsion may occur in S. mutans for other PTS ~ubstrates that have not yet been examined.

ATP-dependent protein kinases and the regulation of sugar uptake in oral streptococci
The original demonstration by Deutscher and Saier [41] that HPr of the PTS was the major soluble protein phosphorylated by ATP in cell extracts of S. pyogenes was followed by similar observations in other Gram-positive bacteria [37, 42-46]. ATP-dependent phosphorylation of HPr on a seryl residue was shown to be catalyzed by an HPr kinase, and dephosphorylation was carried out by an HPr phosphatase. In most organisms studied, HPr kinase activity was stimulated by fructose 1,6-diphosphate (FDP) and inhibited by glycolytic end-products, and phospho-(seryl)-HPr was found to be less active in the PEP-dependent phosphorylation ~f PTS sugars than free HPr, at least in vitro (see Reizer et al., in this issue). These observations led to the suggestion that the ATP-dependent HPr kinase might have a role in regulating PTS activity in response to the energy needs of the cell. Also, because the HPr kinase was, in general, stimulated by conditions eliciting inducer expulsion, a role for this enzyme in this process was also hypothesized (reviewed in [37]). This latter hypothesis was strengthened by the finding that HPr, HPr kinase, and inducer expulsion are all found in Lactobacillus brevis, a heterofermentative lactic acid bacterium that lacks a complete PTS for any sugar [45, 46]. Although S. mutans apparently lacks inducer expulsion, at least for TMG, the uptake of

Sugar transport and regulation in S. mutans

1001

sugars by the PTS in this organism appears to be regulated by the availability of sugar in the medium, as discussed earlier. This is precisely the behavior one would predict if an HPr kinase, regulated by the concentrations of glycolytic intermediates, had some role in modulating PTS-mediated sugar uptake in S. mutans. Therefore, several years ago we examined whether S. mutans had ATP-dependent protein kinase activity and, if so, whether HPr was a major substrate for ATP-dependent phosphorylation in this organism. We found that incubation of membrane fractions of S. mutans with [32p]ATP resulted in the phosphorylation of at least 4 proteins which have not yet been identified. Incubation of cytoplasmic fractions with [32p]ATP, however, resulted in the labeling predominantly of a single protein, which we identified as HPr phosphorylated on a serine residue [47]. As in other Gram-positive organisms, ATP-dependent phosphorylation of HPr was stimulated by FDP, which accumulates in rapidly glycolyzing cells, and inhibited by 2-phosphoglycerate (2PGA), 3-phosphoglycerate (3-PGA), PEP, and Pi, all of which accumulate in starved streptococci [47]. Conditions that inhibited ATPdependent phosphorylation of HPr stimulated phosphorylation of a 61-kDa protein that has not yet been identified, but may be the HPr kinase itself [47]. The above results provided circumstantial evidence that the regulation of pT~-mediated sugar ............. .. ~--S---~-. .... ........ uptake. .by sugar availability,. . namely the ,, repre S sion of the PTS under conditions of sugar excess and its "derepression" under conditions of sugar limitation [20, 22, 32], could be due at least in part to the ATP-dependent phosphory.lation and dephosphorylation of HPr m S. mutans. Under conditions of sugar excess, FDP is the predominant intracellular metabolite, which could then activate the HPr kinase, and feedback inhibit further PTS-mediated sugar uptake if phospho-(seryl)-HPr were less active in this regard ("repression"). In contrast, under conditions of sugar limitation or starvation when 2-PGA, 3-PGA, PEP, and Pi predominate in the cell, the kinase would be inhibited, the formation of free HPr would be favored, and the PTS would become more active ("derepression") [47]. To test these possibilities, we measured the uptake of sucrose in S. mutans cells that had been grown under conditions of sugar excess or sugar limitation, and confirmed that uptake was stimulated several-fold under the latter condi-

tion compared to the former [29]. This stimulation was due to an increase in the Vm~ of the high-affinity sucrose PTS. We also showed that by shifting cells that were growing in the presence of an excess of either glucose or sucrose to media lacking sugar, a time-dependent increase in both the uptake and PEP-dependent phosphorylation rates of both sugars occurred [29]. This stimulation was insensitive to the presence of either chloramphenicol or rifampin, indicating that neither protein nor RNA synthesis was required for starvation-induced activation of the PTS. These results therefore indicated that the effect was a stimulation of one or more activities of preexisting PTS proteins. Finally, we showed that starvation-induced stimulation of sucrose uptake in S. mutans correlated over time with the dephosphorylation of phospho-(seryl)-HPr in vivo (Fig. 1, reprinted from [29]). The results summarized above provide very strong circumstantial evidence for a role of the HPr kinase and phospho-(seryl)-HPr in regulating PTS-mediated sugar uptake in S. mutans. This regulation may also be selective between various PTSs in this organism. Thus, a lowaffinity sucrose uptake system, with an apparent Km very close to that of the trehalose (lowaffinity "sucrose") PTS described earlier in this review, was not stimulated by sucrose starvation as judged by kinetic analyses [29]. Perhaps phospho-(seryl)-HPr is more active in PEP-depenrlont nhr~enhr, .. 4:,~- " tllli~; ~,,..~.. [~aivo]L~*JLav--LJ[* . . ul|Ol.~.,][ l[~ ,k^ trehalose PTS compared to the high-affinity sucrose PTS. For example, it has been shown that phospho(seryl)-HPr of S. lactis is phosphorylated by PEP and Enzyme I at different rates depending on the presence or absence of various sugar-specific Enzymes III [48], and a similar phenomenon may occur in S. mutans. In any case, we propose that ATP-dependent phosphorylation of HPr in S. mutans may regulate the uptake of at least the high-affinity sucrose and glucose PTSs as shown in the following scheme:
[lntracellular metabolites] .~ high [FDE ATP] HPr kinase activity ~ high

Condition sugar excess sugar ~

IPqSER)-HPr] , high

FFS activity ~ low

low [2 & 3-PGA, P E E Pi] low [ F D E ATP] · low · ~ low ~ high

limitation high [2 & 3-PGA, P E E Pil

Not only does the regulatory scheme shown above explain the modulation of PTS activities

1002
i i

G.R. Jacobson et al.
I u I

100

7

80
L

/
O

/

o

-, ¢ "O Q

6

·
O
m

r~
"1-

\

/

/

HPr-~
5

3
m .

o 60
tO 0 .~.~0 ) -..-----0 ~

3
3 (JD r~
i i

//
40

\

A B
4

-~
0 IQ. 0 ,-

v

,20
... --

1

1

.I

I

I

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

Time (h)
Fig. 1. Correlation of sucrose uptake stimulation and dephosphorylation of phospho-(seryl)-HPr in S. mutans as a consequence of sucrose starvation in vivo. Cells were ~rown to mid-exnonential nhn~e an n mo,tintm e n r t t n i n i n o '~13mM c , , r , r n e , ~ h~,-,,,~,,:.A washed, resuspended in the same mednum without sugar, and incubated at 37°C. At various times thereafter ~absct~sa), both the initial (o) arrd steady-state (~) rates of [t4C]sucrose (10 tzM) uptake were measured in al~quots taken from the suspension. A parallel culture was treated identically, except that [3zp]inorganic phosphate was present during the initial growth on sucrose. Aliquots of this suspension were taken at the indicated times after initiation of starvation, and subjected to polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate. The gel was fixed in acid, dried, and autoradiographed. The amoant of acid-stable phosphate covalently bound to HPr was estimated by densitometric scanning of lanes of this gel and is plotted (o) as percent phosphorylation of HPr relative to time 0 (beginning of starvation). The inset shows 2 lanes of this autorac4ogram corresponding to time 0 (A) and to 2 h after starvation (B). Dephosphorylation of HPr correlated well with stimulation of PTSmediated uptake in this experiment. Reprinted with permission of the authors of [29], which should be consulted for further experimental details.
· ~ -1. . . . . . . . . . r . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~.,.==.::= ~ ,=,,,= = ,J l=U= v~oL~,,.x

as a function of sugar availability in S. mutans, but it makes sense from a teleological point of view. Under sugar-limiting conditions, the cells need to scavenge the maximum amount of sugar as fast as possible, and the activation of the highaffinity PTS (dephosphoryiation of phospho(seryl)-HPr) accomplishes this. However, when sugar is in excess, lower-affinity but higher Vmax non-PTS uptake systems for glucose and sucrose take over, and the PTSs are inhibited by formation of phospho-(seryl)-HPr. This may be necessary to prevent the combined actions of PTS and nonPTS uptake systems which could swamp the cell

with inhibitory concentrations of intracelhtlar sugar phosphate faster than it could be catabolized [29]. When the cells begin to exhaust sugar from the medium, the PTS is again turned on. Such a mechanism may have evolved in S. mutans to allow this organism to respond as efficiently as possible to rapidly fluctuating sugar concentrations that occur in its natural environment (the oral cavity). It should be emphasized, however, that at present the evidence for such a regulatory scheme is entirely circumstantial, and requires confirmation by further, more direct experimci~t~ (see next section).

Sugar transport and reguletion in S. mutans

i003

Finally, it should be mentioned that ATPdependent phosphorylation of HPr has also been detected in one other oral streptococcus, S. salivarius [49]. In this case, both an acid-stable and an acid-labile phosphorylation of HPr were found. The latter was identified as an N-3phospho-histidine, while the former is likely to be a seryl-phosphate by analogy to S. mutans HPr, although it was not identified as such in this study [49]. The role, if any, of the unusual ATPdependent phosphorylation of a histidine residue of HPr at the N-3 position in this organism remains to be determined.

Conclusions and perspectives
Among the oral streptococci, the mechanisms of carbohydrate transport and its regulation have been most extensively studied in S. mutans, the primary etiological agent of dental caries. In this organism, most carbohydrates that have been examined are taken up by a high-affinity PTS, and many of the proteins comprising this syst,-rn have been extensively characterized. Loweraffinity, non-PTS uptake systems for sucrose and glucose have also been identified, and indirect evidence suggests that melibiose may also be transported into S. mutans by a PTS-independent system that may, however, be regulated by the PTS.
]X~,~UlalklUll I.Jl I..,dJ

will also need to be further explored using both biochemical and genetic approaches. Finally, the role of the ATP-dependent HPr kinase in S. mutans will need to be examined using more direct approaches. Purification and characterization of the kinase as well as the HPr phosphatase will be necessary to confirm the presumed direct regulation of these enzymes by glycolytic intermediates. The isolation of kinase a n d / o r phosphatase mutants, which might be expected to have pleiotropic effects on carbohydrate utilization, will be essential in determining if these proteins have a direct role in transport regulation. The recent development of a general technique for the isolation of such mutants, using the antibioiic streptozotocin (G.R. Jacobson et al., manuscript in preparation) should be useful for this purpose. Another approach would be to construct site-specific mutants of S. mutans HPr that are unable to be phosphorylated by the HPr-kinase. Such mutants have recently been constructed by 2 different groups using the HPr gene (ptsH) from B. subtilis, but the conclusions reached by each group regarding the effects of these mutations on PTS activities were conflicting [50; Reizer et al., this volume]. The isolation and testing of such site-specific mutations of S. mutans HPr, however, awaits the cloning and sequencing on the p t s H gene from this organism.

OUllyUl dt~;

tl~ttlK~

Ill

S. mutans appears to occur by several mechanisms. In addition to classical induction and repression of gene expression, inducer exclusion as well as modulation of uptake activity by sugar availability has also been observed. Strong circumstantial evidence links regulation of PTS activity by sugar availability to an ATP-dependent HPr kinase that has been found in S. mutans and many other Gram-positive bacteria. It is postulated that this kinase is regulated in vivo by the concentrations of glycolytic intermediates such that efficient coordination of sugar uptake with cellular needs is ensured. In the future, both biochemical and molecular biological approaches will be necessary to understand the molecular mechanisms of carbohydrate transport regulation in S. mutans. The mechanisms of induction and repression of gene expression will require identification and characterization of the proteins responsible, as well as the roles of regulatory sequences in the DNA governing transcription of genes encoding transport proteins. Inducer exclusion mechanisms

Acknowledgments
Research in the authors' laboratory was supported under Public Health Service Grant DE05966 from the National Institute of Dental Research. We are also grateful to Dr. Jonathan Reizer for making available to us a copy of the review that also appearz in this issue (Reizer et al.) prior to publication.

References
1 Hamada S. & Slade H.O. (1980) Microbiol. Rev. 44, 331 - 384 2 Loesche W.J. (1986) Microbiol. Rev. 50, 353-380 3 Kundig W., Ghosh S. & Roseman S. (1964) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 52, 1067-1074 4 Postma P.W. & Lengeler J.W. (1985) Microbiol. Rev. 49,232-269 5 Saier M.H. Jr. (1985) Mechanisms and Regulation of Carbohydrate Transport in Bacteria. Academic Press Inc., Orlando, FL 6 Saier M.H. Jr., Yamada M., Erni B., Suda K., Lengeler J., Ebner R., Argos P., Rak B.,

I(X~

G.R. Jacobson et al. 56, 2594-2600 30 Hamilton I.R. & Lo G.C.Y. (1978) J. Bacteriol. 136, 900- 908 31 St. Martin E.J. & Wittenberger C.L. (!979) Infect. Immun. 26, 487-491 32 Ellwood D.C. & Hamilton I.R. (1982) Infect. lmmun. 36, 576-581 33 Vadeboncoeur C., Thibault L., N6ron S., Halvorson H. & Hamilton I.R. (1987)J. Bacteriol. 169, 5686-5691 34 Rodrigue L., Lacoste L., Trahan L. & Vadeboncoeur C. (1988) Infect. lmmun. 56, 518-522 35 Dills S.S. & Seno S. (1983) J. Bacteriol. 153, 861-866 36 Liberman E.S. & Bleiweis A.S. (1984) Infect. Immun. 43,536-542 37 Reizer J., Saier M.H. Jr., Deutscher J., Grenier F., Thompson J. & Hengstenberg W. (1988) CRC Crit. Rev. Microbiol. 15,297-338 38 Reizer J. & Panos C. (1980) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77, 5497-5501 39 Reizer J., Novotny M.J., Panos C. & Saier M.H. Jr. (1983)J. Bacteriol. 156, 354-361 40 Thompson J. & Saier M.H. Jr. (1981) J. Bacteriol. 146, 885--894 41 Deutscher J. & Saier M.H. Jr. (1983) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 80, 6790-6794 42 Deutscher J. & Engelmann R. (1984) FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 23,157-162 43 Reizer J., Novotny M.J., Hengstenberg W. & Saiel M.H. Jr. (1984) J. Bacteriol. 160, 333-340 44 Deutscher J., Pevec B., Beyreuther K., Kiltz H.-H. & Hengstenberg W. (1986) Biochemistry 25, 6543-6551 45 Romano A.H., Brino G., Peterkofsky A. & Reizer J. (i987) d. Bacterioi. 169, 5589-5596 46 Reizer J., Peterkofsky A. & Romano A.H. (1988) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85, 2041-2045 47 Mimura C.S., Poy F. & Jacobson G.R. (1987) J. Cell. Biochem. 33,161-171 48 Deutscher J., Kessler U., Alpert C.A. & Hengstenberg W. (1984) Biochemistry 23, 4455-4460 49 Waygood E.B., Mattoo R.L., Erickson E. & Vadeboncoeur C. (1986) Can. J. MicrobioL 32, 310-318 50 Eisermann R., Gonzy-Treboul G., Deutscher J. & Hengstenberg W. (1988)J. Biol. Chem. 263, 17050-17054

Schuetz K., Lee C.A., Stewart G.C., Breidt F. Jr,, Waygood E.B.. Peri K.G. & Doolittle R.F. (1988) FASEBJ. 2, 199-208 7 Schachtele C.F. & Mayo J.A. (1973)J. Dent. Res. 52, 1209-1215 8 Brown A.T. & Wittenberger C.L. (1973) Arch. Oral. Biol. 18, 117-126 9 Maryanski J.H. & Wittenberger C.L. (1975) J. Bacteriol. 124, 1475-1,181 10 Calmes R. (1978) Infect. tmmun. 19,934-942 11 Slee A.M. & Tanzer J.M. (1979) Infect. Immun. 24, 821 - 828 12 Slee A.M. & Tanzer J.M. (1979) Infect. lmmun. 26, 783-786 13 St. Martin E.J. & Wittenberger C.L. (1979) Infect. Immun. 24,865-868 14 Vadeboncoeur C. (1984) Can. J. Microbiol. 30, 495-502 15 NEron S. & Vadeboncoeur C. (1~87) FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 42, 7-11 16 Gauthier L., Mayrand D. & Vadeboncoeur C. (1984) J, Bacteriol. 160,755-763 17 Gauthier L., Vadeboncoeur C. & Mayrand C. (1984) Caries Res. 18, 289-295 18 WOrsch P. & Koellreutter P. (1985) Caries Res. 19,439-449 19 Keevil C.W., Williamson M.I., Marsh P.D. & Ellwood D.C. (1984) Arch. Oral Biol. 29, 871- 878 20 Ellwood D.C., Phipps P.J. & Hamilton I.R. (1979) Infect. Immun. 23,224-231 21 Hamilton I.R. & St. Martin E.J. (1982) Infect. Immun. 36, 567-575 22 Slee A.M. & Tanzer J.M. (1980) Infect. lmmun. 27,922-927 23 Slee. . .A. .M. . . . .,g, T n r t T ~ r l lk'l t'lflO"l~t uD ;c~t-./u,~ :r-u-. B i o . ....... .. ... . ~..,,J~/ ~ , phys. Acta 692,415-424 24 Thibault L. & Vadeboncoeur C. (1985) Infect. Immun. 50, 817-825 25 Vadeboncoeur C., Proulx M. & Trahan L (1983) Can. J. Microbiol. 29, 1694-1705 26 Mimura C.S., Eisenberg L.B. & Jacobson G.R. (1984) Infect. Immun. 44,708-715 27 Vadeboncoeur C. & Proulx M. (1984) Infect. lmmun. 46, 213-219 28 Sato Y., Poy F., Jacobson G.R. & Kuramitsu H. (1989) Y. Bacteriol. 171,263-271 29 Lodge J. & Jacobson G.R. (1988) Infect. lmmun.

