Metal-coordination sphere in the methylated Ada protein-DNA co-complex
Lawrence C Myers I, Timothy and Gregory
`Program fo 46 lgher Degrees in Biophysics and 3D J artment of Biological Chemistry /

D Cushing2,

Gerhard

Wagner1f3*

L Verdine1t2*
Harvard University, Cambridge, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02138, MA 02115, USA USA

and *Department of Chemistry, and Molecular Pharmacology,

Background: The Ada protein of Escherichia coli repairs methyl phosphotriesters in DNA by direct, irreversible methyl transfer to one of its own cysteine residues.This residue, Cys69, is ligated to a tightly bound zinc ion in the protein. After methyl transfer, Ada can bind DNA sequence-specifically, inducing the transcription of genes that confer resistance to the toxic effects of methylating agents. Coordination of zinc via a thioether-S is exceedingly rare. We therefore investigated whether methylation causes ligand exchange of Cys69, replacing the thioether with a new zinc ligand with higher affinity for the metal. Results: We added a 13C-labeled methyl group to Cys69 of Ada and used isotope-edited NMR to observe the Chemistry & Biology

behavior of its protons. Comparison of the spectra for the Zn- and *r'Cd- bound forms of the methylated protein with that of the "3Cd-bound form provided clear evidence that S-Me-Cys69 is coordinated to the metal in Ada when Ada is bound specifically to DNA. Conclusions: The transcriptionally competent form of Ada, in which Cys69 is methylated and the protein is bound to DNA, maintains the coordination of S-MeCys69 to the metal ion. Thus, ligand exchange is not responsible for switching Ada from a DNA-repair protein to a transcriptional activator.We propose that the lability of the thioether-zinc coordinate bond may provide a mechanism for down-regulation of the adaptive response by inactivation of the Ada DNA-binding domain. October 1994, 1:91-97 NMR, zinc

Key words:

Ada, cadmium,

Introduction
to sub-lethal dosages of methylating agents by inducing the synthesis of proteins that confer protection against the toxic effects of DNA methylation. The Ada protein is essential for this so-called adaptive response (for review, see [l]).Ada repairs one of the most mutagenic DNA adducts, 06-methylguanine (@-meG), by direct, irreversible transfer of the offending methyl group to a cysteine residue in the carboxyterminal domain (C-Ada19; Fig. 1) [2,3].Ada also repairs the S, diastereomer of DNA methylphosphotriesters (MePs) by direct transfer to another cysteine residue, Cys69, located in the amino-terminal domain [4]. Once Cys69 has been methylated, Ada becomes able to activate methylation-resistance genes in vitro [5]. Ada is thus essential for the regulation of the induction of the adaptive response, as well as participating directly in DNA repair.The ability of the Ada protein to activate transcription has been traced to an enhancement in its sequence-specific DNA-binding activity upon methylar tion of Cys69; the methylated protein (S-Me-Cys69 Ada) binds to several sites in the E. coli genome, activating expression of a methylation-resistance regulon [5-71. As suggested by the observation that overexpression ofAda leads to gratuitous induction of the ada regulon, the unmethylated protein does have some sequence-specific DNA-binding activity [B]. It has recently been determined that methylation of Cys69 increases the binding
Escherichia coli responds

affinity ofAda for the ada promoter by a factor of 103, which translates to a difference in binding free energy (25 "C) of = 4.2 kcal mol-' [8]. Uncovering the molecular basis of this effect will lead to a deeper understanding of ada regulon function, and should also provide insight into the general problem of how the post-translational modification of DNA-binding proteins governs their transcriptional activity [9]. The structures responsible for sequence-specific DNAbinding by Ada are contained entirely within the aminoterminal domain of the protein [8,10].This domain has been found to contain a tightly bound zinc ion that is essential for folding of the protein both in viva and in vitro [ll]. NMR studies on a *13Cd-labeled version of the 20 kDa amino-terminal domain of Ada (N-Ada20), coupled with similar studies on a truncated version that contains the intact zinc-binding module (N-AdalO; Fig. 1 b) and several mutant Ada fragments led to the unexpected discovery that the metal ion is directly coordinated. to the active site nucleophile, Cys69 [12]. This finding, confirmed by an NMR solution structure of N-Ada1 0 [ 131, suggested that the metal ion of Ada not only serves. to stabilize the tertiary structure of the protein, but also participates directly in the methyl transfer chemistry by increasing the nucleophilicity of Cys69. The zinc and cadmium forms of N-Ada10 are nearly isostructural asjudged by their NMR spectra [12],

*Corresponding

authors. 0 Current Biology Ltd ISSN 1074-5521 91

92

Chemistry

& Biology

1994, Vol

1 No

2

(a)

Ada
pmtdysis or

genetic engineering A,

H,N' S-Me-Q&9 N-Ada204 117

6)
C-Ada1 9 N-Ada20 N-Ada17 N-Ada10 y-; 1-j 178

I

C7

354

Q Chemistry

& Biology

1994

Fig. 1. Schematics of the Ada protein, its constituent domains, and the autocatalytic DNA-repair reaction of the amino-terminal domain. (a) Ada consists of two domains. The 20-kDa amino-terminal domain (N-Ada201, or a further truncated fragment (N-Ada1 71, repairs the S, diastereomer of methylphosphotriesters and, in its methylated form, binds DNA in a sequence-specific manner; the 19kDa COOH-terminal domain K-Ada1 9) repairs the mutagenic lesion 06-meG by direct methyl transfer to Cys321. Each domain retains its activity when separated from the other. (b) Schematic representation of Ada and its fragments. The metal-binding domain is shaded yellow, with the ligand residues denoted above. N-Ada1 7 comprises residues 1 to 153. This 17-kDa fragment, generated by gene truncation, fully retains all activities contained in the full amino-terminus (N-AdaZO), including methylation-enhanced sequence-specific DNA binding. N-Ada1 0, which comprises residues 1-92, retains MeP repair and metal binding activity, but is not capable of methylation-enhanced sequence-specific DNA binding.

and have similar affinities for DNA.These two forms of the protein show a four-fold difference in the rate of methyl transfer [S], however, consistent with the notion that the bound metal participates directly in the DNA repair reaction. The finding that the bound metal interacts directly with the active site Cys suggested that the metal may also form

part of the structural switch that converts Ada from a DNA-repair protein to a transcriptional activator. The fact that the thiolate-S of Cys69 is a much stronger zinc ligand than the thioether-S produced by methylation suggested the possibility that methylation might trigger ligand exchange or stereochemical rearrangement about the metal [12]. Ligand exchange seemed a particularly attractive option, as coordination of the thioether-S of

Metal

coordination

in Ada-DNA

co-complex

Myers

et al.

93

Met residues to zinc occurs rarely, if at all, in proteins. Furthermore, the matrix metalloproteases use a similar type of switch mechanism wherein chemical modiflcation of a zinc-bound Cys results in dissociation of that ligand and subsequent unveiling of the enzyme's masked zinc protease activity [ 141. The NMR solution structure of N-Ada10 revealed no obvious candidate ligand for the putative exchange reaction [ 131; however, this fragment lacks residues that are essential for sequence-specific DNA binding, even though it is fully competent to demethylate MePs [ 111. To address the coordination states of Cys69 after methylation, we have developed a procedure for specific labeling of the methyl group with 13C to permit selective observation of the attached protons `using isotope-edited NMR. Ohkubo et al. [ 151 h ave p ursued the reverse approach, in which all carbons of the protein except the Cys69 methyl group are labeled with 13C . Their results, reported while this manuscript was in preparation, support the notion that in the non-DNA-bound form of the methylated Ada amino-terminus, S-Me-Cys69 is coordinated to zinc. These studies, however, did not address the question of whether S-Me-Cys69 is coordinated to zinc in the transcriptionally competent form of Ada, the state in which the protein is bound specifically to DNA. Here we report that in the transcriptionally competent form ofAda, the active site S-Me-Cys is indeed coordinated to the metal ion.Ada thus represents an exceedingly rare example of zinc ligation by a thioether-S in a protein.These findings have important implications for understanding transcriptional switching in Ada.

T,lOMe, alkylates Ada and various amino-terminal fragments efficiently and with 1: 1 stoichiometry. This result, taken together with the observed increase in DNAbinding affinity of the Ada proteins methylated by TIIOMe, establishes that the homopolymer substrate methylates Ada selectively on Cys69 [8]. To label T,,OMe with 13C on its single phosphotriester moiety, a dT (13C)-methyl phosphoramidite was synthesized by a standard route [16,17], using 13C-labeled methanol as the source of the isotopically labeled methyl group. This phosphoramidite was used together with the standard dT in the synthesis of (methyl-`3C)T,,0Me by direct analogy to the known procedure [8]. The specificity of labeling of N-Ada17 with (methyl`3C)T,,0Me was e xamined by comparison of the onedimensional (1D) 13C-edited `H spectra of Zn-bound N-Ada17 methylated with either the labeled or unlabeled oligonucleotide. At the concentrations necessary for NMR measurements, we found that methylation of

(a) RS \
\ ,*SR

RS'

CdCS-PCH2-Cys69

(b) RS\

Results
Transfer of a 13C-labeled methyl group to Cys69

\ ,eQ@Fd--S-CyS69 RS I
"CH3

An Ada fragment containing residues 1-153 (N-Ada17; Fig. lb) has been shown to have virtually identical metalbinding and methylation-dependent DNA-binding properties to those exhibited by full-length Ada [8]. Sakashita et al. [lo] have reported a similar observation in a fragment containing residues l-146 . We have thus focused the present studies on N-Ada17, as this form of the protein represents a suitable candidate for future high-resolution structural studies. As a strategy to determine the ligation state of Cys69 following methylation, we chose to take advantage of the scalar coupling that is often observed between l13Cd and protons that are separated by three contiguous bonds from the metal. In a typical case, the P-protons of a Cys thiolate ligand are coupled to the `13Cd (Fig. 2a); the same three-bond relationship exists, however, for the protons on the methyl group of a metalbound S-Me-Cys (6 protons; Fig. 2b). We reasoned that the &Me-Cys69 could be uniquely identified among all the other atoms of the DNA and protein by specific labeling of the &carbon with 13C. This required the development of a method for transfer of a 13C-labeled methyl group specifically to Cys69 of N-Ada17. We have recently shown that a single-stranded thymidine homopolymer containing a single, centrally located MeP,

(`) ""\ RS'

SR Cd' .Ligand

+

S-CYS~~ `CH3
I

detection by a three-bond coupling exists between the metal and the Cys p protons. (b) If the S-Me-Cys69 remains a ligand in S-Me-Cys69 N-Ada1 7, then a three-bond coupling should be apparent between the l13Cd and the protons on the 13C-labeled methyl group (signified in bold type). Thus, the NMR signal for the methyl group in the `13Cd form of S-Me-Cys69 Ada bound to DNA would be broadened as compared to the corresponding forms of the protein/DNA complex with a NMR inactive bound metal (Zn or `12Cd). (c) If the S-Me-Cys69 does not continue to coordinate the zinc in S-Me-Cys69 N-Ada1 7, then there should be no threebond coupling between the 113Cd and the protons on the 13Clabeled methyl group. Thus, the NMR signal for the methyl group in the `13Cd form of S-Me-Cys69 Ada-DNA would not be broadened as compared to the forms of the complex with an NM&inactive bound metal (Zn or `12Cd).

Fig. 2. Ligation schemes for `13Cd in Ada and their NMR. (a) In the unmethylated form of l13Cd N-Ada,

94

Chemistry

& Biology

1994,

Vol

- `%x3
1 No 2

_y!+
4.0 3.0 wm 2.0 1.0
Fig. 3. 1 D 13C-edited heteronuclear multiple-quantum coherence NMR spectra of N-Ada1 7 methylated using (methyl-13C)T,,0Me and in a co-complex with a duplex oligonucleotide containing sequence-specific binding site for the protein. a

the issue of S-Me-Cys69 coordination unambiguously, we looked for the presence of three-bond coupling between the &CH, protons and the `13Cd in the protein-DNA complex. Coupling of the &CH, to `13Cd would not be expected to give rise to a well-defined peak splitting, but rather would be evident as line broadening of the proton peak, as three-bond lH-l13Cd coupling constants are commonly small [18]. It is thus necessary to compare the line width of the potentially scalar coupled system with isomorphous examples that are incapable of metal-ligand scalar coupling. For the latter, we prepared protein-DNA complexes having a 13C label on S-Me-Cys69, but including the NMR-inactive metals Zn or l12Cd.The latter control is especially important, as the structures of the complexes formed with `13Cd and `12Cd are expected to be virtually identical. A series of 2D `H-13C heteronuclear single quantum coherence (HSQC) spectra were measured for the `13Cd, `12Cd and Zn forms of (methyl-13C)S-Me-Cys69N-Ada17. In each spectrum, a single prominent peak was observed that was undetectable, at comparable sensitivity, in the same complex bearing a 12C methyl group (data not shown); this cross-peak can therefore be assigned to the 13C-labeled methyl group. The chemical shift of the cross-peak arising from the 13C-labeled methyl group for the `12Cd and `13Cd forms of the proteins was virtually identical, confirming the isostructural nature of the isotopomers; a corresponding peak in the Zn form was shifted slightly (= 0.1 ppm), presumably due to the differing electronic effects of bound Zn and Cd. Cross sections of the proton spectra for the various forms are presented in Fig. 4.To determine the line widths of the crosspeaks arising f?om the labeled methyl group, the peak widths at half-height were measured in the `H cross-sections of the HSQC spectra (Fig. 4).The cross-section of the methyl peak of the 113Cd-bound protein is broadened by = 5 Hz relative

N-Ada17 results in rapid precipitation of the protein from solution; however, in the presence of a duplex oligonucleotide containing a specific binding site for the protein, it remains in solution and retains the ability to bind DNA specifically [8]. All NMR experiments reported here were therefore carried out in the presence of a specific 2 1-bp oligonucleotide duplex containing an Ada binding site. Under these conditions, the 1D 13Cedited spectra of N-Ada17 treated with (rnethyl13C)T110Me exhibits a strong, single peak that is not observed in the N-Ada17 treated with unlabeled T, lOMe (Fig. 3) and is distinct from the peaks detected for (methyl-13C)T, lOMe alone (3.25,3.47 ppm for the two stereoisomers in CDCI,, data not shown).The chemical shift of the peak (Fig. 3) is consistent with that expected for &protons of S-Me-Cys. Taken together with our earlier results, these data establish that (methyl13C)TI,0Me transfers a single 13C-labeled methyl group to Cys69 of N-Ada17.
The coordination status of S-Me-Cys69

"kd

Protein

It has previously been shown that l13Cd serves as an NMR-active counterpart to Zn in proteins (181. Indeed, the substitution of Cd for Zn in Ada only weakly affects phosphotriester repair and DNA binding [8]. We therefore incorporated ' 13Cd into N-Ada1 7 biosynthetically [ 121. The `13Cd-bearing protein was then methylated by treatment with (methyl-13C)T,10Me in the presence of a duplex ohgonucleotide containing an Ada-binding site. As the chemical shift of `13Cd in proteins can be diagnostic of the nature of the bound ligands [18], we first attempted to detect the *13Cd directly. No signal was observed, however, presumably due to broadening caused by the large size of the protein-DNA complex (- 38 kDa), chemical shift anisotropy or dynamic effects [18]. Even if a signal were observed in these experiments, they would not prove conclusive, as appropriate chemical shift standards do not exist for all the possible Cys 3(X) ligation schemes.To address

312

3:o

2:8 ppm

216

214

2i

Fig. 4. 1 D proton cross-sections of a 2D ' H-13C HSQC spectrum showing the chemical shift and line width measurements for the 13C-labeled methyl group in the tmethyl-13C)S-Me-Cys69 AdaDNA co-complex containing a tightly bound (a) lr3Cd metal ion, (b) "*Cd metal ion and (c) Zn metal ion. The small shoulder peak observed in both cadmium samples is likely to originate from minor contaminating amounts of the Zn form of the complex.

Metal

coordination

in Ada-DNA

co-complex

Myers et al.

95

to either the ' "Cd-bound protein or the Zn-bound protein. This broadening, although small, is highly reproducible and is in a range expected for three-bond couplings of `13Cd to `H [ 191. Furthermore, whereas the line-width of the methyl peak in the l13Cd protein is broader than that in the *l'Cd and Zn proteins, the respective natural abundance 13C-lH crosspeaks in all three spectra possess same line widthsThe broadenthe ing observed in the spectrum of the `13Cd protein is therefore due to scalar coupling of the methyl to the `13Cd and not to variation in sample preparation or spectroscopy conditions. Based on the observation of this methyl-metal coupling, we conclude that the S atom of S-Me-Cys69 in Ada remains ligated to the metal, even when the protein is bound specifically to DNA.

Discussion
Methylation of Cys69 converts Ada from a DNA-repair protein to a potent activator of transcription [5]. This covalent modification of Ada brings about a 103-fold change in its specific DNA affinity, which constitutes the molecular basis for Ada's function as a biological switch [8]. The recent finding that Cys69 is activated toward methyl transfer by ligation to a tightly bound zinc ion raised the possibility that the metal may also be directly important in structural changes that may accompany functional conversion to a transcriptional activator. As methylation of Cys69 converts Ada from a strong zinc ligand to a substantially weaker one, it appeared possible that exchange of S-Me-Cys for another ligand, or alternatively stereochemical rearrangement about the metal center, might accompany methylation. Here, we have shown that the ligation status of Cys69 is unaffected by methylation.These results are in general agreement with those of Ohkubo er al. [15], who studied an Ada fragment in the absence of specific binding to DNA.There is still no information on whether stereochemical changes accompany methylation, and if so what they are. Preliminary chemical shift data, however, indicate that no major structural rearrangement occurs upon methylation [g, 151. The finding that a thioether is ligated to zinc in Ada is both unexpected and extraordinary.Although all the Met residues in proteins have thioether-S groups analogous to that in S-Me-Cys, there appears to be no known example in which Met is used to coordinate a zinc ion in a protein that normally binds zinc.The S atom of Met, however, is commonly used as a ligand in copper-containing proteins' such a plastocyanin. It has proven possible to replace the bound metal in plastocyanin with zinc or cadmium [20], and NMR evidence suggests that, at least in the case of the Cd-substituted protein, the metal is coordinated to Met [20,21].The observation of such a rare coordination scheme in Ada raises the question of whether the thioether ligation has a function apart thorn that of maintaining the folded structure of the protein and, perhaps, positioning the methyl group. Although further experiments will be required to determine whether this is the case, one possibility is that thioether coordination serves

as a mechanism for deactivating the adaptive response. We have consistently noted that the S-Me-Cys69 forms of all amino-terminal Ada fragments are substantially more labile toward irreversible unfolding than are the corresponding unmethylated proteinsIt is plausible that this is a consequence of the weaker zinc coordination in the methylated protein, which appears to destabilize the zinc cluster and its attendant elements of the protein core [l 11. Although sequence-specific binding to DNA dramatically stabilizes the methylated protein, the intracellular concentration of specific genomic binding sites is low. Non-specific binding to DNA by the methylated Ada protein may also stabilize the protein, but the protein readily dissociates from such sitesTherefore, the majority of methylated Ada protein is expected to spend some time free in solution, during which period it is highly prone to thermal inactivation. It thus appears that the adaptive response may be regulated by spontaneous unfolding resulting from ligand labilization, as well as by proteolysis of Ada. This possibility may also help explain the downregulation of transcription for the alkA promoter; from which the methylated N-terminal ofAda alone serves as a sufficient transcriptional activator [7,22]. If ligand reorganization does not contribute to transcriptional switching in Ada, how is it that methylation brings about a 103-fold change in binding of the protein to DNA? Comparing the data of Ohkubo et al. [15] with those reported here, we note that the methyl protons of S-Me-Cys69 Ada experience = 0.5 ppm downfield shift upon specific binding to DNA.This significant change provides evidence for an alteration in the environment surrounding the methyl group upon interaction of the protein with DNA. Barring stereochemical rearrangement about the metal, which seems unlikely, the simplest explanation for such a change in environment would be that Lh,e methyl group is in direct contact with DNA. Although 4.2 kcal mol-' exceeds the greatest free energy change observed for interactions involving a single methyl group (3.2 kcal mol-`; [23]), it may be that the difference reflects a loss of repulsive interactions that are present in the unmethylated protein, in addition to a gain of favorable interactions involving the methyl group. It seems possible that the sort of cooperative interactions that so frequently confer such remarkable strength and specificity on protein-DNA interactions may contribute to an exceedingly sensitive mechanism to. detect the presence or absence of a single methyl group.

Significance
Aberrant methylation of DNA by endogenous agents, such as S-adenosyl-L-Methionine and exogenous electrophiles gives rise to a variety of genotoxic adducts which are the target of proteinbased repair systems [24]. From the points of view of organismal evolution and human health, the most serious of these lesions is 06-meG, which causes G*C to A*T transition mutations by base-

96

Chemistry

& Biology

1994, Vol 1 No 2 A duplex 21-mer containing a specific binding site for Ada:

pairing with thymine during replication. The prototype for studies of 06-meG repair has been the E. coli Ada protein, which reverses this lesion and also repairs DNA methylphosphotriesters by direct, irreversible transfer of the methyl group to cysteines in its carboxy-terminal domain (Cys321) and amino-terminal domain (Cys69), respectively. The methylation of Cys69 reveals a sequencespecific DNA-binding activity in the aminoterminal domain, enabling Ada to activate transcription of a methylation-resistance regulon. The repair of DNA methylphosphotriesters is autocatalyzed by coordination of the acceptor residue, Cys69, to a tightly bound zinc ion. This finding raised the question of whether Cys69 methylation affects the coordination sphere of the bound metal, and, if so, how such changes would enable Ada to bind DNA in a sequence-specif% manner. The NMR studies presented here show that when S-Me-Cys69 N-Ada17 binds specifically to DNA, there is a three-bond coupling between the `13Cd ion that is tightly bound to Ada and the protons on the S-Me-Cys69. These experiments were possible because we were able to label the S-Me-Cys69 with a "CH3 group by synthesizing a 13C-labeled methylphosphotriester substrate for Ada. We could thus use isotope-edited NMR to observe the 13C-S-Me-Cys69 three-bond coupling directly. As the S-Me-Cys69 still remains to the bound metal in coordinated the transcription-competent form of the protein, the role of the bound metal in the transition that enhances sequence-specific DNA binding is probably a passive one. The weak S-Me-Cys69 ligand makes Ada more sensitive to thermal denaturation, however, perhaps providing a mechanism for transcriptional down-regulation of the adaptive response by inactivation of the transcription-competent form.

5'-d(GCAAATTAAAGCGCAAGATTG)-3' 3'-d(CGTTTAATTTCGCGTTCTAAC)-3' was synthesized by standard methods. The individual strands were purified by 20 % denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and recovered by a crush-and-soak protocol using 1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) followed by adsorption onto a Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and elution using 30 % CH,CN/70 % 0.1 M TEAB. Following removal of the solvent by Speed-Vat (Savant), the strands were dissolved in TE Buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA), quantified by W, and mixed together in equimolar parts. The combined strands were heated to 95 `C for 3 min. then allowed to cool slowly to room temperature. Other experiments [8] have shown that the duplex 21-mer binds Ada with an affinity equal to that of the intact ada promoter. Protein biosynthesis and purification N-Ada17 was produced by growth of an overproducing E. colt' strain [S] in rich media (Zn form) or metal-supplemented minimal media (l13Cd and I'Cd) as described [11,12].The proteins were purified as described previously [12]. *13Cd and `12Cd were purchased in the form of the elemental metal (Icon Services, Summit, NJ) and used as the respective chloride salts. Solutions of the chloride salts were formed by dissolving the elemental metal in 1N HCl with heating followed by neutralization with NaOH. Formation of the methylated protein-DNA co-complex The complex was formed by adding equimolar amounts of N-Ada17 and the duplex 21-mer along with a lo-fold molar excess of (methyl-r3C)T1 r (O-Me) and incubating at 37 "C for 2 h in a reaction buffer containing 50 mM Tris/HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT. Ultrafjltration using a lo-kDa cutoff filter (Amicon, Waltham MA) was performed to separate the homopolymer from the protein-DNA co-complex and to exchange the complex into a buffer suitable for NMR (25 mM NaP03, pH 6.4, 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM 2H-DTT f?om Isotec Inc., Miamisburg,OH). NMR spectroscopy Measurements were made using 1 mM 13C S-Me-Cys69 N-Adal7-DNA co-complex samples at pH 6.4 and 37 "C. All samples were lyophilized and resuspended in D,O (99.99 %) before spectroscopic measurements. The rH-13C heteronuclear singlequantum coherence (HSQC) and lH-13C heteronuclear multiple-quantum coherence (HMQC) spectra were recorded on a Bruker AMX-600 spectrometer. The 2D `H-t3C HSQC spectra were taken using a proton spectral width of 8333.33 Hz and 2048 complex points, giving a spectral resolution of 2.1 Hz per point. Acknowledgements: Supported by grants (to G.L.V.) from the Chicago Community Trust (Searle Scholars Program) and NSF (Presidential Young Investigator Program) and grants (to G.W.) from NSF; L.C.M. is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute Predoctoral Fellow.

Materials

and methods

Oligonucleotide synthesis Oligonucleotides were produced using an Applied Biosystems 380A DNA synthesizer using a stat&m phosphoramidite coupling cycle. The 13C labeled homopolymer (methyl13C)T,,0Me was synthesized by coupling five units of 5'-dimethoxytrityl thymidine 3'$cyanoethyl phosphoramidite (ABN) to a CPG thymidine resin (Milligen), then one unit of 5'dimethoxytrityl thymidine 3'-(methyl-r3C) methyl phosphoramidite, then five more units of 5'dimethoxytrityl thymidine 3'P-cyanoethyl phosphoramidite. The resin-bound c&gonucleotide was 5'-detritylated and then deprotected by a mod&cation of the procedure of Kuijpers et al. [25] using `%I m&mol, by analogy to a procedure described in detail elsewhere [8].The crude oligonucleotide product d(TpTpTpTpTpTp(O'3Me)TpTpTpTpT) was used directly without further purification.The "C-labeled phosphoramidite was synthesized by analogy to a published procedure [16,17], using 13C methanol (Cambridge Isotopes, Woburn, MA) as the source of the label.

References
1. Lindahl, T., Sedgewick, B., Sekiguchi, M. & Nakabeppu, Regulation and expression of the adaptive response to agents. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 57, 133-157. Teo, I., Sedgewick, B., Demple, B., Li, B., & Lindahl, Induction of resistance to alkylating agents in f. co& the product serves both as a regulatory protein and an enzyme of mutagenic damage. EMBOJ. 3, 2151-2157. Y. (1988). alkvlatina T. (1984). ada+ gene for repair

-

2.

Metal
3. Nakabeppu, Y., Kondo, H. Kawabata, S.-l., Iwanga, S., & Sekiguchi, M. (1985). Purification and structure of the intact Ada regulatory protein of Escherichia co/i K12, 06-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase. 1. Biol. Gem. 260, 7281-7288. Sedgewick, B., Robins, P., Tatty, N., & Lindahl, T. (1988). Functional domains and methyl acceptor sites of the Escherichia co/i Ada protein. J. Biol. Chem. 263, 4430-4433. Teo, I., Sedgewick, B., Kilpatrick, M.W., McCarthy T.V. & Lindahl, T. (1986). The intracellular signal for induction of resistance to alkylating agents in E. co/i. Cell 45, 315-324. Sakumi, K. & Sekiguchi, M. (1989). Regulation of expression of the ada gene controlling the adaptive response. /. MO/. Biol. 205, 373-385. Akimaru, H., Sakumi, K., Yoshikai, T., Anai, M. & Sekiguchi, M. (1990). Positive and negative regulation of transcription by a cleavage product of Ada protein. /. Mol. Biol. 216, 261-273. Myers, L.C., Jackow, F. & Verdine, G.L. Metal dependence of transcriptional switching in Escherichia co/i Ada. 1. Bio/. Chem. (in press). Hunter, T. & Karin, M. (1992). The regulation of transcription by phosphotylation. Cell 70, 375-387. Sakashita; H., et al., & Morikawa, K. (1993). Folding topology and DNA binding of the N-terminal, 14 kDa fragment of Ada protein. FEBS Lett. 323,257-260. Myers, L.C., Terranova, M.P., Nash, H.M., Markus, M.A. & Verdine, C.L. (1992). Zinc binding by the methylation signaling domain of the Escherichia co/i Ada protein. Biochemistry 31,4541-+547. Myers, L.C., Terranova, M.P., Ferentz, A.E., Wagner, G. & Verdine, G. L. (1993). Repair of DNA methylphosphotriesters through a metalloactivated cysteine nucleophile. Science 261, 1164-l 167. Myers, L.C., Verdine, G.L., & Wagner, C. (1993). Solution structure of the DNA methyl phosphotriester repair domain of Escherichia co/i Ada. Biochemistry 32, 14089-l 4094. Springman, E.B., Angleton, E.L., Birkedal-Hansen, H., & Van Wart, H.E. (1990). Multiple modes of activation of latent human fibroblast collagenase: evidence for the role of a Cys73 active-site zinc complex in latency and a `cysteine switch' mechanism for activation. Proc. Nat/. Acad. Sci. USA 87, 364-368. Ohkubo, T., Sakashita, H., Sakuma, T., Kainosho, M., Sekiguchi, M.

coordination

in Ada-DNA

co-complex

Myers et a/.

97

16.

4.

17.

5.

18. 19.

6.

7.

20.

8.

21.

9. 10.

22.

11.

23.

12.

24. 25.

13.

14.

& Morikawa, K. (1994). Methylation dependent functional switch mechanism newly found in the Escherichia co/i Ada Protein. I. Am. Chem.Soc 116,6035-6036. Tanaka, T., Tamatsukuri, S. & Ikehara, M. (1986). New approach to the synthesis of deoxynucleoside-phosphoramidite derivatives. Tetrahedron Lett. 27, 199-202. Wada, T., Ishikawa, K. & Hata, T. (1993). Nucleoside 3'-N,Ndialkylphoshonamidites as novel nucleotide units for the solutionphase oligonucleotide synthesis. Tetrahedron 49, 2043-2054. Summers, M.F. (1988). `t3Cd NMR spectroscopy of coordination compounds and proteins. Coordination Chemistry Rev. 86,43-l 34. Zerbe, O., Pountney, D.L., von Philipsborn, W. & Vasak, M. (1994). Vicinal t13Cd, ' Hb-cysteine coupling in Cd-substituted metalloproteins follows a Karplus-type dependence. J. Am. Chem. Sot. 116,377-378. Engeseth, H.R., McMillin, D.R. & Otvos, I.D. (1984). Comparative Cd-l 13 nuclear magnetic resonance studies of Cd(ll)-substituted blue copper proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 259, 4822-4826. Live, D.H., Kojiro, C.L., Cowburn, D. & Markley, J.L. (1985). Identification of proton NMR signals from the metal ligands in cadmium-substituted plastocyanin via two-dimensional multiplequantum detection in the absence of explicitly resolved `H-`13Cd coupling. 1. Am. Chem. Sot. 107,3043-3045. Shevell, D.E. & Walker, C.C. (1991). A region of the Ada DNA-repair protein required for the activation of ada transcription is not necessary for activation of a/!& Proc. Nat/. Acad. Sci. USA 88,9001-9005. Fersht, A.R., Shindler, J.S. & Tsui, W.-C. (1980). Probing the limits of protein-amino acid side-chain recognition with the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Discrimination against phenylalanine by tyrosyl-tRNA synthetases. Biochemistry 19, 5520-5524. Lindahl, T. (1993). Instability and decay of the primary structure of DNA. Nature 362, 709-715. Kuijpers, W.H.A., Huskens, J., Koole, L.H. & van Boeckel, C.A.A. (1990). Synthesis of well-defined phosphate-methylated DNA fragments: the application of potassium carbonate in methanol as deprotecting reagent. Nucleic Acids Res. 18, 5197-5205.

15.

Received: revisions

25 11111994; revisions requested: received: 29 Aug 1994. Accepted:

9 Aug 1994; 29 Aug 1994.

