Abstracts / Molecular Immunology 45 (2008) 4095­4182

4171

from C. albicans and characterized the role of these proteins for immune invasion. By using protein array, screening of an expression cDNA library, affinity chromatography and mass spectrometry, three factor H binding proteins from C. albicans were identified. These C. albicans complement regulatory-acquiring surface proteins (CaCRASPs) were recombinantly expressed and purified. Binding assays show that recombinant CRASP-1, -2, -3 bind host complement regulators factor H and FHL-1, and the binding domains within the host proteins were localized. Factor H has two contact sites for CRASP-1, which are located in short consensus repeats (SCR) 6-7 and SCR19-20. FHL-1 binds CRASP-1 via SCR67. Rather similar domains SCR5-7 and SCR16-18 of factor H and FHL-1 are used for binding to CRASP-2 and -3. In addition, CRASP-1, -2, -3 also bind plasminogen via lysine residues in a dose dependent manner. Attached to CRASP-1, -2, -3, all three host plasma proteins are functionally active. Factor H and FHL-1 show cofactor activity for cleavage of C3b, and bound plasminogen is converted to proteolytically active plasmin by urokinase-type plasminogen activator. Specific antiserum for CRASP-1 and -2 were generated and were used to demonstrate surface expression of CRASP-1 and -2 on C. albicans by using flow cytometry and immunefluorenscence. In summary, three factor H binding proteins from C. albicans, CRASP-1, -2, -3, were identified. Each protein binds host complement regulators factor H and FHL-1 for complement evasion. In addition, by binding host plasminogen, they contribute to tissue evasion. Thus, C. albicans utilizes multiple surface proteins to bind host complement regulators for evading complement attack. doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2008.08.226 P228 Interaction with C4b-binding protein contributes to the serum resistance of an anaerobic pathogen, Fusobacterium necrophorum Nathalie Friberg, Petteri Carlson, Seppo Meri, Hanna Jarva Haartman Institute, Helsinki, Finland Anaerobic bacteria are part of our environment and flora. They usually become invasive and pathogenic only under special conditions, e.g. tissue hypoxia, concomitant infection or neoplasia. Fusobacterium necrophorum is an exception and can on its own be pathogenic. This strictly anaerobic Gram-negative rod is involved in local and invasive diseases such as the life-threatening Lemierre's syndrome. This syndrome, characterized by sore throat, septicaemia, jugular vein thrombosis and disseminated infection, affects mainly healthy young adults. In order to cause disease, F. necrophorum must evade innate immune responses. The aim of our study was to understand how F. necrophorum avoids complement activation and whether it binds C4b binding protein (C4BP), an inhibitor of the classical and lectin pathways. We collected twelve F. necrophorum strains isolated from patients with sepsis. For 11 patients, infection was initially located in the oro-pharynx. Ten patients developed complications (distant infections, abscesses and/or jugular vein thrombosis). Patient 12 presented a different pathology: a facial cellulitis. All strains were resistant to serum killing after 1 h incubation in 75% normal human serum. In the direct binding and FACS assays all strains bound C4BP. The interaction between F. necrophorum and C4BP was hydrophobic and specific in nature. Bound C4BP remained functionally active as a cofactor for factor I in the cleavage of C4b. Strain 12 bound less C4BP than the other strains. Its survival in normal human serum was impaired after 3.5 h incubation compared to the other strains.

Interestingly, patients with the most severe symptoms carried strains with the strongest ability to bind C4BP. This suggests that the binding of C4BP contributes to the virulence and the survival of F. necrophorum in the human host. In conclusion, we show for the first time, that an anaerobic bacterium is able to bind the complement inhibitor C4BP to evade complement attack. doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2008.08.227 P229 Characterisation of the interaction of the human complement regulatory protein factor H with the periodontitis-associated Treponema denticola: Demonstration of specific digestion of factor H by dentilisin John McDowell a , Bernice Huang a , Christopher Fenno b , Richard Marconi a
a b

Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, USA University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA

Treponema denticola (Td) is associated with periodontitis and is predominant at the leading edge of subgingival plaque where it interacts with gingival epithelia. Td produces a number virulence factors including dentilisin, a protease which is cytopathic to host cells. We have identified a unique Td lipoprotein that binds complement regulatory proteins that we have designated as Factor H binding protein B (FhbB). Earlier analyses suggested that FhbB specifically bound to Factor H like protein 1 (FHL-1). However, here we describe a novel mechanism whereby FhbB binds Factor H (FH) which is then cleaved by dentilisin at the cell surface to generate a FH sub-fragment of 43 kDa that appears to be derived from the Nterminus of FH. Using a Td dentilisin mutant we demonstrate that cleavage of FH is dependent on this serine protease. FH bound to the dentilisin mutant but was not cleaved and was capable of serving as a Factor I cofactor in the proteolytic cleavage of purified C3b. To assess the molecular basis of the interaction of FhbB with FH, mutational analysis were conducted. The determinants of FhbB required for FH binding appear to be distributed throughout the protein and include putative coiled-coil domains. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of a pathogen that proteolytically cleaves FH to yield a fragment that remains bound to the cell surface. We hypothesize that Td utilizes the cell bound N-terminal fragment of FH to facilitate binding to host epithelial cells. This novel mechanism of adherence may contribute to increased plaque biofilm spread and periodontitis-associated tissue destruction. doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2008.08.228 P230 Scabies mite inactivated protease paralogues inhibit human complement Katja Fischer a , Frida Bergström b , Simone Reynolds a , Simone Beckham a , Charlene Willis a , Ruby Law c , Christoph Langendorf c , Anna Blom b , Ashley Buckle c , Robert Pike c , Dave Kemp a
a

The Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Australia Lund University, Malmö, Sweden c Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
b

Infestation of skin by the parasitic itch mite Sarcoptes scabiei afflicts 300 million people worldwide, particularly socially disadvantaged, overcrowded populations, such as indigenous Australian communities or residents of nursing homes. The high preva-

4172

Abstracts / Molecular Immunology 45 (2008) 4095­4182

lence of Scabies in young children and immune-deficient patients greatly facilitates secondary streptococcal infections with significant sequelae such as cellulitis, septicaemia, glomerulo-nephritis, rheumatic fever and heart disease. Emerging resistance to antiscabies agents emphasizes the need to identify potential targets for chemotherapeutic and/or immunological intervention. We have identified a multigene family of Serine Proteases comprising multiple catalytically inactivated members (Scabies Mite Inactivated Protease Paralogues (SMIPPs)) which are secreted into the gut of Sarcoptes scabiei. Immunohistochemistry experiments demonstrate that SMIPPs are located in the mite gut and in faeces excreted into the upper epidermis; hence their site(s) of action may be both external and internal to the mite. Scabies mites feed on epidermal protein including host plasma; consequently they are exposed to the host defence mechanisms internally as well as externally. We hypothesize that SMIPPs enable parasitic scabies mites to survive against the onslaught of the host defense by interfering with protease-mediated pathways. Complement is an obvious system that has evolved to limit the capacity of pathogenic parasites to survive and multiply within the epidermis. SMIPP proteins from different clades in an extensive phylogenetic tree have been expressed and purified from Pichia pastoris. This novel family of mite gut proteins has been shown to inhibit all three human complement pathways, presumably minimalising complement-mediated gut damage. High resolution structures show that the peptide binding groove is occluded; invoking mechanisms other than competitive inhibition of complement serine proteases. doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2008.08.229 P231 The role of paramyosin from blood fluke Schistosoma mansoni in inhibition of the complement system Lina Grekin a , Ram Cohen a , James M. Sodetz b , Daniel Gold a , Zvi Fishelson a
a b

action between the C-terminus of paramyosin and the globular head of C1q and the MACPF region in C8. Apparently, paramyosin utilizes the same domain for binding to C1q, C8 and C9 and, thus, to inhibit complement activation at multiple steps. The efficient ability of PmyCC to inhibit the complement cascade suggests that the PmyCC complement inhibitory sequence may be utilized for vaccine development against schistosomiasis and for treatment of complement-induced diseases. doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2008.08.230 P232 Schistosoma mansoni TOR is a tetraspanning orphan receptor on the parasite surface Corinne Lochmatter, Jürg Schifferli, Perrine Martin University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland A trispanning orphan receptor (TOR) has been described in Schistosoma haematobium and Schistosoma mansoni. Here we report the complete molecular organisation of the S. mansoni TOR gene, also known as SmCRIT (complement C2 receptor inhibitor trispanning). SmTOR gene consists of four exons and three introns as shown by cloning the single exons from S. mansoni genomic DNA and the corresponding cDNA from the larval stage (cercaria) and the adult worm. The SmTOR ORF consists of 1260 bp and is longer than previously reported with a fourth transmembrane domain (proposed new name: Tetraspanning Orphan Receptor), with however an unchanged C2 binding domain on the extracellular domain one (ed1). This domain differs in Schistosoma japonicum. A protein at the approximate expected molecular weight (55 kDa) was detected in adult worm extracts with polyclonal antibodies. doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2008.08.231 P233 Characterization of the complement inhibitory function of Rhesus rhadinovirus Marcin Okroj a , Linda Mark a , Anna Stokowska b , Scott Wong c , Nicola Rose d , David Blackbourn e , Bruno Villoutreix f , Brad Spiller g , Anna Blom a
a

Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel University of South Carolina, Columbia, USA

Schistosomiasis remains one of the most prevalent parasitic diseases, affecting more than 200 million people. The disease is caused by the blood fluke Schistosoma, which successfully evades the human immune system. Paramyosin is a protein that is present in invertebrate muscle and was also found on the surface of Schistosoma mansoni. Recombinant paramyosin was shown to bind to several complement components and inhibit complement activation. To characterize the interaction between paramyosin and the complement proteins C1q, C8 and C9, we prepared purified recombinant fragments of paramyosin in BL21 E. coli cells. Paramyosin-complement protein interaction was examined by using Western Blotting and ELISA assays. Paramyosin and its Cterminal fragment (PmyCC, 14.3 kDa) bound to C1q, C8 and C9 in a dose-dependent manner. Like intact paramyosin, PmyCC inhibited complement-mediated lysis of rabbit and antibody-coated sheep erythrocytes. We showed competition between C9 and C8 and between C9 and C1q in binding to PmyCC, suggesting that they bind to the same site within the PmyCC. Moreover, we found binding of PmyCC to the globular head of C1q and to the MACPF (membrane attack complex/perforin) domains in the - and -chains of C8. Recently, we mapped the binding to C9 and to the MACPF of C8 and the inhibition of C9 polymerization to a 10 amino acid sequence within PmyCC. In conclusion, these results suggest a specific inter-

Lund University, Malmö, Sweden University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland c Oregon Health & Science University, Oregon, USA d National Institute for Biological Standards and Control, Herts, UK e University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK f University of Paris V, Paris, France g Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK
b

Rhesus rhadinovirus (RRV) is currently the closest known, fully sequenced homolog of human Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV). Both these viruses of the Gammaherpesvirinae subfamily encode their own complement inhibitors: KSHV-complement control protein (KCP) and Rhesus rhadinovirus complement control protein (RCP), respectively, and these two molecules share 63% similarity. Previously we characterized the functional properties of KCP, including factor I cofactor and convertase decay accelerating activities as well as binding to activated early complement components and heparin. Herein, we performed comparative analyses for two variants of RCP protein, encoded by RRV strains H26-95 and 17577. RCP variants from the two strains of RRV supported C3b- and C4b-cleavage by factor I, similar to KCP. Decay accelerating activity for the classical C3 convertase was

