doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2007.04.008

J. Mol. Biol. (2007) 370, 492­511

Crystal Structures of tRNA-guanine Transglycosylase (TGT) in Complex with Novel and Potent Inhibitors Unravel Pronounced Induced-fit Adaptations and Suggest Dimer Formation Upon Substrate Binding
Bernhard Stengl 1 , Emmanuel A. Meyer 2 , Andreas Heine 1 , Ruth Brenk 1 François Diederich 2 and Gerhard Klebe 1 
Institut für Pharmazeutische Chemie, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marbacher Weg 6, 35032 Marburg, Germany Laboratorium für Organische Chemie, ETH Zürich, Hönggerberg, HCI, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland
2 1

The bacterial tRNA-guanine transglycosylase (TGT) is a tRNA modifying enzyme catalyzing the exchange of guanine 34 by the modified base preQ1. The enzyme is involved in the infection pathway of Shigella, causing bacterial dysentery. As no crystal structure of the Shigella enzyme is available the homologous Zymomonas mobilis TGT was used for structurebased drug design resulting in new, potent, lin-benzoguanine-based inhibitors. Thorough kinetic studies show size-dependent inhibition of these compounds resulting in either a competitive or non-competitive blocking of the base exchange reaction in the low micromolar range. Four crystal structures of TGT-inhibitor complexes were determined with a resolution of 1.58­2.1 Å. These structures give insight into the structural flexibility of TGT necessary to perform catalysis. In three of the structures molecular rearrangements are observed that match with conformational changes also noticed upon tRNA substrate binding. Several water molecules are involved in these rearrangement processes. Two of them demonstrate the structural and catalytic importance of water molecules during TGT base exchange reaction. In the fourth crystal structure the inhibitor unexpectedly interferes with protein contact formation and crystal packing. In all presently known TGT crystal structures the enzyme forms tightly associated homodimers internally related by crystallographic symmetry. Upon binding of the fourth inhibitor the dimer interface, however, becomes partially disordered. This result prompted further analyses to investigate the relevance of dimer formation for the functional protein. Consultation of the available TGT structures and sequences from different species revealed structural and functional conservation across the contacting residues. This suggests that bacterial and eukaryotic TGT could possibly act as homodimers in catalysis. It is hypothesized that one unit of the dimer performs the catalytic reaction whereas the second is required to recognize and properly orient the bound tRNA for the catalytic reaction.
© 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

*Corresponding author

Keywords: crystal structure; TGT; complexes; base exchange reaction; substrate binding

Introduction
Transfer RNA-guanine transglycosylases (TGTs, E.C. 2.1.2.23) constitute a family of tRNA-modifying enzymes present in archaea and bacteria, as well as in eukaryotes.1 TGTs catalyze the base exchange of specific guanine residues in tRNAs towards 7-substituted-7-deazaguanine bases in a kingdom-

Abbreviation used: TGT, tRNA-guanine transglycosylase. E-mail address of the corresponding author: klebe@mailer.uni-marburg.de

0022-2836/$ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

493 additional steps. The first is performed by QueA, the second by a still unknown cofactor B12-dependent enzyme.2,13 In some bacterial species, among them Escherichia coli and Shigella flexneri, queuosinetRNAAsp is further modified to glutamyl-queuosine by YadB, a glutamyl-queuosine tRNAAsp synthetase. YadB aminoacetylates one of the hydroxyl groups of the queuosine-pentenyl moiety.14­17 The base exchange mechanism catalyzed by TGT follows a ping-pong reaction mechanism (Figure 2).18 In a first step tRNA binds to TGT and G34 is cleaved off from tRNA. In an intermediate state tRNA ribose 34 is covalently bound to TGT. In a second reaction step, preQ1 replaces G34 in the active site and is incorporated into tRNA. Structurally the reaction pathway is well characterized by means of crystal structure analyses of Zymomonas mobilis TGT in complex with a tRNA substrate, preQ1 and guanine type inhibitors.3 Following the reaction pathway, TGT recognizes the tRNA substrate via a specific "zinc binding" subdomain and G34 is specifically addressed in the active site by Asp102, Asp156, Gln203, and Gly230 (Figure 2(a)). A polar contact towards the peptide NH group of Ala 232 is mediated via a water molecule (W1). G34 is buried in the active site by hydrophobic stacking interactions with Met260 and Tyr106. Asp280, located adjacent to the ribose ring 34, acts as catalytic nucleophile. Kept in position by Tyr258 and Gly261, the carboxylate oxygen of Asp280 attacks the C1 carbon of ribose 34 in a SN2 reaction and pulls the ribose ring towards Asp280.19 The ribose moiety performs a 40° rota-

specific manner. While in bacteria TGT incorporates preQ1, in archaea and in eukaryotes TGT inserts preQ0 and queuine, respectively (for chemical formulae see Figure 1).2 TGT belongs to the group of enzymes with a ()8/triose-phosphate isomerase (TIM)-barrel fold. Due to specific insertions and extensions associated with the enzyme function they form a separate superfamily within this fold.3 Among all TGTs, the bacterial TGT is characterized in most detail by means of kinetic and crystallographic studies.3 The bacterial TGT is part of an enzymatic pathway that incorporates the hypermodified base queuine into one of four specific tRNAs in the anticodon position 34 (the "wobble position", Figure 1).4 These tRNAs code for His, Tyr, Asn, and Asp (anticodon G34U35N36 N = A,U,C or G) and share a U33G34U35 sequence in common that is recognized by TGT.5,6 The enzyme performs the initial tRNA modification step replacing guanine 34 (G34) by preQ1.4 Most presumably, preQ1 is produced from guanosine triphosphate (GTP),7 by means of the queC, queD, queE, and queF gene products, which have been identified in a comparative genomics project.8 The involvement of QueC in preQ1 biosynthesis has been demonstrated in more detail.9 QueF has been characterized as a NADPHdependent oxidoreductase catalyzing the reduction of preQ0 to preQ1.10 Although preQ0 and preQ1 are present in bacterial cells and can bind to TGT, preQ1 is the preferred substrate of TGT.11,12 After incorporation of preQ1 into tRNA this base is transformed to the functional base queuine in two

Figure 1. Posttranslational modifications of tRNA in bacteria resulting in a queuine-modified tRNA in position 34. *It is still unclear which hydroxygroup of queuine is glutamylated in the last step.

494

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

Figure 2. Assumed mechanism for the base exchange reaction catalyzed by TGT. The base exchange follows a pingpong mechanism. First tRNA binds to TGT and Asp280 performs a nucleophilic attack onto C1 of the tRNA ribose cleaving guanine 34 from tRNA (a) and (b). Then preQ1 replaces guanine to finally be incorporated in tRNA in a reverse reaction step (c) and (d). W1 and W2 represent catalytically important water molecules.

tional movement anchored by the adjacent ribose phosphate groups P34 and P35 (Figure 3). This rotation causes rupture of the covalent bond between C1 and G34. It is controlled by Asp102 via its carboxy group, which forms an H-bond to the 2 OH group of the ribose. Upon rotation the 2OH group is finally pushed into a hydrophobic cleft formed by Val45 and Leu68 (Figure 3). This geometry results in a sterically favoured but electrostatically disfavoured intermediate.3 The cleaved guanine is most likely reprotonated in position 7 in the binding pocket by the water molecule W1 (Figure 2(b)). Both, guanine and water then leave the binding pocket and are replaced by preQ1. To properly accommodate preQ1, the Leu231­Ala232 peptide bond has to flip orientation, which is controlled by Glu235 acting as acid/base system (Figure 2(b) and (c)).3 PreQ1 is bound similarly to guanine except for its aminomethyl group that interacts directly with the flipped Leu231 carbonyl oxygen. For activation preQ1 has to be deprotonated in position N9 by Asp102 acting as a general base. The proton is shuffled from the active site to the

surrounding bulk water, supposedly mediated by another water molecule (W2) that bridges Asp102 with Gln107 at the upper rim of the binding pocket (Figures 2(c) and 3).19 In a reverse SN2 reaction step the now activated preQ1 attacks as nucleophile the C1 carbon of ribose 34. Upon product formation, the covalent bond towards Asp280 is cleaved and the ribose 34 2OH group is pushed back from its unfavourable environment to form a stable H-bond with Asp102 (Figure 3). In this step, the Asp102 carboxy group rotates and expels W2 from the active site followed by the final release of the preQ1modified tRNA from TGT. From a medicinal chemistry point of view, the bacterial TGT is a promising target for the development of antibiotics against Shigellosis. This bacterial dysentery is caused by members of the genus Shigella responsible for about 1.1 million deaths per year, predominantly in developing countries.20 Most infections can be treated successfully with existing antibiotics but the rising number of multidrugresistant Shigella strains urges the need for alternative drugs with deviating modes of action.21 To

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

495 scaffold for substitutions in positions 3 and 4 with various aromatic side-chains to address a hydrophobic cleft formed by Val45, Leu68 and Val282 adjacent to the G34 binding pocket (Table 2, 5­10). In earlier inhibitor studies based on a quinazolinone skeleton this cleft has been shown to accommodate hydrophobic side-chains, e.g. as attached to 11.28,31 Detailed results from crystal structure analyses of four lin-benzoguanine derivatives in complex with TGT are presented here and their structure-affinity relationship is discussed in detail. This was particularly challenging as the underlying inhibition mechanism of quinazolinones and lin-benzoguanines turned out to be more complex than previously assumed. Furthermore, the crystal structures are systematically analyzed with respect to structures of the uncomplexed enzyme and TGT in complex with its natural substrate tRNA-preQ1.

Figure 3. Structural superimposition of tRNA covalently bound to Asp280 (red) and preQ1-modified tRNA (orange) in the TGT binding pocket.19 Upon product formation ribose 34 anchored by P34 and P35 rotates with 2OH out of the hydrophobic environment formed by V45 and L68 and forms an H-bond to D102. In consequence, the catalytically important W2 is expelled from the binding pocket.

Results and Discussion
Inhibition constants A series of lin-benzoguanine derivatives (Table 1, 4), systematically modified in 3- and 4-position, was synthesized and kinetically characterized (Table 2, 5­10). All new compounds are potent TGT inhibitors, which underlines the relevance of the new scaffold as promising lead structure. Detailed analyses of the inhibition mechanism were performed. Trapping experiments, similarly applied by Xie et al. to derive TGT-tRNA complexes for crystallization,19 showed that depending on the size putative inhibitors follow different inhibition modes (Figure 4). For trapping experiments TGT is incubated with tRNA and various inhibitors. SmallTable 1. Small non-competitive TGT inhibitors exhibit competitive (Kic) and uncompetitive inhibition (Kiu)

successfully infect human intestinal cells Shigella bacteria produce plasmid-encoded virulence factors, which enable the bacteria to invade their host cells in the human colon epithelium.22,23 The successful translation of the most upstream positive regulator, a virulence factor called virF, relies on Q-modified tRNA molecules.24 The knockout of the tgt-gene in S. flexneri disables Q-formation and results in a significantly reduced virulence.25 This underlines the relevance of TGT as a promising target for drug design. As no crystal structure of Shigella TGT is available, the highly homologous Z. mobilis TGT with an overall sequence identity of 60% and a virtually identical active site (Supplementary Data: Table 2) has been used as reference structure for an initial design approach.26 Further rational design combined with computational approaches have identified putative leads from various structural classes as potent TGT inhibitors.27­29 Presently, the most promising compounds originate from the structural class of 6-amino-quinazolinones (2,6diamino-3H-quinazolin-4-ones) (Table 1, 1). Based on 1, systematic modifications resulted in potent micromolar TGT inhibitors, which also allowed the deciphering of some properties of the binding pocket (Table 2, 11).28,30,31 Here we report on the development of a new class of TGT inhibitors, based on scaffold 1 and extended by an imidazole moiety to reveal linbenzoguanine (6-aminoimidazol[4,5-g]quinazolin-8 (7H)-one) 4 (Table 1). This compound, prepared for the first time by Leonard et al.32, was used as

Standard deviation determinations.

a

calculated

from

double/triple

Ki

496
Table 2. Substituted, competitive TGT inhibitors

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

Uncompetitive contribution is negligible thus only Kic is given. Compounds 5­10 are lin-benzoguanine-based, 11 is the most potent quinazolinone-based inhibitor. a Standard deviation calculated from double/triple Ki determinations.

sized compounds such as 1 and 4 tend to stabilize the covalent TGT-tRNA intermediate formed subsequent to G34 cleavage. An SDS-PAGE performed

with the reaction products of this experiment shows retarded bands representing TGT with covalently attached tRNA (Figure 5(b)). In case of larger substituted inhibitors, e.g. 5, such a stabilisation remains almost undetectable. Here, only one strong band representing uncomplexed TGT is observed. These observations can be explained by the fact that TGT sequentially accepts two different substrates. At first, tRNA is covalently bound to TGT and G34 is released, subsequently followed by the incorporation of preQ1 into tRNA. Putative inhibitors can interfere at different stages with this reaction (Figure 4). Small leads of equal size and properties to preQ1 compete with tRNA as well as with preQ1 for TGT binding. In contrast, compounds decorated with additional side-chains are too large to be accommodated in the preQ1 binding site once tRNA is covalently attached to the enzyme. The additional side-chains would sterically interfere with the ribose 34 binding site (Figure 5(a)). Thus, they can only compete with tRNA binding to TGT. To discuss the inhibitory potency in a consistent manner for ligands of different size, the binding data presented will refer to TGT inhibition with respect to tRNA binding (Figure 4). All substituted lin-benzoguanine compounds (5­10) are almost exclusively competitive with the binding of tRNA to TGT, as indicated by the trapping experiments. They solely inhibit the initial step of the base exchange reaction and Kic, the competitive inhibition constant, is sufficient to describe their inhibitory potency (Figure 4). In contrast, unsubstituted compounds such as 1 and 4 show non-competitive inhibition of TGT with respect to tRNA binding. In this case, two independent inhibition constants have to be considered. The first describes interference with tRNA binding to TGT (competitive inhibition, Kic) and is identical to the inhibition constant for substituted compounds. The second refers to the stabilization of the covalent TGT-tRNA intermediate by blocking the base recognition site occupied by preQ1 after G34 is released. Small compounds compete with preQ1 for this site and further prevent product formation by an alternative mechanism. With respect to tRNA as substrate this is an uncompetitive mode of inhibition (Kiu). Thus, small compounds contribute via two binding equilibria to the total inhibition of the base exchange reaction. Determination of the inhibition constants is based on the exchange of guanine-34 in tRNA against tritium-labelled [8-3H]guanine as similarly labelled preQ1 is not available.26 Inhibition constants are calculated determining the reduction of the initial velocity vo of the base exchange reaction in the

Figure 4. Inhibition model for TGT with respect to tRNA binding. Depending on their size, inhibitors show either competitive Kic (5) or uncompetitve inhibition Kiu (1) of tRNA binding.

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

497

Figure 5. (a) Superposition of TGT·5 and TGT·7 (white) with covalently attached tRNA,19 via Asp280 together with the bound substrateanalogue 9-deazaguanine (grey). While the lin-benzoguanine scaffold replaces 9-deazaguanine, the phenyl-substituents would interfere with the covalently attached ribose 34 binding site at Asp280. (b) SDSPAGE of trapping experiment performed with TGT, tRNA and different inhibitors. Inhibitors 1 and 4 stabilize the covalent TGT-tRNA complex, resulting in retarded bands. For substituted inhibitor 5 this stabilization is only marginal.

presence of inhibitor (formula 1).33,34 At various concentrations inhibitors alter the kinetic constants of the TGT base exchange reaction (Km and Vmax). While Kic modulates Km (formula 2), Kiu reduces Vmax (formula 3). It turned out that uncompetitive inhibition is only relevant for compounds of equal size to preQ1 (Kiu [M]: 0.6(1), 1.7(2)). Already marginally bigger ligands such as the unsubstituted lin-benzoguanine (Kiu[M]: 7.9(4)) or 8-methyl-quinazolinone (Kiu [M]: 19.1(3)) show significantly reduced uncompetitive inhibition due to steric interference with the covalently bound tRNA. To allow estimation of a possible uncompetitive contribution of ligands with larger substituents, the Kiu of 5 has been determined. With a value in the region of 50 M it is separated from tRNA competitive binding by a factor of 50. Obviously, for substituted compounds uncompetitive inhibition still occurs but not to a relevant level. These results are consistent with the trapping experiments. However, these findings clearly reveal that all previous considerations about the structureactivity relationship of quinazolinone-based inhibitors were tampered by the unconsidered contribution of uncompetitive inhibition especially for the small compounds. Thus, the latter were overestimated in their potency with respect to competitive inhibition.31 Comparison of competitive inhibition constants (Kic) for lin-benzoguanine 4 with respect to 6aminoqinazolinone 1 shows a slight decrease of inhibitory potency with respect to the former (Kic [M]: 1.5(1), 4.1(4)). Substitution of 4 in 4-position, as

realized in 5, results in slightly improved affinity. With a Kic of 1.0 M 5 has been the most potent TGT inhibitor known and it is slightly stronger than that of the equally substituted 6-amino-quinazolinone 11 (Kic[M]: 2.6).35 For all other substituted compounds 6­10, Kic remains in the same range or drops slightly. Structural evidence for these trends will be discussed in in the next section. Determination of inhibition constants was additionally complicated by the low solubility of some compounds in the assay solution. This may mimic non-specific inhibition as a consequence of aggregate formation.36 To avoid such effects, the detergent Tween-20 was added to the assay solution, which had been demonstrated to significantly reduce aggregation.37 Further details about the synthesis, the novel assay protocol and the re-evaluation of several known inhibitors are published elsewhere.35 Crystal structures of TGT·inhibitor complexes Crystallization experiments were performed with all synthesized compounds to obtain binary Z. mobilis TGT·inhibitor complexes. The improved solubility of the lin-benzoguanine derivatives with respect to the previously investigated 6-aminoquinazolinone enhanced the success rate for soaking. For 4, 5, 6, and 7, soaking at a pH of 5.5 resulted in crystals diffracting up to 1.58­2.1 Å. Details of the data collection and refinement statistics are given in Table 5 in Materials and Methods. For 9 and 10 the substitution of 4 at N3 reduced solubility of the

498 compounds. For 9, no bound ligand could be detected after soaking, for 10 the binding pocket was only partly occupied by the ligand. Due to reduced population and/or structural disorder of the ligand the diffraction data were not sufficient for structural refinement. The assumed binding mode of lin-benzoguanines could be confirmed by crystal structure analysis of 4 in complex with TGT at a resolution of 1.7 Å. The position of 4 is well defined in the G34 binding pocket as indicated by the Fo­Fc omit map (map excluding the ligand coordinates from the refinement to test the quality of the ligand electron density) contoured at 2.4 (Figure 6(a)). For reasons of visualization and comparability identical  levels were applied for respective Figures. Inhibitor 4 is in tight contact with the protein forming seven Hbonds and 60 van der Waals interactions. A total of 94% of its solvent accessible surface becomes buried upon complexation (Table 3). The observed binding mode is similar to that of the natural substrate preQ1 (Figure 2(c)) and the initial lead 1 (Figure 6(b)). The residual electron density of 4 is better defined compared to 1. Both 4 and the residues forming the G34 binding pocket are properly ordered, whereas for 1 several split side-chain conformations were observed.28 It had been anticipated that 1 did not populate all binding pockets in the crystal upon soaking due to reduced ligand solubility. Thus, the diffraction pattern, recorded as average for the entire crystal, comprises a superimposition of the ligand-bound and the ligand-free situation. The former was refined to 60% occupancy. It shows, superimposed with the unoccupied situation, for Asp102, Asn70 (Gly69-His73), Leu231, and Ala232 two alternative conformations. This gives rise to the interpretation that, upon ligand binding, Asp102 is rotated towards the ligand and Asn70 moves together with the Val45-His73 backbone strand by 2 Å. Furthermore, the Leu231/Ala232 peptide bond is flipped to expose its carbonyl oxygen for H-bonding to the 6-amino group of 1 (Figure 6(b)). In the TGT·4 complex the ligand-binding site is fully occupied. Binding pocket residues adopt only one conformation, which is similar to TGT·1 in the

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

ligand-bound state. Asp102 recognizes the ligand via a double hydrogen bond. The movement of Asn70 significantly extends the volume of the adjacent hydrophobic cavity formed by Val45 and Leu68. A similar cluster of crystal water molecules stabilizes Asp102 and Asp280 in both structures (Figure 6(a) and (b)). In consequence, the further design concentrated on filling the enlarged hydrophobic cavity, at the same time expelling the water cluster. Due to an increase in molecular degrees of freedom, this step is generally assumed to be favourable for entropic reasons. Crystal structure analyses of TGT·5 and TGT·6 show that this goal has been successfully achieved and the aromatic substituents occupy the cavity (Figure 6(c) and (d)). In both structures, the basic lin-benzoguanine scaffold is located equally as in TGT·4. Surprisingly, no significant gain in affinity was observed for the substituted derivatives compared to 4 (Kic[M]: 4.1(4), 1.0(5), 6.9(6)). Obviously, the replacement of the water cluster next to Asp280 and Asp102 is energetically crucial. Possibly, the polarizable water molecules buffer and compensate for the negative charges of the nucleophile Asp280 as well as of Asp102, which recognizes the substrate and catalyzes the proton abstraction. All substituted derivatives 5­11 cross this region of the binding pocket with hydrophobic, hardly polarizable portions unable to form any polar interactions. Supposedly, any disturbance of the water network is detrimental to binding. Crystal structure analyses of TGT·2 and TGT·3 had already indicated that the 8-methyl-substituted 3 instead of 2 disrupts the water network and produces unfavourable contacts to the carboxy group of Asp102.31 Subtracting the uncompetitive inhibitory contributions of 2 and 3 reveals an almost twofold affinity decrease for the latter (Kic [M]: 2.1(2) vs. 3.7(3); Table 1). Analysis of the complexes TGT·5 and TGT·6 reveals an unexpected conformational splitting for both, ligand and active site residues. Both structures were resolved to a resolution of 1.58 Å, thus allowing the interpretation of partial occupancy. With respect to a plane determined by the lin-

Figure 6. Crystal structure of 4 in the binding pocket of TGT determined at 1.7 Å resolution. 4 is contoured at 2.4 in the Fo­Fc density map. The ligand is well-defined in the binding pocket. No split conformations can be observed. Asn70 adopts the same geometry as in TGT·1 (cf. (b)). A distinct water network is found between D102 and D280. (b) Binding mode of 1 in the binding pocket of TGT.28 The binding pocket is characterized by split conformations of protein residues in the active site due to partial occupancy of the inhibitor in the crystals. Residues coloured in grey represent the apo conformation, residues in yellow correspond to the inhibitor-bound conformation. (c) Crystal structure of 5 in the binding pocket of TGT determined at 1.58 Å resolution. 5 is contoured at 2.4  in the Fo­Fc density map. The lin-benzoguanine scaffold is in similar position as 4. The phenyl substituent adopts two conformations (grey, d; yellow, u) paralleled by two conformations for N70. The conformation of N70u is structurally similar to that of N70 in TGT·4 (a). (d) Electron density of the N70 loop in the binding pocket of TGT·5 contoured at 1.0 in the 2 Fo­Fc density map. Associated with the split conformations of 5 the residues G69­H73 adopt two arrangements. (e) Crystal structure of 6 in the binding pocket of TGT determined at 1.58 Å resolution. 6 is contoured at 2.4 in the Fo­Fc density map. The lin-benzoguanine scaffold is equally positioned to 4 and 5. The phenyl substituent was only refined in up-conformation (yellow). Nevertheless electron density suggests also the presence of the down-conformation (grey). Also in this structure N70 adopts two orientations. (f) Electron density of the N70 loop in the binding pocket of TGT·6 contoured at 1.0 in the 2Fo­Fc density map. Residues G69­H73 adopt two almost equally distributed conformations (u-conformation shown in yellow and d-conformation in grey).

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

499 was too pronounced and the difference electron densities of ligand substituents and active site residue side-chains were not well-enough defined to unambiguously relate these split conformations to specific structural adaptations of the binding pocket. In TGT·5 the d-conformation is slightly higher populated than the u-conformation (occupancy of

benzoguanine skeleton the 4-substituent is either orientated above (up-conformation, u) or below this plane (down-conformation, d). Both orientations are observed side-by-side in the same crystal, suggesting virtually equivalent energy content. Both orientations have already been reported for substituted quinazolinone-type inhibitors (e.g. 11).28 However, in these cases structural disorder

Figure 6 (legend on previous page)

500
Table 3. Kic values for 4­7, average B-factors for scaffold and substituent; number of formed H-bonds, van der Waals contacts in the binding pocket and percentage of buried solvent accessible surface for the ligands
Compound 4 5ua 5da 6u 6.9 21.3 45.6 7 92 90 7d 7d (TGT1)b (TGT2)b 3.7 39.0 54.0 7 88 95 29.3 32.9 7 102 93

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

Kic (M) 4.1 1.0 Ø B-factor scaffold 20.2 15.2 15.0 Ø B-factor substituent ­ 27.8 23.1 Nr. of H-bonds 7 7 7 Nr. of v.d.Waals 60 96 86 interactions Buried solvent 94 93 93 accessible suface [%]
a b

5 was separately calculated for u- and d-conformation. 7 refers to the two symmetry-independent dimers in TGT1·7 and TGT2·7.

56% versus 44%) and has a lower average B-value for the phenyl substituent (23.1 Å2 versus 27.8 Å2) (Figure 6(c) and Table 3). The two observed conformations of the substituents correlate with the two different binding-site conformers involving the Asn70 backbone stretch from Gly69 to His73. They deviate by 1.4 Å as indicated by the averaged C rmsd. In Figure 6(d) the shift of the Gly69­His73 backbone is visualized with the most pronounced shift of 1.9 Å experienced by Thr71. For the dconformation Asn70 (N70d) is found in virtually the same position as in uncomplexed TGT. In the uconformation Asn70 (N70u) adopts a position similar to that in TGT·4 and its carboxamide moiety performs a parallel stacking with the phenyl ring of the substituent. Accordingly, both conformations are largely identical to either the ligand-bound or ligandfree conformations observed in TGT·1 (Figure 6(b)). But in contrast to this structure, in TGT·5 both protein conformers are accommodating the ligand. In the crystal structure of TGT·6 u- and d-conformation split differently. Electron density suggests that the aromatic substituent favours the u-conformation, however with reduced accuracy, as indicated by the rather diffuse side-chain electron density (Figure 6(e)). With an average B-value of 45.6 Å2, the substituent exhibits a significantly higher value compared to the remaining scaffold atoms (21.3 Å2, Table 3). Surprisingly Asn70 is found almost equally distributed in u- and d-conformation (Figure 6(f)). Consulting TGT·4 and TGT·5 it can be concluded that the Asn70d conformer is only observed once the lin-benzoguanine scaffold is substituted. Therefore, it is assumed that also for 6 the d-conformation of the side-chain is present, however, distributed over multiple states, thus resulting in a rather inaccurately defined electron density (Figure 6(e)). In consequence, this conformation was not included in the refinement. Nevertheless, its likely geometry has been added in Figure 6(e) and (f) to show its putative contacts to Asn70d. Directly facing the orientation of Asn70d in TGT·5 and TGT·6 shows that this residue is further pushed out of space as a consequence of accommodating the extended para-

methylphenyl substituent in 6, supposedly prompting for the less-well defined binding mode (Figure 6(c) and (e)). For TGT·7 the analysis of the crystal structure shows a more complex picture. As for the other ligands soaking of 7 into preformed TGT crystals was performed. Compared to the other complexes a loss of the C-centering is observed upon soaking, resulting in a space group transition from C2 to P2. We carefully checked the extinction rules and Patterson maps (see Materials and Methods) to verify the observed symmetry reduction. Two independent TGT molecules are now present in the asymmetric unit instead of one in C2. One of them (TGT1) exhibits a structure very similar to the previously discussed complexes (see Figure 7). The second (TGT2), however, is structurally altered due to modified contacts in the packing. To ease the discussion, TGT1, which fits well into the series, will be discussed here, whereas the slightly deviating binding mode of TGT2·7 will be addressed separately below. In TGT1·7 the binding pocket and its vicinity shows very similar geometry to TGT·5 and TGT·6. No split conformations are apparent in TGT1·7 as detected for 5 and 6, however, this complex could only be recorded to lower resolution. Only the d-conformation is found (Figure 7(c)). The electron density of the para-methoxyphenyl substituent is defined with limited accuracy. Its average B-value (54.0 Å2) is significantly higher than for the remaining scaffold (39.0 Å2). Nevertheless, the ligand is buried to 95% from solvent access (Table 3). Also Asn70 adopts only the dconformation and forms close contacts with the methoxy group of the substituent. Obviously, this further size-expanded substituent (cf. 5 and 6) avoids accommodation in the u-conformation. Thus, the substituent of 7 inverts the shift of Asn70 towards the u-conformation caused by the unsubstituted lin-benzoguanine scaffold in TGT·4 (Figure 6(a)). The position occupied by the carboxamide group of Asn70 in the u-conformation in other structures is occupied in the present case by a water molecule (W3) mediating a contact to Gln107 (Figure 7(c)). In contrast to TGTx*5 and *6 the sidechain of this residue is fully ordered. Induced fit upon substrate/inhibitor binding Induced-fit adaptations observed in the complexes TGT·4­TGT·7 were identified to be of functional relevance as they are similar to those observed when TGT is bound to tRNA. The comparison of the structures of uncomplexed TGT,38 and the one bound to a tRNA anticodon stem loop,19 reveals a series of adaptations in the vicinity of the G34/preQ1 binding pocket (Figure 8(a)). Asp102 involved in H-bonding to Asn70 and Thr47 in the uncomplexed situation, rotates towards preQ1. Simultaneously, Asn70 and Thr47 engage in the stabilization of the U35 phosphate group. During this transition Thr47 shifts by about 1.8 Å and the backbone strand from Gly69 to His73 is translocated by 1.0 Å (C-rmsd 69­73).

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

501

Figure 7. (a) TGT·5 crystallizes in space group C2 with one TGT molecule per asymmetric unit. Two TGT molecules form a symmetric dimer via a 2-fold axis. In the unit cell two identical dimers are present symmetry-related by C-centering. (b) In TGT·7 C-centering degenerates upon ligand soaking, reducing crystal symmetry to the space group P2. In consequence, two independent TGT dimers are found in the unit cell. In TGT2 helix 1 and loop 1-1, involved in dimer interface formation, are disordered. In TGT1 helix 1 and the dimer interface are ordered, similar to the dimers in C2. (c) Crystal structure of 7 in the binding pocket of TGT1 structurally similar to C2 complexes. 7 is contoured at 2.4 in the Fo­Fc density map. The lin-benzoguanine scaffold as well as the para-methoxyphenyl substituent are defined to limited accuracy. N70 adopts a conformation similar to that in uncomplexed TGT. W3 is found in an equal position to N70 in TGT·4. (d) Crystal structure of 7 in the binding pocket of TGT22 (dimer with modified interface). 7 is contoured at 2.4 in the Fo­Fc density map. The lin-benzoguanine scaffold as well as the para-methoxyphenyl substituent are well defined. Due to the disordered helix 1 V45­T47, L68­N70 and Q107 adopt conformations that significantly extend the binding pocket size. (e) Binding pocket and dimer interface of TGT1·7. Helix 1 and loop 11 are fully ordered and engaged in dimer interface contacts, whereas the ligand is not fully buried inside the obviously too small hydrophobic pocket. (f) Binding pocket and dimer interface of TGT2·7. Helix 1 and the adjacent loop are not ordered. This allows the further extension of the size of the pocket. In consequence, 7 penetrates deeper into the pocket and becomes properly ordered.

502

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

Figure 8. (a) Structural superimposition of uncomplexed TGT38 (grey) and preQ1-tRNA (orange) bound to TGT19 (red). Multiple conformational adaptations can be observed upon tRNA binding. (b) Structural superimposition of uncomplexed TGT (grey), preQ1-bound tRNA19 (red), TGT·5 in u-conformation (green), and TGT1·7 (blue). Upon tRNA binding Y106 rotates and shifts to perform a hydrophobic stacking towards ribose 34. Q107 rotates into the binding pocket to stabilize W2 together with D102. In TGT·5 and 7 the shift of Y106, stacking on top of lin-benzoguanine, is less pronounced compared to the tRNA-bound situation. As a consequence, the Q107 side-chain is either disordered (green) or W2 is not found in the binding pocket (blue). (c) Structural superimposition of uncomplexed TGT (grey), preQ1-tRNA bound TGT19 (red), and TGT·5 in u- and d-conformation (green). Upon tRNA binding the H-bond network of D102-N70T47 (grey) is disrupted. All residues are involved in substrate binding. T47 flips, N70 shifts towards a position previously occupied by W3 and D102 rotates towards preQ1. In TGT·5 N70u is similar to the tRNA-bound conformation, N70d corresponds to the uncomplexed conformation. T47 adopts an intermediate conformation. (d) Structural superimposition of uncomplexed TGT (grey), preQ1-tRNA bound TGT (red) and TGT·5 in u-conformation (green). In uncomplexed TGT W3 is stabilized by D102 and the amide group of Y72. In the tRNA-bound state and in TGT·5 N70 replaces W3 and forms an H-bond to the amide group of H73.

Additionally, the Thr47/Ala48 peptide bond is flipped. The carbonyl group of Thr47 is now binding to the amide nitrogen of Asn70, thus stabilizing the shifted geometry of the Gly69­His73 backbone stretch. Tyr106, closing up the G34/preQ1 recognition pocket in the uncomplexed state performs a hydrophobic stacking with the ribose ring adjacent to preQ1 once tRNA is bound. In this state, the Tyr106 backbone is shifted by 1.9 Å compared to uncomplexed TGT. In consequence, the neighbouring Gln107 side-chain is no longer hydrogen-bonded to

His73, which is located at the outer rim of the binding pocket. Instead Gln107 orients towards the G34/ preQ1 recognition site to subsequently involve Asp102 in water (W2)-mediated interaction. Presumably, this water molecule is important in the catalytic mechanism assisting Asp102 and Gln107 to shuffle a proton out of the binding pocket (Figure 2(c)). Inhibitor binding of TGT·5, TGT·6, and TGT1·7 partially reflects these structural rearrangements, however, obviously they do not proceed beyond these substrate-induced adaptations. The discussion

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

503 tion the modification of the binding pocket geometry. Also Thr47 has to re-orient after losing close contact to the Asn70 side-chain upon tRNA binding (Figure 8(a)). In the crystal structure of TGT·5 Thr47 is lacking a proper interaction partner (Figure 8(c)). The residue remains rather scattered over several arrangements as indicated by a poorly defined electron density and an augmented average B-value of 57.3 Å2. The backbone flip is observed similarly to the tRNA-bound state but no backbone shift can be observed. Thus, no H-bond towards the backbone of Asn70 is formed. Obviously this allows the presence of Asn70 in two alternative conformations. However, within the domino-type rearrangement process the presence of a rather disordered residue points to the relevance of interaction partners to stabilize alternative geometries. Dimer interfaces and inhibitor binding Structure determination of TGT·7 revealed a space group symmetry reduction upon soaking (C2 to P2 transition). Uncomplexed TGT crystallizes in C2 with one TGT molecule per asymmetric unit (four per unit cell). Via 2-fold symmetry, a TGT monomer is supplemented in the crystal packing to form a tightly associated homodimer with an interface of 1667 Å2 buried solvent accessible surface. This was first described by Romier et al.38 The C2 symmetrical unit cell is complemented by two weakly interacting homodimers, related by C centering (Figure 7(a)). In all cases studied up to now, this crystal symmetry is conserved upon soaking. In TGT·7, C centering degenerates and two symmetry-independent protein molecules, TGT1 and TGT2, form the asymmetric unit resulting in two homodimers in P2 (Figure 7(b)). This observation coincides with the fact that the two homodimers accommodate 7 slightly differently. While in TGT1, the homodimer interface shows similar geometry as in all other known complexes, in TGT2 inhibitor binding seems to interfere with the dimer interface perturbing the orientation of Val45Lys52 in the 1-1 loop. In the latter dimer, about half of the 1-1 loop and the whole helix 1 are not visible in the electron density (Figure 7(b) and (f)). In TGT1 this helix remains ordered. The residues Ala49, Thr50, and Lys52, residing in the 1-1 loop, form in TGT1 and all other C2-symmetric structures interactions to Tyr330, His333, Leu334, Glu339, and Leu341 located in the zinc binding-subdomain of the dimer molecule. This, along with the size of the interface, suggests a tightly bound dimer. Especially notable is the charged interaction between Lys52 and Glu339 (Figure 7(e)). Although Ala49, Thr50, and Lys52 are not ordered in TGT2, further interactions within the dimer interface maintain the structural integrity of the TGT2-dimer (see below). Adjacent to Ala49­ Lys52, the residues Val45­Thr47 in the 1-1 loop are located at the outer rim of the active site. They are part of the small hydrophobic ribose 34 binding

will focus on Asn70/Thr47 and Tyr106/Gln107 as they monitor best the underlying processes. The conformational changes observed for Tyr106/ Gln107 in the inhibitor-bound states are less pronounced than those observed upon tRNA binding. This results from the fact that Tyr106 performs a hydrophobic stacking onto the lin-benzoguanine scaffold in inhibitor-bound states, whereas it is stacking onto ribose 34 in the tRNA-bound state (Figure 8(b)). The latter requires a pronounced backbone shift with respect to the uncomplexed conformation (1.6 Å compared to uncomplexed TGT). The smaller shift of Tyr106 in inhibitor-bound crystal structures (0.9 Å compared to uncomplexed TGT) results in deviating conformations of Gln107 that impedes the water-mediated contact by W2 towards Asp102 observed in the tRNA-bound state. In TGT·5, the Gln107 side-chain is not visible in the electron density but water molecule W2 can still be observed H-bonded to Asp102 (Figure 8(b), green). In TGT1·7, the Gln107 side-chain points directly towards Asp102 and no mediating water molecule can be detected (Figure 8(b), blue). Instead H-bonding to W3 can be observed (Figure 7(c)). Thus, the rotation and shift of Tyr106 out of the base recognition site triggers the rearrangement of Gln107 along with an appropriate orientation of the catalytically important water molecule W2. The adaptations close to Asn70/Thr47 are associated with the rotation of Asp102 towards the base recognition site in a domino-type rearrangement. All ligands interact with Asp102 similarly to preQ1 in its tRNA-bound state (Figure 8(c)). Asn70, after having lost Asp102 as binding partner, seeks a new stable geometry. In the crystal structure of TGT·5 the two almost equally populated conformations of Gly69­His73 correspond closely (C  -rmsd Gly69­His73: 0.5 Å) to the conformers found in either uncomplexed or tRNA-bound TGT, which mutually differ by approximately 1 Å (Figure 8(c)). In uncomplexed TGT and TGT1·7 a water molecule (W3) is found in exactly the same position that the Asn70 side-chain occupies in the tRNA-bound state (Figure 8(c) and (d)). In uncomplexed TGT this water molecule is stabilized by contacts to the backbone amide of Tyr72 and the side-chain of Asp102. In TGT1·7 the latter contact is replaced by a contact to Gln107 as Asp102 is rotated towards the ligand. In the tRNA-bound TGT the shifted Asn70 displaces this water and forms a backbone amide interaction to His73 (Figure 8(d)). This interaction allows the Asn70 side-chain to properly accommodate the binding site of the U35 phosphate group that serves as one of the hinges controlling the rotation of ribose 34 (Figure 3). A similar backbone amide interaction to His73 is realized by Asn70u in TGT·5, although there the carboxamide terminus is rotated by about 45° with respect to the tRNA-bound situation as the sidechain stacks on top of the ligand's phenyl ring (Figure 8). These findings underline the relevance of W3 for stabilizing the uncomplexed binding pocket conformation and allowing by its substitu-

504 pocket discussed above. In TGT1 the substituent of 7 is distributed over several states in the binding pocket (see earlier), indicated by high average Bvalues (scaffold: 39.0 Å2, side-chain 54.0 Å2). In contrast, in TGT2 it is well defined within this pocket (scaffold: 29.3 Å2, side-chain 32.9 Å2; see Table 3 and Figure 7(c) and (d)). In all C2-symmetric dimers, the loop residues Val45­Thr47 stabilize the geometry of Leu68­Asn70 and obviously restrict the volume of the binding pocket (Figure 7(e)). In TGT2 Val45­ Thr47, the last ordered residues of the 1-1 loop, orient away from the binding pocket thus expanding its size. This allows Leu68-Asn70 to shift away from the ligand. The Leu68 side-chain rotates away from the ligand and H-bonding between the Asn70 and Gln107 further stabilizes and extends the binding pocket (Figure 7(f)). In consequence, 7 penetrates deeper into the binding pocket of TGT2 compared with TGT1 and experiences, most likely, more favourable interactions (Table 3), profiting from the destabilisation of other structural elements. In contrast, 7 shows disordered accommodation in TGT1, obviously due to a too stringent binding pocket. TGT: a functional dimer? The surprising fact that binding of 7 has impact on the properties and geometry of the dimer interface prompted us to seek for structural arguments that might support the hypothesis of TGT dimer formation for functional reasons. During biochemical characterization of TGT enzymes from different species dimer and multimer formation in pure TGT solutions has been observed, however it has been discussed controversially.39 E. coli TGT seems to form dimers at low protein concentrations and multimers at higher concentrations. For Z. mobilis TGT a molecular mass of 55 kDa was determined by gel filtration. This value falls between monomer (43 kDa) and dimer (86 kDa). Whether the presence of TGT as dimer is of any functional relevance or whether it is only induced upon tRNA binding, possibly in a species-dependent manner, has yet not been studied. The crystal structure of anticodon stem loop tRNA with Z. mobilis TGT shows a tightly associated homodimer (TGTA, TGTB), not imposed by crystal symmetry (Figure 9(d)). 19 Superimposing this tRNA-bound homodimer with the C2 symmetrical TGT dimer reveals an identical contact interface geometry (Figure 9(b)). The recently determined crystal structure of Thermotoga maritima TGT (PDBcode: 2ASH) also exhibits a homodimer in the asymmetric unit. It shares sequence identity of 47% (63% residues with similar properties) with Z. mobilis TGT.40 All essential residues in the active site are conserved, suggesting unchanged enzyme function (Supplementary Data Table 2). Structural superposition reveals almost identical tertiary structures and dimer orientation (Figure 9(a) and (b)). It also suggests that the interface-forming residues are highly conserved (Figure 9(c)). To

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

collect further evidence for a putatively conserved interface, sequence alignments of 21 representatively selected bacterial and eukaryotic TGTs were performed (CLUSTAL_W, Supplementary Data: Table 1, according to Z. mobilis numbering).40,41 Again, active sites (Supplementary Data: Table 2) are well conserved, except for Chlamydia species where notable differences of active site residues and a specific insertion of 18 residues between position 114 and 115 suggest a slightly deviating function. Therefore, the annotated Chlamydia TGT was excluded from further considerations. Across bacterial TGTs the core residues forming the dimer interface are highly conserved (Table 4, Lys52, Leu74, Pro78, Phe92, and Tyr330, His333, Leu334, Glu339, Leu345). At position 49 (Gly/Ala), 50 (Thr/ Ser/Cys), 326 (Phe/Tyr/Trp), 329 (Ala/Ser), and 341 (Leu/Phe) related residues are found. In eukaryotic TGTs Lys52, Leu74, and Pro78 are conserved and at positions 50 (Thr/Ser), 92 (Phe/ Met), 329 (Ala/Ser), 330 (Tyr/Phe), 339 (Glu/Asn), and 345 (Leu/His) residues similar to the bacterial ones are observed. Archaea TGTs are known to form functional dimers, e.g. in P. horikoshii TGT.42 However, the superposition of tRNA-bound P. horikoshii and Z. mobilis TGT crystal structures reveals deviating composition of the dimer interface. Possibly, this results from the significantly different tRNA binding geometries, as archaebacterial TGT exchanges G15 against preQ0 and forms a 2:2 complex with tRNA. Although analogy between archaea and bacterial enzymes is remote, the fact of a functional dimer in the former together with a highly conserved dimer interface in eubacterial TGTs suggests dimer formation possibly for functional reasons. The Z. mobilis TGT homodimer forms a 2:1 complex with an elongated stem loop of tRNA, which served for this crystal structure determination as a substitute for full-length tRNA.19 The anticodon U33G34U35 recognition sequence forms strong interactions with TGTA, the first component of the dimer (Figure 9(d)). As the active sites of TGTA and the second TGTB molecule pack closely together only one tRNA anticodon loop is bound in this crystal form. TGTB is not involved in tRNA anticodon recognition but forms interactions with the anticodon stem loop. Arg77 is H-bonded to the phosphate groups of C27 and it is in close contact to the phosphate group of G26. This arginine is highly conserved among all bacterial and eukaryotic TGTs (few exceptions: Lys/Gln, Table 4). To obtain some ideas about the putative full-length tRNA binding, tRNAPhe (PDB code: 1EHZ) was mapped onto the stem loop (Figure 9(d)). This fit renders two positively charged residues, Lys125 and Arg132, of TGTB prominent to interact with phosphate groups of the tRNA D-stem bases in positions 11 and 12. Even though Lys125 and Arg132, located in the TIM-barrel insertion 7-6 which is specific for bacterial and eukaryotic TGTs,3 are not strictly conserved, at both positions predominantly Arg or Lys are found (Table 4).

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

505

Figure 9. (a) Structural superimposition of TGT from Z. mobilis and T. maritima, colour-coded by structural elements. Both enzymes adopt identical conformations. (b) Structural superimposition of TGT dimers. The dimer from Z. mobilis TGT·5 (green) is generated by 2-fold crystal symmetry. The homodimers of tRNA-bound Z. mobilis TGT19 (blue) and T. maritima TGT, PDB-code: 2ASH, (yellow/orange) are part of the asymmetric unit. All dimer constitutions are virtually identical. (c) Structural superimposition of the dimer interface from Z. mobilis (blue) and T. maritima (yellow/orange). Amino acid residues and their respective geometries are highly conserved. (d) Structural match of tRNAPhe, PDB-code: 1EHZ, (orange) from yeast onto the crystal coordinates of the RNA anticodon stem loop (red) bound to the Z. mobilis TGT dimer19 (blue). R77, L125 and R132 from the second presumably non-catalytic TGT molecule (TGTB) are well positioned to recognize and stabilize tRNA in a bound conformation so that the other TGT molecule (TGTA) can perform the catalytic reaction. Geometries of L124 and R132 were manually adjusted to demonstrate their ability to form interactions with tRNA.

According to these structural considerations dimer formation of TGTs for catalytic reasons might be given. Following this hypothesis only one molecule would perform the base exchange reaction, whereas the other serves as a platform to fix the bound tRNA via Arg77 and insertion 7-6.

Summary and Conclusions
Most challenging in the presented structure-based design study is the strong adaptability of the TGT binding pocket. Inhibitor complexes show pronounced induced-fit adaptations resembling those

also experienced by tRNA binding to TGT. In this context, the question must be asked whether the adaptations result as specific responses to the properties of each individual inhibitor or whether they point to structural adaptations potentially required by the protein to accomplish its functional task. In the latter case, these adaptations are expected to correspond to low energy transformations to allow efficient enzyme action. Most of the studied inhibitors place their substituent in two alternative conformations into the ribose 34 binding pocket. With respect to the peptide stretch hosting Asn70, the protein responds differently to both placements: one geometry relates closely to the uncomplexed, the other to the tRNA-

506
Table 4. Sequence alignment of residues involved in TGT dimer formation and tRNA recognition in the assumed non-catalytic TGT monomer from 19 TGT amino acid sequences representing a diverse set of eubacterial and eukaryotic species Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

507 TGTs. In case this hypothesis is correct, perturbance of this interface might provide a novel design strategy to modulate protein function and to create a new class of TGT inhibitors with alternative mode of action.

bound situation. Considering Tyr106/Gln107 and Thr47, these residues adopt conformations half-way in-between the uncomplexed and tRNA-bound situation. These findings suggest that TGT is highly adaptive, however this conformational multiplicity is a consequence of its functional role. Possibly a ligand to be bound selects one of the bindingcompetent conformers of the protein and stabilizes this state as complex. Similar considerations have been suggested to explain the binding properties of different inhibitors to aldose reductase,43­45 or trypsin mutants.46,47 A further conformational adaptation within the TGT binding pocket leads to another important aspect of ligand binding and catalytic activity: the functional role of water molecules and their tight association with the binding pocket. The Leu231/ Ala232 peptide flip controls substrate recognition and promiscuity.3 Depending on the orientation of the peptide flip either the CO or the NH-group is exposed to the binding pocket. In two uncomplexed TGT crystal structures both orientations are exhibited, as a consequence of deviating pH conditions used for crystallization. The different functional groups of the peptide bond are H-bonded to water molecules found in deviating positions. Upon ligand binding, they either get replaced or mediate an interaction between the bound ligand and the exposed peptide bond functionality (W1; Figure 2(a)). W2 is only found in the active site when the substrate tRNA is bound, as its accommodation requires a conformational adaptation of the binding pocket (Figure 8(b)). As W2 is likely to receive a proton during catalysis its presence is highly relevant for the enzymatic reaction. Furthermore, water molecule W3 serves as a surrogate for an alternative protein side-chain conformer that allows tRNA binding in correct orientation (Figure 8(d)). A water cluster bridges between Asp102 and Asp280, the catalytic nucleophile, e.g. apparent in TGT·4. Attempts to replace these water molecules by hydrophobic ligand portions were geometrically feasible, however, they did not parallel the presumed increase in binding affinity. Despite the expected entropic benefit for water release, obviously the price for their replacement by a hydrophobic substituent is detrimental for binding. It can be assumed that these water molecules solvate the negatively charged side-chains of Asp280 and Asp102 in close contact distance. These findings underline the structural as well as the functional relevance of water molecules associated with the geometrical adaptation of the binding pocket. The experience collected with this inhibitor series has to be regarded in further design, particularly with respect to further attempts accommodating the ribose 34 binding pocket. A remarkable conformational change is observed for binding of 7, as this ligand interferes with the homodimer interface found in TGT crystal structures. Preliminary sequence and structure comparisons provide some evidence that the homodimer is a functional prerequisite for bacterial and eukaryotic

Materials and Methods
Trapping experiment An aliquot of 5 M Z. mobilis TGT, 100 M E. coli tRNATyr, and 1 mM of the respective inhibitor (dissolved in DMSO) in 10 l of 100 mM Hepes buffer (pH 7.3), 20 mM MgCl2, 5 mM dithiothreitol were incubated for 1 h at 25 °C. A total of 10 l SDS loading buffer was added and incubated for another 1 h at 25 °C. A total of 10 l of each sample was loaded onto a 15% (w/v) SDS gel.35 Inhibition constant determination Inhibition constants were determined in an assay solution of 150 nM Z. mobilis TGT, 200 mM Hepes buffer (pH 7.3), 20 mM MgCl2, 2.95 M Tween 20 (Roth). The assay solution also contained 5% (v/v) DMSO, used to dissolve the inhibitors, and the two substrates 8-[3H] guanine (Hartmann Analytik) and E. coli tRNATyr in various concentrations. The purification of E. coli tRNATyr was performed as described.48 After the incubation of TGT with the two substrates four aliquots were taken in 1 min intervals, transferred to glass fiber filters (GC-F, Whatman), quenched in 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (20 min) and washed in 5% trichloroacetic acid (two × 7 min) to wash out any tRNA-unbound 8-[3H]guanine. The filters were dried at 60 °C and tRNA incorporated tritium was quantified using liquid scintillation counting. Inhibition constants for non-competitive inhibitors were calculated from the kinetic parameters of TGT (Km and Vmax) observed in the absence of inhibitor and apparent kinetic parameters (Kapp and Vapp ) for the base exchange m max reaction in the presence of uncompetitive inhibitors. Inhibition constants were determined by applying formulae 2 and 3. For kinetic parameter determination TGT was incubated with 20 M 8-[3H]guanine, 0.25­15 M tRNATyr as limiting substrate for three times; one time without inhibitor and twice in the presence of inhibitor at different concentration. Inhibition constants for purely competitive inhibitors were calculated by a slightly modified method initially developed by Grädler et al.26 TGT is incubated with 20 M 8-[3H]guanine, 1 M/1.5 M tRNATyr in the presence of five different inhibitor concentrations. From the decrease of initial velocity in the presence of inhibitor the competitive inhibition constant can be calculated. Exact details concerning the modified assay setup as well as inhibitor syntheses are published separately.35 Z. mobilis TGT crystallization Cloning and expression of Z. mobilis TGT in E. coli and the purification protocol have been described.38,39,49 TGT crystals suitable for ligand soaking were produced in a two-step procedure. Micro-crystals were grown at 273 K using the hanging-drop, vapour diffusion method. Droplets were prepared by mixing 2 l of concentrated protein solution (14 mg ml-1 TGT, 2 M NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH

508
8.5), 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT (dithiothreitol)), with 2 l of reservoir solution (100 mM morpholino ethylsulfonate (Mes) (pH 5.5), 1 mM DTT, 8% (w/v) PEG 8000, 10% DMSO). Micro-crystals of 0.05 mm3 grew within two weeks. Subsequently macro-seeding was performed under similar conditions. Again droplets were prepared by mixing 2 l of concentrated protein solution with 2 l of reservoir solution containing only 5% PEG 8000. One micro-crystal was transferred into this solution. Single crystals with a size of approximately 0.7 mm × 0.7 mm × 0.2 mm grew within two to four weeks. Ligands were dissolved in DMSO and added to the droplet to a final concentration of 2 mM l-1 to allow soaking at 293 K for one day. Data collection

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes

For data collection, crystals were cryoprotected using glycerol; 4 l of the crystallization droplet were well mixed with 2.2 l of glycerol, resulting in a 35% glycerol solution. The soaked crystal was transferred for 10 s into this solution and subsequently flash-frozen in liquid N2. Data sets were collected at cryo conditions (100 K) with CuK radiation ( = 1.5418 Å) using a Rigaku RU-300 rotating-anode generator at 50 kV and 90 mA equipped with focusing mirrors (MSC, USA) and a R-AXIS IV++ image-plate system. Three of the crystals exhibited monoclinic symmetry in space group C2 containing one monomer per asymmetric unit with

Table 5. Statistics of data collection and structure refinement
Crystal data A. Data collection and processing No. crystals used Wavelength (Å) Space group Unit cell parameters a (Å) b (Å) c (Å)  (deg.) B. Diffraction data Resolution range (Å) Unique reflections R(I)sym (%) Completeness (%) Redundancy I/(I) C. Refinement Program used for refinement Resolution range (Å) Reflections used in refinement Final R values Rfree (%) Rwork (%) No. of atoms (non-hydrogen) Protein atoms Water molecules Ligand atoms RMSD, angle (deg.) RMSD, bond (Å) Ramachandran plot Most favoured regions (%) Additionally allowed regions (%) Generously allowed regions (%) Mean B-factors (Å2) Protein atoms Water molecules Ligand atoms PDB-code TGT·4 (pH 5.5) 1 1.5418 C2 91.2 65.6 69.8 96.1 20­1.7 (1.76­1.70) 44,525 4.3 (16.7) 98.7 (99.3) 2.3 (1.7) 20.6 (4.2) CNS 20­1.7 44,059/4450 22.0 19.6 2870 368 15 1.2 0.005 94.1 5.6 0.3 20.6 34.1 20.2 2BBF TGT·5 (pH 5.5) 1 1.5418 C2 90.6 64.9 70.1 95.8 20­1.58 (1.61­1.58) 53,824 6.9 (39.4) 97.1 (78.4) 2.2 (1.6) 12.4 (1.7) SHELXL 10­1.58 51,398/2624 21.2 17.0 2880 275 23 2.3 0.009 95.8 3.9 0.3 20.7 31.0 18.7 1Y5V TGT·6 (pH 5.5) 1 1.5418 C2 90.9 65.3 67.0 96.0 20­1.58 (1.61­1.58) 53,930 4.2 (22.1) 96.4 (69.3) 2.4 (1.8) 21.4 (3.6) SHELXL 20­1.58 52,915/2681 19.6 15.9 2823 333 24 2.4 0.011 95.7 4.0 0.3 21.0 31.4 29.4 1Y5W TGT·7 (pH 5.5) 1 1.5418 P2 71.1 64.2 88.1 95.1 20­2.1 (2.14­2.10) 44,873 5.9 (35.7) 96.4 (98.5) 2.4 (2.1) 13.4 (2.4) CNS 20­2.1 42,047/2118 25.5 22.1 5568 243 25 1.2 0.006 92.8 6.9 0.3 32.6 34.6 37.9 1Y5X

(app) Formula: The following abbreviations were used: initial velocity: vo, (apparent) maximum velocity: Vmax , (apparent) Michaelis-Menten (app) constant: Km , competitive inhibition constant: Kic, uncompetitive inhibition constant: Kiu, substrate concentration for tRNATyr: [S], inhibitor concentration: [I]

     1 Km ½I 1 1 ½I þ ¼ 1þ 1þ r0 Kic ½S Vmax Kiu Vmax   ½I app Km ¼ Km 1 þ Kic Vmax  Vapp ¼  max ½I 1 þ Kiu

ð1Þ

ð2Þ

ð3Þ

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes Matthews coefficients of 2.3­2.4. One crystal showed the monoclinic space group P2 containing two symmetryindependent monomers per asymmetric unit with a Matthews coefficients of 2.3. Unit cell dimensions for all crystals are given in Table 5. All data processing and scaling were performed using the HKL2000 package.50 Data collection and processing statistics are given in Table 5. Structure determination and refinement For TGT·7 a change in space group symmetry from C2 to P2 was observed, compared to the other TGT complexes discussed here. Axes a and c are exchanged and a loss of the C-centering leads to the P2 space group. The deposited dataset for TGT·7 contains 42,204 reflections of which 21,028 (14,479 reflections > 3 ) are observed that should otherwise be absent in space group C2. Calculation of a self Patterson revealed a peak at x = 0.4882, y = 0.5, z = 0 with a peak height of 69.6 , indicating that the packing got only slightly disturbed upon ligand binding and results in a loss of the Ccentering. Due to the loss of symmetry there are now two independent molecules in the asymmetric unit. Molecular replacement with the coordinates of apo TGT crystallized at pH 5.5 (PDB code 1P0D),12 was performed for TGT·7, using AMoRe.51 For TGT·4, TGT·5, and TGT·6 (all space group C2) the 1P0D coordinates were directly applied for initial rigid-body refinement of the protein atoms followed by repeated cycles of conjugate gradient energy minimization, simulated annealing and B-factor refinement using the CNS program package.52 Due to the lower resolution of TGT·4 and TGT·7 this program was also used in further refinement cycles to include the ligand and the water molecules to generate the final model. Refinement at the later stages for TGT·5 and TGT·6 (both with a maximum resolution of 1.58 Å) was performed with SHELXL.53 Here, up to 20 cycles of conjugate gradient minimization were performed with default restraints on bonding geometry and B-values: 5% of all data were used for Rfree calculation. Amino acid side-chains were fit to A-weighted 2 Fo­Fc and Fo­Fc electron density maps using O.54 Water and glycerol molecules as well as the ligand were located in the difference electron density and added to the model for further refinement cycles. During the last refinement cycles, riding H-atoms were introduced for the protein residues (not for ligand) without using additional parameters. All final models were validated using PROCHECK.55 Data refinement statistics are shown in Table 5. The van der Waals contacts and H-bonds were detected by the program CONTACSYM.56 Solvent accessible surface buried upon ligand binding was calculated with MS using an 1.4 Å probe radius.57 RMSD values were calculated by means of the program suite SYBYL 7.0 (Tripos Inc., St. Louis, MO.). Figures were prepared using Isis Draw (MDL, San Leandro, USA) and Pymol. Protein Data Bank accession codes The atomic coordinates have been deposited in the RCSB Protein Data Bank and are available under accession codes for 1BBF (for TGT·4), 1Y5V (for TGT·5), for 1Y5W (forTGT·6) and 1Y5X (for TGT·7) (also given in Table 5).

509

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Grants KL1204/1-3 and KL1204/9-1) and the Graduiertenkolleg (GK "protein function at the atomic level", G. Klebe, University of Marburg). We are grateful to the ETH Research Council (F. Diederich, ETH Zürich) and the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie for financial support. We thank Dr K. Reuter (University of Marburg) for his helpful discussions on the new assay setup and C. Sohn for his support during X-ray data collection. We acknowledge the support of N. Donati and M. Guillot (all ETH) for their support in synthesis.

Supplementary Data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/ j.jmb.2007.04.008

References
1. Romier, C., Meyer, J. E. & Suck, D. (1997). Slight sequence variations of a common fold explain the substrate specificities of tRNA-guanine transglycosylases from the three kingdoms. FEBS Letters, 416, 93­98. 2. Iwata-Reuyl, D. (2003). Biosynthesis of the 7-deazaguanosine hypermodified nucleosides of transfer RNA. Bioorg. Chem. 31, 24­43. 3. Stengl, B., Reuter, K. & Klebe, G. (2005). Mechanism and substrate specificity of tRNA­guanine transglycosylases (TGTs): tRNA modifying enzymes from the three different kingdoms of life share a common catalytic mechanism. Chembiochem, 6, 1­15. 4. Okada, N. & Nishimura, S. (1979). Isolation and characterization of a guanine insertion enzyme, a specific tRNA transglycosylase, from Escherichia coli. J. Biol. Chem. 254, 3061­3066. 5. Nakanishi, S., Ueda, T., Hori, H., Yamazaki, N., Okada, N. & Watanabe, K. (1994). A UGU sequence in the anticodon loop is a minimum requirement for recognition by Escherichia coli tRNA-guanine transglycosylase. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 32221­32225. 6. Curnow, A. W. & Garcia, G. A. (1995). tRNA-guanine transglycosylase from Escherichia coli. Minimal tRNA structure and sequence requirements for recognition. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 17264­17267. 7. Kuchino, Y., Kasai, H., Nihel, S. & Nishimura, S. (1976). Biosynthesis of the modified nucleoside Q in transfer RNA. Nucl. Acids Res. 3, 393­398. 8. Reader, J. S., Metzgar, D., Schimmel, P. & de CrécyLagard, V. (2004). Identification of four genes necessary for biosynthesis of the modified nucleoside queuosine. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 6280­6285. 9. Gaur, R. & Varshney, U. (2005). Genetic analysis identifies a function for the queC (ybaX) gene product at an initial step in the queuosine biosynthetic pathway in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 187, 6893­6901. 10. Van Lanen, S. G., Reader, J. S., Swairjo, M. A., de Crécy-Lagard, V., Lee, B. & Iwata-Reuyl, D. (2005). From cyclohydrolase to oxidoreductase: discovery of nitrile reductase activity in a common fold. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 102, 4264­4269.

 http://www.pymol.org

510
11. Hoops, G. C., Townsend, L. B. & Garcia, G. A. (1995). tRNA-guanine transglycosylase from Escherichia coli: structure-activity studies investigating the role of the aminomethyl substituent of the heterocyclic substrate PreQ1. Biochemistry, 34, 15381­15387. 12. Brenk, R., Stubbs, M. T., Heine, A., Reuter, K. & Klebe, G. (2003). Flexible adaptations in the structure of the tRNA-modifying enzyme tRNA-guanine transglycosylase and their implications for substrate selectivity, reaction mechanism and structure-based drug design. Chembiochem, 4, 1066­1077. 13. Van Lanen, S. G., Kinnie, S. D., Matthieu, S., Link, T., Culp, J. & Iwata-Reuyl, D. (2003). tRNA modification by S-adenosylmethionine:tRNA ribosyltransferaseisomerase. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 10491­10499. 14. Campanacci, V., Dubois, D. Y., Becker, H. D., Kern, D., Spinelli, S., Valencia, C. et al. (2004). The Escherichia coli YadB gene product reveals a novel aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase like activity. J. Mol. Biol. 337, 273­283. 15. Blaise, M., Becker, H. D., Keith, G., Cambillau, C., Lapointe, J., Giegé, R. & Kern, D. (2004). A minimalist glutamyl-tRNA synthetase dedicated to aminoacylation of the tRNAAsp QUC anticodon. Nucl. Acids Res. 32, 2768­2775. 16. Dubois, D. Y., Blaise, M., Becker, H. D., Campanacci, V., Keith, G., Giegé, R. et al. (2004). An aminoacyltRNA synthetase-like protein encoded by the Escherichia coli yadB gene glutamylates specifically tRNAAsp. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 7530­7535. 17. Salazar, J. C., Ambrogelly, A., Crain, P. F., McCloskey, J. A. & Söll, D. (2004). A truncated aminoacyl­tRNA synthetase modifies RNA. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 7536­7541. 18. Goodenough-Lashua, D. M. & Garcia, G. A. (2003). tRNA-guanine transglycosylase from E. coli: a pingpong kinetic mechanism is consistent with nucleophilic catalysis. Bioorg. Chem. 31, 331­344. 19. Xie, W., Liu, X. & Huang, R. H. (2003). Chemical trapping and crystal structure of a catalytic tRNA guanine transglycosylase covalent intermediate. Nature Struct. Biol. 10, 781­788. 20. Kotloff, K., Winickoff, J., Ivanoff, B., Clemens, J., Swerdlow, D., Sansonetti, P. et al. (1999). Global burden of Shigella infections: implications for vaccine development and implementation of control strategies. Bull. World Health Org. 77, 651­666. 21. Ashkenazi, S., Levy, I., Kazaronovski, V. & Samra, Z. (2003). Growing antimicrobial resistance of Shigella isolates. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 51, 427­429. 22. Sansonetti, P. J. (2001). Rupture, invasion and inflammatory destruction of the intestinal barrier by Shigella, making sense of prokaryote-eukaryote cross-talks. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 25, 3­14. 23. Jennison, A. V. & Verma, N. K. (2004). Shigella flexneri infection: pathogenesis and vaccine development. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 28, 43­58. 24. Durand, J. M., Dagberg, B., Uhlin, B. E. & Bjork, G. R. (2000). Transfer RNA modification, temperature and DNA superhelicity have a common target in the regulatory network of the virulence of Shigella flexneri: the expression of the virF gene. Mol. Microbiol. 35, 924­935. 25. Durand, J. M., Okada, N., Tobe, T., Watarai, M., Fukuda, I., Suzuki, T. et al. (1994). vacC, a virulence-associated chromosomal locus of Shigella flexneri, is homologous to tgt, a gene encoding tRNA-guanine transglycosylase (Tgt) of Escherichia coli K-12. J. Bacteriol. 176, 4627­4634. 26. Grädler, U., Gerber, H. D., Goodenough-Lashua, D. M., Garcia, G. A., Ficner, R., Reuter, K. et al. (2001). A new

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes target for Shigellosis: rational design and crystallographic studies of inhibitors of tRNA-guanine transglycosylase. J. Mol. Biol. 306, 455­467. Brenk, R., Gerber, H.-D., Kittendorf, J. D., Garcia, G. A., Reuter, K. & Klebe, G. (2003). From hit to lead: de novo design based on virtual screening hits of inhibitors of tRNA-guanine transglycosylase, a putative target of Shigellosis therapy. Helv. Chim. Acta, 86, 1435­1452. Brenk, R., Meyer, E. A., Reuter, K., Stubbs, M. T., Garcia, G. A., Diederich, F. & Klebe, G. (2004). Crystallographic study of inhibitors of tRNA-guanine transglycosylase suggests a new structure-based pharmacophore for virtual screening. J. Mol. Biol. 338, 55­75. Brenk, R., Naerum, L., Gradler, U., Gerber, H. D., Garcia, G. A., Reuter, K. et al. (2003). Virtual screening for submicromolar leads of tRNA-guanine transglycosylase based on a new unexpected binding mode detected by crystal structure analysis. J. Med. Chem. 46, 1133­1143. Meyer, E. A., Brenk, R., Castellano, R. K., Furler, M., Klebe, G. & Diederich, F. (2002). De novo design, synthesis, and in vitro evaluation of inhibitors for prokaryotic tRNA-guanine transglycosylase: a dramatic sulfur effect on binding affinity. Chembiochem, 3, 250­253. Meyer, E. A., Furler, M., Diederich, F., Brenk, R. & Klebe, G. (2004). Synthesis and in vitro evaluation of 2aminoquinazolin-4(3H)-one-based inhibitors for tRNAguanine transglycosylase (TGT). Helv. Chim. Acta, 87, 1333­1356. Leonard, N. J. & Hiremath, S. P. (1986). Dimensional probes of binding and activity. Tetrahedron, 42, 1917­1961. Bisswanger, H. (2002). Enzyme Kinetics - Principles and Methods, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim. Segel, I. H. (1993). Enzyme Kinetics Behavior and Analysis of Rapid Equilibrium and Steady-State Enzyme Systems, Wiley, New York. Meyer, E. A., Donati, N., Guillot, M., Schweizer, W. B., Diederich, F., Stengl, B. et al. (2006). Synthesis, biological evaluation, and crystallographic studies of extended guanine based (lin-benzoguanine) inhibitors for tRNA-guanine transglycosylase (TGT). Helv. Chim. Acta, 89, 573­597. McGovern, S. L., Caselli, E., Grigorieff, N. & Shoichet, B. K. (2002). A common mechanism underlying promiscuous inhibitors from virtual and highthroughput screening. J. Med. Chem. 45, 1712­1722. Ryan, A. J., Gray, N. M., Lowe, P. N. & Chung, C. (2003). Effect of detergent on "promiscuous" inhibitors. J. Med. Chem. 46, 3448­3451. Romier, C., Reuter, K., Suck, D. & Ficner, R. (1996). Crystal structure of tRNA-guanine transglycosylase: RNA modification by base exchange. EMBO J. 15, 2850­2857. Reuter, K. & Ficner, R. (1995). Sequence analysis and overexpression of the Zymomonas mobilis tgt gene encoding tRNA-guanine transglycosylase: purification and biochemical characterization of the enzyme. J. Bacteriol. 177, 5284­5288. Boeckmann, B., Bairoch, A., Apweiler, R., Blatter, M.-C., Estreicher, A., Gasteiger, E. et al. (2003). The SWISSPROT protein knowlegebase and its supplement TrEMBL in 2003. Nucl. Acids Res. 31, 365­370. Ciccarelli, F. D., Doerks, T., von Mering, C., Creevey, C. J., Snel, B. & Bork, P. (2006). Toward automatic reconstruction of a highly resolved tree of life. Science, 311, 1283­1287.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32. 33. 34. 35.

36.

37. 38.

39.

40.

41.

Crystal Structures of TGT Complexes 42. Ishitani, R., Nureki, O., Nameki, N., Okada, N., Nishimura, S. & Yokoyama, S. (2003). Alternative tertiary structure of tRNA for recognition by a posttranscriptional modification enzyme. Cell, 113, 383­394. 43. Howard, E. I., Sanishvili, R., Cachau, R. E., Mitschler, A., Chevrier, B., Barth, P. et al. (2004). Ultrahigh resolution drug design I: details of interactions in human aldose reductase­inhibitor complex at 0.66 Å. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Bioinform. 55, 792­804. 44. Sotriffer, C., Krämer, O. & Klebe, G. (2004). Probing flexibility and `induced-fit' phenomena in aldose reductase by comparative crystal structure analysis and molecular dynamics simulations. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 56, 52­66. 45. Urzhumtsev, A., Tete-Favier, F., Mitschler, A., Barbanton, J., Barth, P., Urzhumtseva, L. et al. (1997). A `specificity' pocket inferred from the crystal structures of the complexes of aldose reductase with the pharmaceutically important inhibitors tolrestat and sorbinil. Structure, 5, 601­612. 46. Rauh, D., Klebe, G., Sturzebecher, J. & Stubbs, M. T. (2003). ZZ made EZ: influence of inhibitor configuration on enzyme selectivity. J. Mol. Biol. 330, 761­770. 47. Rauh, D., Reyda, S., Klebe, G. & Stubbs, M. T. (2002). Trypsin mutants for structure-based drug design: expression, refolding and crystallisation. J. Biol. Chem. 383, 1309­1314. 48. Curnow, A. W., Kung, F. L., Koch, K. A. & Garcia, G. A. (1993). tRNA-guanine transglycosylase from Escherichia coli: gross tRNA structural requirements for recognition. Biochemistry, 32, 5239­5246. 49. Romier, C., Ficner, R., Reuter, K. & Suck, D. (1996). Purification, crystallization, and preliminary x-ray

511
diffraction studies of tRNA-guanine transglycosylase from Zymomonas mobilis. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 24, 516­519. Otwinowski, Z. & Minor, W. (1997). Processing of Xray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode. Methods Enzymol. 276, 307­326. Navaza, J. (1994). AMoRe: an automated package for molecular replacement. Acta Crystallog. sect. A, 50, 157­163. Brunger, A. T., Adams, P. D., Clore, G. M., DeLano, W. L., Gros, P., Grosse-Kunstleve, R. W. et al. (1998). Crystallography & NMR system: a new software suite for macromolecular structure determination. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 54, 905­921. Sheldrick, G. M. & Schneider, T. R. (1997). SHELXL: high-resolution refinement. Methods Enzymol. 277b, 319­343. Jones, T. A., Zou, J. Y., Cowan, S. W. & Kjeldgaard, M. (1991). Improved methods for binding protein models in electron density maps and the location of errors in these models. Acta Crystallog. sect. A, 47, 110­119. Laskowski, R. A., MacArthur, M. W., Moss, D. S. & Thornton, J. M. (1993). PROCHECK: a program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures. J. Appl. Crystallog. 26, 283­291. Sheriff, S., Silverton, E. W., Padlan, E. A., Cohen, G. H., Smith-Gill, S. J., Finzel, B. C. & Davies, D. R. (1987). Three-dimensional structure of an antibodyantigen complex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 84, 8075­8079. Connolly, M. L. (1983). Solvent-accessible surfaces of proteins and nucleic acids. Science, 221, 709­713.

50. 51. 52.

53. 54.

55.

56.

57.

Edited by R. Huber (Received 18 October 2006; received in revised form 30 March 2007; accepted 3 April 2007) Available online 12 April 2007

