BBRC
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 310 (2003) 505­512 www.elsevier.com/locate/ybbrc

Hoechst 33258 binds to G-quadruplex in the promoter region of human c-myc
Souvik Maiti,a,* N.K. Chaudhury,b and Shantanu Chowdhurya,*
b a Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, CSIR, Mall Road, Delhi 110007, India Department of Biocybernetics, Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences, Delhi 110054, India

Received 3 September 2003

Abstract In vitro binding of Hoechst 33258 to the promoter region of human c-myc, d(GG GGAGGG TGG GGA GGG TGG GGA AGG TGG GG) which forms G-quadruplex, both in vitro and in vivo in the presence of metal ions, was investigated by equilibrium absorption, fluorescence, and kinetic surface plasmon resonance methods. Hypochromic effect in UV absorption spectra and blue shift in fluorescence emission maxima of Hoechst in the presence of quadruplex revealed that Hoechst binds to the quadruplex. Analysis of UV and fluorescence titration data revealed that Hoechst binds to quadruplex with binding affinity of the order of 106 . Anisotropy measurements and higher lifetime obtained from time-resolved decay experiments revealed that quadruplex-bound Hoechst is rotationally restricted in a less polar environment than the bulk buffer medium. From surface plasmon resonance studies, we obtained kinetic association ðka Þ and dissociation ðkd Þ of 1.23 Æ 0.04 Â 105 MÀ1 sÀ1 and 0.686 Æ 0.009 sÀ1 , respectively. As Hoechst is known to bind A­T-rich region of duplex DNA, here we propose the likelihood of Hoechst interacting with the AAGGT loop of the quadruplex. Ó 2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: c-myc; Quadruplex; Hoechst; Ligand binding

G-quadruplex DNA plays a functional role in transcription of the proto-oncogene c-myc. The presence of potential quadruplex forming sequences in the promoter sites of PDGF-A, c-abl, c-ets, c-fes/fps, c-myb, c-src, cyes, and c-vav besides c-myc suggests its possible role in gene regulation [1­6]. Altered fine-tuning of regulation has been implicated in tumor progression, diabetes, and neurological disorders like mental retardation (fragile X syndrome) and dystrophy (Friedrich's ataxia, Hutchinson's disease) [7­9]. G-quadruplex structures in telomeres, containing short guanine tracts interspersed with several thymines and possibly adenines, are implicated to play a dominant role in telomere maintenance and hence are critical to chromosome stability and integrity [10]. Such potential biological role of G-quadruplex DNA along with its probable significance in the regu-

Corresponding authors. Fax: +91-11-2766-7471. E-mail addresses: souvik2maiti@yahoo.com (S. Maiti), shantanuc@igib.res.in (S. Chowdhury). 0006-291X/$ - see front matter Ó 2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.09.052

*

lation of gene expression through its secondary structure motif has prompted interest in the search for specific molecules to modulate formation/stability of G-quadruplexes in vivo [11]. In vitro characterization of G-quadruplexes indicates four-stranded structures containing one or more nucleic acid strands, in parallel or antiparallel orientations, stabilized as G-quartets. Four guanines on a plane interacting via Hoogsteen bonding form a G-quartet (Fig. 1A). Typically, three or four G-quartets are stacked within a quadruplex and held together by p­p nonbonded attractive interactions. These secondary structures derive their chemical stability from hydrogen bonding within each quartet and coordination of a monovalent cation within its central scaffold [12]. Structural analysis by Sun et al. [13] has shown that the mammalian telomeric repeat TTAGGG forms parallel quadruplex motif under in vitro conditions. Telomerase activity could be regulated by such structures in vivo, thus small molecules, which selectively bind to telomeric G-quadruplex, may be of therapeutic value. Strong

506

S. Maiti et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 310 (2003) 505­512

Fig. 1. (A) Chemical structure of the G-quartet that is formed by Hoogsteen base pairs of four guanine bases. M and R indicate a cation and sugar, respectively. The dashed line indicates the Hoogsteen hydrogen bonds between guanine bases. (B) Chemical structure of Hoechst 33258.

indication of the in vivo presence of quadruplex motif and its functional role comes from the transcription inhibition of c-myc in HeLa cells by a quadruplex-specific small molecule [14]. Success in arresting expression of c-myc in cancerous cells makes G-quadruplex an interesting drug target for cancer therapy. In vitro chemical stability along with recent evidence of its in vivo existence and implication in various potential disease models impart G-quadruplex structures interesting candidates for design of potential drugs. As a starting point in the design of small molecules that interact and interfere with processes that involve Gquadruplexes, known duplex DNA binding molecules have been tested with the intention of modifying selected molecules to improve selectivity [15­18]. Distamycin, A­T-rich minor groove binder of duplex DNA, was recently shown to inhibit protein interactions with G-quadruplex DNA by specifically binding to the quadruplex moiety [19]. Similarly, the antitumor drug ditercalinium, which binds to double-stranded DNA with a preference for G­C-rich regions, can also form stable complexes with quadruplex structures [20]. Ethidium bromide [15], actinomycin D [21], and acridine [22]

showed poor binding with quadruplexes formed by d(T2 G4 )4 and d(T4 G4 )4 . It was initially identified that all these ligands bind poorly with G-quadruplexes but subsequently it has been discovered that chemically modified ligand of such poorly interactive molecules can bind selectively with G-quadruplexes with impressive affinity. Another example is the dye 3,30 -diethyloxadicarbocyanine (DODC). In 1995, Chen et al. [23] reported that DODC binds G-quadruplexes with moderate affinity but very recently Schouten et al. [24] have developed a new generation of novel heterocyclepeptide conjugates based on DODC that bind telomeric G-quadruplex DNA with higher affinities and improved quadruplex/duplex discrimination. With the above-mentioned objective, in the present study, we have investigated the binding ability of another well-known ligand--bis-benzimidazole, Hoechst 33258 (Fig. 1B) with G-quadruplex. Hoechst preferentially binds in the minor groove of A­T-rich sequences of double-stranded DNA [25,26]. The formed complex is brightly fluorescent, making this dye a useful stain for chromosomes and newly synthesized DNA [27,28]. Several groups have investigated the strength and mode(s) of dye binding to polynucleotides and oligonucleotides of defined base sequence including calf thymus DNA, poly[d(A­T)]2 , and the self-complementary d(CGCGAATTCGCG)2 duplex [29]. Using UV, fluorescence, circular dichroism (CD), and surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy we have shown that Hoechst binds to G-quadruplex formed by the oligonucleotide corresponding to bases 2180­2212 in the promoter region of human c-myc. Recent report by Siddiqui-Jain et al. [14] of in vivo presence of a G-quadruplex in the promoter site of c-myc and its functional role in transcription prompted us to choose this sequence for our study.

Materials and methods
Hoechst 33258 was obtained from Sigma and used without any further purification. The 31 mer oligonucleotide from the promoter site of c-myc, d(GG GGAGGG TGG GGA GGG TGG GGA AGG TGG GG) and a 39-mer 50 -biotinylated sequence d(ATG CAT GCG GGG AGG GTG GGG AGG GTG GGG AAG GTG GGG) were obtained from Sigma Genosys USA. All other reagents were of analytical grade. Milli Q water was used for all experiments. All experiments were done in 10 mM Tris­HCl buffer, pH 7.4, at 20 °C unless it is mentioned. Hoechst­quadruplex DNA binding constants were determined by UV and fluorescence titration method. Cary 400 (Varian) and Fluoromax 4 (Spex) instruments were used for UV and fluorescence titration experiments, respectively. A fixed Hoechst concentration was titrated by increasing quadruplex concentration in 10 mM Tris­HCl buffer, pH 7.4. Titration data were fit directly by nonlinear leastsquares methods to obtain binding constants, using a fitting function in Origin 5.0 (Microcal). Data were transformed into the form of a Scatchard plot of r=C versus r, where r is the ratio of bound Hoechst to the total base pair concentration and C is the concentration of free ligand. Data were fit to the McGhee­von Hippel neighbor exclusion

S. Maiti et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 310 (2003) 505­512 model. Fluorescence titration was performed using fixed concentration (0.5 lM) of Hoechst and by varying the quadruplex concentration. The mixtures were stirred continuously in a 1.0 cm path length cuvette to ensure homogeneity and all titrations were carried out at 20 °C. In order to obtain Kb values, binding isotherms were fitted directly using a fitting function (Origin 5.0). In this analysis, we assume that observed fluorescence intensity is sum of the weighted contributions from free and bound Hoechst: F ¼ F0 ðCt À Cb Þ þ Fb Cb ; ð1Þ

507

where F is the observed fluorescence intensity at each quadruplex concentration, F0 and Fb are the respective fluorescence intensities of free Hoechst and fully bound Hoechst, and Ct and Cb are the concentrations of total and bound Hoechst, respectively. For the interaction of Hoechst with quadruplex assuming 1:1 stoichiometry, it can be shown that
2 Cb À Cb ð½Q0 þ ½C0 þ 1=KA Þ þ ½Q0 ½C0  ¼ 0;

ð2Þ

where KA is the association constant, ½Q0 is the total quadruplex concentration, and ½C0 is the total Hoechst concentration. From Eqs. (1) and (2), it can be shown that:  DF ¼ ðDFmax =2Ct Þ f½Q0 þ ½C0 þ 1=KA g qffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffi À ð½Q0 þ ½C0 þ 1=KA Þ2 À 4½Q0 ½C0  ð3Þ where DF ¼ F À F0 and DFmax ¼ Fmax À F0 . Steady-state fluorescence anisotropy measurements were performed with a Spex Fluoromax-3 spectrofluorimeter using 1 cm path length quartz cuvettes. Excitation and emission slits with a nominal band-pass of 5 nm were used for all measurements. Background intensities of samples without Hoechst were subtracted from each spectrum to cancel any contribution from solvent, Raman peak, and other scattering artifacts. Using parallel polarized excitation, anisotropy (A) of samples was calculated as ratio of the difference between the parallel ðIk Þ and perpendicular ðI? Þ emitted light and the total intensity ðIt ¼ Ik þ 2I? Þ A ¼ ðIk À I? Þ=It : ð4Þ

injections of 1 M NaCl in 50 mM NaOH followed by extensive washing with buffer. The 50 biotinylated oligomer (Sigma Genosys) was heated at 95 °C for 5 min and slowly cooled to room temperature in running buffer (filtered and degassed 10 mM Tris­HCl, pH 7.40, 100 mM KCl, and 0.005% surfactant P20 from Biacore) before noncovalent immobilization on flow cell 2 to attain a binding of 80 response units (RU). Flow cell 1 was left blank as control to account for any signal generated due to bulk solvent effect or any other effect not specific to the DNA quadruplex­Hoechst interaction which was subtracted from the signal obtained in flow cell 2. Manual injection at 2 ll/min was used to achieve long contact times and control the amount of bound DNA on the surface. Oligo immobilized surface was exposed to the running buffer for 2 h at a flow rate of 2 ll/min before Hoechst injection for attaining quadruplex conformation on the chip. Samples of Hoechst were prepared fresh in running buffer by serial dilutions from a stock solution immediately before the experiment. Mass transfer limitation effect was tested by injecting Hoechst at different flow rates (5, 15, and 75 ll/min). Significant mass transfer limitation was observed under the experimental conditions and data were treated accordingly. All procedures were carried out at 20 °C using repetitive cycles of sample injection and regeneration. Hoechst samples (0.22­6.22 lM) were injected from 7 mm plastic vials for 2 min at a flow rate of 30 ll/min using the KINJECT command. Running buffer was sufficient for complete dissociation of the bound complexes. Hence surfaces were regenerated after Hoechst­DNA binding by buffer flow at 30 ll/min for 10 min. An array of different ligand concentrations was used in each experiment. All data were obtained in triplicate. Data analysis was carried out using the software Biaevaluation 3.1 (from Biacore). Kinetic analysis was done by fitting the response curves to different models and evaluating the goodness of fit. Equilibrium analysis was done by plotting the response at equilibrium, obtained by subtracting the response of the control flow cell 1 from that of flow cell 2, against Hoechst concentration. The data were fit to the equation RU ¼ RUmax ½Hoechst=ðKD þ ½HoechstÞ; ð6Þ

Fluorescence lifetimes were calculated from time-resolved fluorescence intensity decays using spectrofluorimeter Model FL900 (Edinburgh Analytical Instruments, UK) in the time-correlated single photon counting mode. This machine uses a thyratron-gated nanosecond flash lamp filled with hydrogen as the plasma gas (0.4 bar vacuum) and is run at 40 kHz. Lamp profiles were measured at the excitation wavelength using Ludox, colloidal silica, as the scatterer. To optimize the signal-to-noise ratio, 10,000 photon counts were collected in the peak channel. The data stored in a multichannel analyzer were routinely transferred to an IBM PC for analysis. Intensity decay curves were fitted as a sum of exponential terms: X IðtÞ=Ið0Þ ¼ Ai expðÀt=sI Þ ð5Þ where IðtÞ is the intensity at time t and Ai is a pre-exponential factor representing the fractional contribution to the time-resolved decay of the component with a lifetime si . The decay parameters were recovered using a nonlinear least-squares iterative fitting procedure based on the Marquardt algorithm. The program also includes statistical and plotting subroutine packages. The goodness of the fit of a given set of observed data and the chosen function was evaluated by the reduced v2 ratio, the weighted residuals, and the autocorrelation function of the weighted residuals. A fit was considered acceptable when plots of the weighted residuals and the autocorrelation function showed random deviation about zero with a lowest v2 . Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) measurements were performed with Pharmacia BIACORE 2000 system and streptavidin-coated sensor chips (Sensor chip SA, Biacore). The streptavidin sensor surface was prepared for DNA immobilization with three consecutive 1 min

where RU is the measured response, RUmax is the maximum response, and KD the dissociation constant for binding interaction. CD spectra were measured in a Jasco model spectropolarimeter (Japan) equipped with a thermoelectrically controlled cell holder and a cuvette with a path length of 1 cm. CD titrations were conducted at 20 °C by incremental injections of 2.5­20 ll aliquots of a Hoechst solution into 2 ml of a 4 lM quadruplex solution in the same buffer (10 mM Tris­HCl, pH 7.4). The resulting ligand concentration in the solution increased from 0 to about 8 lM. After each injection, the CD spectrum was recorded between 220 and 400 nm.

Results Electronic absorption spectroscopy is one of the most useful experimental techniques to obtain first-hand information about equilibrium ligand­DNA interactions. UV­Vis absorption spectra of Hoechst in the absence and presence of quadruplex were obtained (Fig. 2) to observe the interaction of Hoechst with G-quadruplex formed by guanine-rich antisense strand from the promoter site of c-myc in the presence of Kþ ions. Addition of increasing amounts of quadruplex to Hoechst results in hypochromism and moderate bathochromic shift of 10 nm from 340 to 350 nm in the UV­Vis spectrum of Hoechst. Isobestic points were observed at 360 and 310 nm (Fig. 2), clearly indicating the interaction of Hoechst with quadruplex. Intercalative ligand­DNA

508

S. Maiti et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 310 (2003) 505­512

Fig. 2. Absorbance spectra of 2 lM Hoechst in 10 mM Tris­HCl buffer (pH 7.4), 100 mM KCl in the absence and presence of successive addition of Hoechst at 20 °C. Inset is the Scatchard plot of r=C versus r, where r is the ratio of bound Hoechst to the total base pair concentration and C is the concentration of free ligand. Data were fit to the McGhee­von Hippel neighbor exclusion model.

binding usually results in hypochromism and bathochromism due to strong stacking interaction between aromatic chromophores and DNA base pairs. Observed spectral characteristics of Hoechst­quadruplex interaction suggest a mode of binding that involves stacking interaction between Hoechst and base pairs of DNA. Absorbance change at 340 nm of the Hoechst absorption spectra due to successive addition of quadruplex solution was used to construct a Scatchard plot. Analysis of this Scatchard plot yielded a binding affinity of 1.4 Æ 0.2 Â 106 MÀ1 and binding site density of 0.9. Fluorescence excitation and emission spectra of Hoechst in the absence and presence of different amounts of quadruplex were recorded in order to study the binding event. Fig. 3 shows emission spectra of Hoechst on addition of quadruplex. It is seen that addition of increasing concentrations of oligonucleotide results in a gradual increase in the fluorescence intensity of Hoechst. Ratio of the fluorescence intensity of Hoechst in the presence of quadruplex to that in the absence of quadruplex is around 10. The kmax in fluorescence excitation spectra shifts towards the red end by about 12 nm upon binding to quadruplex whereas the kmax in fluorescence emission spectra shifts to blue end by 23 nm. These spectral changes arise from the change in microenvironment of Hoechst that is due to Hoechst­ quadruplex interaction. A binding isotherm was plotted using the fluorescence intensity change at 460 nm due to addition of quadruplex. Analysis of this isotherm using 1:1 binding stoichiometry (see Materials and methods) gives a binding affinity of 5 Æ 0.5 Â 106 MÀ1 . Steady-state fluorescence anisotropy of fluorophores depends on their rotational diffusion in solution. Binding of a fluorescent ligand to DNA is expected to cause substantial change in ligand anisotropy as binding

Fig. 3. Fluorescence emission spectra of 0.1 lM Hoechst in 10 mM Tris­HCl buffer (pH 7.4), 100 mM KCl in the absence and presence of successive addition of Hoechst at 20 °C. Inset is the plot of DF vs quadruplex concentration. Data were fit to Eq. (3) to extract the binding affinity (see Materials and methods).

events can, in principle, restrict rotational motion of a ligand. Thus anisotropy measurements of free and bound ligand offer a significant means of detecting association events in case of fluorescent ligands. Fluorescence anisotropy of Hoechst in the absence and presence of quadruplex was determined. In the absence of quadruplex, Hoechst shows an anisotropy of 0.05 at 500 nm in 10 mM Tris­HCl buffer (pH 7.4), 100 mM KCl at 20 °C, whereas anisotropy of 0.22 was observed in the presence of quadruplex under similar conditions. The higher anisotropy of Hoechst in the presence of quadruplex compared to free Hoechst suggests that it is rotationally restricted in the presence of quadruplex which strongly suggests molecular interaction between Hoechst and G-quadruplex. Fluorescence decay of free and quadruplex-bound Hoechst has been studied and typical decay profiles along with autocorrelation diagrams are shown in Fig. 4. Hoechst exhibits multi-exponential decay in 10 mM Tris­HCl buffer, pH 7.4, irrespective of its concentration. Similar observation was made by Pal et al. [30] for oligomeric duplex bound-Hoechst. Multiexponential decay was also observed for other ligands on interacting with DNA [31,32]. In the present study, we observed that the major decay component (71%) has a lifetime of 0.33 ns in free Hoechst whereas in the presence of quadruplex the major component (78%) has a lifetime of 5.07 ns. Due to the multi-exponential decay nature, mean lifetimes were calculated from the decay times and pre-exponential factors using the following equation: X X hsi ¼ ai s2 = ai s I ; ð7Þ i

S. Maiti et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 310 (2003) 505­512

509

Fig. 4. Fluorescence decay curves for hoechst in 10 mM Tris­HCl buffer (pH 7.4), 100 mM KCl (a) in the absence and (b) in the presence of quadruplex. Solutions were excited at 460 nm and emission was monitored at the emission maximum. The solid lines represent the best fit to the data. The instrumental response function (lamp profile) is also shown in (c). The weighted deviations are shown below the decay curves.

where ai is the pre-exponential factor representing fractional contribution to time-resolved decay of the component with lifetime si . The observed mean lifetimes in absence and presence of quadruplex are 2.4 and 4.8 ns, respectively. The higher lifetime of Hoechst in the presence of quadruplex indicates Hoechst­quadruplex interaction and the binding site is less polar than the bulk buffer medium. This was confirmed by measuring the lifetime of Hoechst in less polar ethanol. The mean lifetime of Hoechst in ethanol was found to be 3.2 ns. Binding of Hoechst to G-quadruplex formed by antisense strand from promoter element of c-myc was analyzed by surface plasmon resonance (Fig. 5). A 39-mer

50 -biotinylated sequence d(ATG CAT GCG GGG AGG GTG GGG AGG GTG GGG AAG GTG GGG) containing the promoter site of c-myc was immobilized on a streptavidin-coated surface. A nonspecific eight nucleotide spacer (ATGCATGC) separates the promoter sequence from biotinylated 50 termini to minimize steric effects of the surface on the quadruplex motif. Quadruplex formation of the oligomer was effected by heating it at 95 °C for 5 min followed by slow cooling in a buffer containing 100 mM KCl (running buffer) before immobilizing it on chip surface. Characteristic CD peaks at 260 and 236 nm of positive and negative intensities, respectively, confirmed the formation of quadruplex under these experimental conditions. To allow for any further secondary structure changes after immobilization running buffer was passed over the surface for at least 2 h at a low flow rate. No significant change in baseline was observed within this period. Hoechst injection at three different flow rates 5, 15, and 75 ll/min indicated changing association rates confirming a mass transfer limited environment under our experimental conditions (Fig. 6, inset). Thus binding titration was done with Hoechst on a chip surface with 80 RU of immobilized DNA and a relatively high flow rate of 30 ll/min such that mass transfer effect on kinetic binding is minimized. Fig. 5 shows BIAcore sensorgrams for Hoechst (0.22­ 6.22 lM) binding to immobilized quadruplex sequence. Global fitting using Biaevalution 3.1 gave best fits with the mass transfer limited 1:1 Langmuir binding model. Models of further complexity did not improve fitting. Fitting obtained with 1:1 Langmuir model without mass transfer was not satisfactory which agreed to the

Fig. 5. Surface plasmon resonance sensorgrams for Hoechst 33258 binding to immobilized G-quadruplex from c-myc promoter site at 20 °C. Unbound ligand concentration in the flow buffer (10 mM Tris­ HCl, pH 7.40, 100 mM KCl, and 0.005% surfactant P20) varies as mentioned in the figure. Observed curves were fitted using the 1:1 Langmuir mass transfer limited binding model using Biaevaluation 3.l (from manufacturer) for evaluating kinetic constants (Table 1). v2 of fitting was 0.491.

Fig. 6. Binding isotherm for determining affinity constant of Hoechst 33258 binding to G-quadruplex. Plots were constructed using the RU values from steady-state region of the SPR sensorgrams presented in Fig. 5 vs. ligand concentration in flow solution. Inset: Mass transport effect. Hoechst 33258 was passed over quadruplex surface at the flow rates mentioned. Significant dependence of association curves to flow rate was observed.

510

S. Maiti et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 310 (2003) 505­512

Table 1 Binding and kinetic constants for Hoechst­quadruplex DNA interaction determined by UV­Vis, fluorescence, and SPRa UV­Vis KA (MÀ1 ) 1.4 Â 10
a b
6

Fluorescence KA (MÀ1 ) 5.0 Â 10
6

Surface plasmon resonancea KA (MÀ1 )b 2.66 Â 10
5

ka (MÀ1 sÀ1 ) 1.23 Â 10
5

kd (sÀ1 ) 0.686

ka =kd (MÀ1 ) 1.79 Â 105

All experiments were performed at 20 °C. Obtained from SPR binding response observed at steady-state for respective kinetic binding events.

experimentally checked mass transfer limitation under our conditions. Kinetic association ðka Þ and dissociation ðkd Þ were 1.23 Æ 0.04 Â 105 MÀ1 sÀ1 and 0.686 Æ 0.009 sÀ1 , respectively. The affinity constant ðKA Þ obtained by global fitting of kinetic binding was 1.79 Æ 0.04 Â 105 MÀ1 . `Goodness-of-fit' decreases at higher concentrations as seen in the representative curve at 6.22 lM Hoechst concentration. We found that it is difficult to work with Hoechst at concentrations above 6­7 lM, which may be due to the fact that nonspecific binding of Hoechst to the sensor chip surface may be excessive and difficult to correct at high concentrations. This may also be the reason for obtaining better fits at lower concentrations than at higher concentrations. A similar observation has recently been reported for ditercalinium binding to quadruplex DNA on streptavidin chip [20]. Equilibrium binding was analyzed using values for equilibrium response ðRUeq Þ obtained from global fitting using the mass transfer limited Langmuir binding model. Plotting of RUeq against Hoechst concentration is shown in Fig. 6, which clearly shows saturation behavior in equilibrium binding response with increasing Hoechst concentration. Fitting to Eq. (6) (Materials and method) gives an equilibrium association constant ðKA Þ of 2.658 Æ 0.002 Â 105 MÀ1 which is in good agreement with KD obtained from kinetic fitting. Though the association constants obtained by SPR from kinetic and equilibrium analysis of binding agree reasonably well they are about an order of magnitude lower than affinity constants obtained by other equilibrium methods used in this study (Table 1). Steric effects due to surface immobilization may be a possible reason for this decreased binding affinity as quadruplex formation close to chip surface may be disturbed though we have used a eight-nucleotide spacer. The refractive index increment ratio (RII) factor was not determined for Hoechst and has not been used for correction of the obtained equilibrium response. Davis et al. [33] point out that such corrections are important and required for correct interpretation of kinetic results only when the binding stoichiometry is greater that 1. Our equilibrium studies (UV and fluorescence) suggest that the binding stoichiometry is not greater than 1 hence this correction may not be necessary. This is further supported by the fact that reasonably good agreement is achieved with results obtained by other methods. In addition to UV­Vis absorption, fluorescence, and SPR studies described above, circular dichroism (CD) provides a means for detecting

Fig. 7. CD spectra of quadruplex in 10 mM Tris­HCl buffer (pH 7.4), 100 mM KCl, in the presence and absence of Hoechst.

and characterizing structural changes in DNA upon ligand binding. Fig. 7 shows the CD spectra from 220 to 380 nm of free and Hoechst bound quadruplex DNA. In the absence of Hoechst the oligomer shows a positive peak at 260 nm and a negative peak at 236 nm, confirming the formation of quadruplex secondary structure under our experimental conditions (Tris­HCl buffer, pH 7.4, 100 mM KCl). However, there was no noticeable change in CD spectrum of the quadruplex in the presence of Hoechst. This indicates that binding of Hoechst to quadruplex does not induce any structural changes in the DNA quartet.

Discussions We have studied interaction of the fluorescent DNA binding dye Hoechst to G-quadruplex formed by the oligonucleotide from promoter region of oncogene c-myc by both equilibrium (UV absorption, fluorescence, fluorescence anisotropy, and circular dichroism) and kinetic binding techniques (surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy). Our results indicate that Hoechst binds to quadruplex DNA with affinity constants of 105 ­106 MÀ1 . While the bis(benzimidazole) derivative Hoechst forms stable complexes with B-DNA, harboring A­T-rich sequences in the minor groove [29], specific binding to G-quartet structures has not been observed before. The in vitro binding affinity of unmodified Hoechst towards

S. Maiti et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 310 (2003) 505­512

511

c-myc promoter specific G-quadruplex structures as indicated by our study makes this dye an interesting molecule for further investigation as a regulator of c-myc and other genes which have potential quadruplex forming sequences in their promoter regions. Although the exact mode of binding to G-quadruplex is not clear three different noncovalent specific interaction modes can be imagined: intercalation between quartet planes, binding in the grooves, and interaction within nucleotide loops of the quadruplex. 1:1 binding stoichiometry, as estimated from the present results, limits interaction to a single binding mode. Bathochromic shift in the absorption maxima and observed hypochromism of Hoechst in the presence of quadruplex DNA may be interpreted in terms of stacking interaction between the quartet forming guanine bases and the aromatic chromophore. But such a binding mode appears unlikely because Hoechst is known to bind A­T-rich minor groove in B-DNA only [29] and no interaction with guanine bases has been reported. The second possibility of minor groove binding in the G-quadruplex is ruled out since the quartet structure does not present a site with A­T-rich groove topology similar to the one observed in duplex helical DNA. The 31 mer oligonucleotide from the promoter site of c-myc, d(GG GGAGGG TGG GGA GGG TGG GGA AGG TGG GG) used in the current study, adopts an intramolecularly folded quadruplex with four planes of guanine tetrads and three five-base-loops (two AGGGT and the AAGGT pentanucleotides). We propose the likelihood of Hoechst interacting with the A­T bases present in the loop formed by AAGGT. Such a binding mode has been observed for distamycin [34], another molecule with affinity for A­T-rich minor grooves, which binds to T loops of hairpins or double hairpins. In our case it is tempting to speculate that the pentanucleotide loop's dynamic nature may be responsible for induced conformational orientation to accommodate the ligand chromophore and make suitable stacking interactions. Involvement of the two other loops formed by AGGGT in binding is less likely as binding site estimations by Scatchard analysis of UV results were close to 1 and a 1:1 binding stoichiometry gave good fit to the fluorescence binding isotherm. Additional support for loop binding interaction is gained from CD experiments which show that ligand binding does not induce substantial structural change in quadruplex. Intercalation within quartet planes is expected to induce structural changes in the overall quadruplex topology while binding in the loop may not perturb the overall secondary structure enough for a detectable CD signal. Surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy further substantiates our claim that Hoechst effectively recognizes the quadruplex motif formed in vitro by the anti-sense strand from c-myc promoter region. These results provide additional information on the kinetics of Hoechst­DNA

interaction in terms of on/off binding rates, which could be potential guidelines for the screening of more effective analogues. Although the affinity constants obtained from kinetic and equilibrium SPR analysis agree reasonably well, these values are about an order of magnitude lower than those observed by other equilibrium methods studied in this report (Table 1). A possible reason for this difference could be steric effects due to surface immobilization, which induce structures other than quadruplexes under our experimental conditions. But any contribution from other factors due to the kinetic process being diffusion-limited (mass transfer limited model as experimentally verified) cannot be ruled out. Extensive fitting routines of obtained sensorgrams using various models from Biacore evaluation software package gave best fits with the Langmuir 1:1 binding model with mass transfer, which is in good agreement with the binding stoichiometry indicated by UV and fluorescence results. Though mode of binding is not clear from our kinetic results it is evident that binding affinity is weaker than Hoechst­duplex DNA complexes as reported earlier (1­3 nM dissociation constant), suggesting a nonintercalative mode of binding [29]. The binding affinities obtained in our results are similar to the ones observed for carbocyanine dye DODC interaction with quadruplex DNA that has also been proposed to be a loop-binding agent [23]. However, higher resolution probing, for example by NMR spectroscopy, will be required to investigate further the details of molecular interaction between Hoechst and quadruplex DNA. Time-resolved fluorescence decay behavior of Hoechst in the absence and presence of quadruplex gives additional support that it binds to the quadruplex. The timeresolved fluorescence of Hoechst bound to quadruplex decays in a multiexponential fashion. Multiexponential decay behavior was also observed for Hoechst and for other ligands when they interact with the DNA double helix. Such multiple lifetimes correspond to different modes and/or efficiencies of fluorescence quenching by the DNA bases and are related to conformational motions of ligands within the DNA helix environment [30­32]. The higher mean lifetime of Hoechst in the presence of quadruplex revealed that Hoechst binds to quadruplex and the binding site is less polar than the bulk buffer. In summary, Hoechst has moderate affinity for Gquadruplex formed by the oligonucleotide from the promoter site of c-myc as observed by both equilibrium and kinetic methods. Hence, this dye may be used to develop analogues with improved quadruplex binding and quadruplex­duplex discrimination. Kinetic constants reported in this study for quadruplex binding may serve as reference points for screening such developed analogues. Our results demonstrate its binding with a specific sequence from the promoter site of c-myc which is unique in the human genome as observed by us and others using standard BLAST (nBLAST) [35]. It will be

512

S. Maiti et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 310 (2003) 505­512 telomerase inhibitor: NMR studies of the 2:1 complex of a pentacyclic methylacridinium cation with d(TTAGGGT)4 , Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 40 (2001) 4749­4751. R.J. Harrison, S.M. Gowan, L.R. Kelland, S. Neidle, Human telomerase inhibition by substituted acridine derivatives, Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 9 (1999) 2463­2468. M.J. Cocco, L.A. Hanakahi, M.D. Huber, N. Maizels, Specific interactions of distamycin with G-quadruplex DNA, Nucleic Acids Res. 1 (2003) 2944­2951. C. Carrasco, F. Rosu, V. Gabelica, C. Houssier, E. De Pauw, C. Garbay-Jaureguiberry, B. Roques, W.D. Wilson, J.B. Chaires, M.J. Waring, C. Bailly, Tight binding of the antitumor drug ditercalinium to quadruplex DNA, Chembiochem 3 (2002) 1235­ 1241. N. Nagesh, D. Chatterji, Ammonium ion at low concentration stabilizes the G-quadruplex formation by telomeric sequence, J. Biochem. Biophys. Methods 30 (1995) 1­8. S.M. Gowan, R. Heald, M.F.G. Stevens, L.R. Kelland, Potent inhibition of telomerase by small-molecule pentacyclic acridines capable of interacting with G-quadruplexes, Mol. Pharmacol. 60 (2001) 981­988. Q. Chen, I.D. Kuntz, R.H. Shafer, Spectroscopic recognition of guanine dimeric hairpin quadruplexes by a carbocyanine dye, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 (1996) 2635­2639. J.A. Schouten, S. Ladame, S.J. Mason, M.A. Cooper, S. Balasubramanian, G-quadruplex-specific peptide-hemicyanine ligands by partial combinatorial selection, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125 (2003) 5594­5595. P.E. Pjura, K. Grzeskowiak, R.E. Dickerson, Binding of Hoechst 33258 to the minor groove of B-DNA, J. Mol. Biol. 197 (1987) 257­271. M. Teng, N. Usman, C.A. Frederick, A.H.J. Wang, The molecular structure of the complex of Hoechst 33258 and the DNA dodecamer d(CGCGAATTCGCG), Nucleic Acids Res. 16 (1988) 2671­2690. S.A. Latt, G. Stetten, L.A. Juergens, H.F. Willard, C.D. Scher, Spectral studies on 33258 Hoechst and related bisbenzimidazole dyes useful for fluorescent detection of deoxyribonucleic acid synthesis, J. Histochem. Cytochem. 23 (1975) 493­505. L. Palka, M.E. Palka-Santini, S. Chambon, D. Renz, P. Maurer, W. Doerfler, Amyloglucosidase suppresses interference by glycogen in the quantification of DNA using the Hoechst 33258 dye, Biotechniques 32 (2002) 1250­1256. F.G. Loontiens, P. Regenfuss, A. Zechel, L. Dumortier, R.M. Clegg, Binding characteristics of Hoechst 33258 with calf thymus DNA, poly[d(A­T)], and d(CCGGAATTCCGG): multiple stoichiometries and determination of tight binding with a wide spectrum of site affinities, Biochemistry 29 (1990) 9029­9039. S.K. Pal, L. Zhao, A.H. Zewail, Water at DNA surfaces: ultrafast dynamics in minor groove recognition, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100 (2003) 8113­8118. E.L. Rachofsky, E. Seibert, J.T. Stivers, R. Osman, J.B.A. Ross, Conformation and dynamics of abasic sites in DNA investigated by time-resolved fluorescence of 2-aminopurine, Biochemistry 40 (2001) 957­967. J.T. Stivers, 2-Aminopurine fluorescence studies of base stacking interactions at abasic sites in DNA: metal-ion and base sequence effects, Nucleic Acids Res. 26 (1998) 3837­3844. T.M. Davis, W.D. Wilson, Determination of the refractive index increments of small molecules for correction of surface plasmon resonance data, Anal. Biochem. 284 (2000) 348­353. D. Rentzeperis, J. Ho, L.A. Marky, Contribution of loops and nicks to the formation of DNA dumbbells: melting behavior and ligand binding, Biochemistry 32 (1993) 2564­2572. T. Simonsson, M. Henriksson, c-myc Suppression in Burkitt's lymphoma cells, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 290 (2002) 11­15.

interesting to investigate the specificity of this interaction vis--vis other quadruplex sequences such as teloa meric and other G-rich promoter elements. Such studies have been initiated in our laboratory.

[18]

[19]

Acknowledgments
S.M. and S.C. gratefully acknowledge Prof. Samir K. Brahmachari, Director IGIB, for his constant support. [20]

References
[1] T. Simonsson, G-quadruplex DNA structures--variations on a theme, Biol. Chem. 382 (2001) 621­628. [2] H. Arthanari, P.H. Bolton, Functional and dysfunctional roles of quadruplex DNA in cells, Chem. Biol. 8 (2001) 221­230. [3] M. Arcinas, K.C. Sizer, L.M. Boxer, Activation of c-myc expression by c-Abl is independent of both the DNA binding function of c-abl and the c-myc EP site, J. Biol. Chem. 269 (1994) 21919­21924. [4] C. Melani, L. Rivoltini, G. Parmiani, B. Calabretta, M.P. Colombo, Inhibition of proliferation by c-myb antisense oligodeoxynucleotides in colon adenocarcinoma cell lines that express c-myb, Cancer Res. 51 (1991) 2897­2901. [5] A. Begue, P. Crepieux, N. Vu-Dac, A. Hautefeuille, N. Spruyt, V. Laudet, D. Stehelin, Identification of a second promoter in the human c-ets-2 proto-oncogene, Gene Expr. 6 (1997) 333­347. [6] A. Heydemann, J.H. Boehmler, M.C. Simon, Expression of two myeloid cell-specific genes requires the novel transcription factor, c-fes expression factor, J. Biol. Chem. 272 (1997) 29527­29537. [7] C.T. Ashley Jr., S.T. Warren, Trinucleotide repeat expansion and human disease, Annu. Rev. Genet. 29 (1995) 703­728. [8] R.L. Margolis, M.G. McInnis, A. Rosenblatt, C.A. Ross, Trinucleotide repeat expansion and neuropsychiatric disease, Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 56 (1999) 1019­1031. [9] S. Choudhry, M. Mukerji, A.K. Srivastava, S. Jain, S.K. Brahmachari, CAG repeat instability at SCA2 locus: anchoring CAA interruptions and linked single nucleotide polymorphisms, Hum. Mol. Genet. 10 (2001) 2437­2446. [10] S. Neidle, G.N. Parkinson, The structure of telomeric DNA, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 13 (2003) 275­283. [11] S.M. Kerwin, G-quadruplex DNA as a target for drug design, Curr. Pharm. Des. 6 (2000) 441­478. [12] P. Balagurumoorthy, S.K. Brahmachari, Structure and stability of human telomeric sequence, J. Biol. Chem. 269 (1994) 21858­ 21869. [13] H. Sun, A. Yabuki, N. Maizels, A human nuclease specific for G4 DNA, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98 (2001) 12444­12449. [14] A. Siddiqui-Jain, C.L. Grand, D.J. Bearss, L.H. Hurley, Direct evidence for a G-quadruplex in a promoter region and its targeting with a small molecule to repress c-myc transcription, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99 (2002) 11593­11598. [15] F. Koeppel, J.F. Riou, A. Laoui, P. Mailliet, P.B. Arimondo, D. Labit, O. Petitgenet, C. Helene, J.L. Mergny, Ethidium derivatives bind to G-quartets, inhibit telomerase and act as fluorescent probes for quadruplexes, Nucleic Acids Res. 29 (2001) 1087­1096. [16] J.-F. Riou, L. Guittat, P. Mailliet, A. Laoui, E. Renou, O. Petitgenet, F. Mgnin-Chanet, C. Hlne, J.L. Mergny, Cell e ee senescence and telomere shortening induced by a new series of specific G-quadruplex DNA ligands, Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99 (2002) 2672­2677. [17] E. Gavathiotis, R.A. Heald, F.G. Stevens, M.S. Searle, Recognition and stabilization of quadruplex DNA by a potent new

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

