Journal of Crystal Growth 122 (1992) 199--203 North-Holland

oon~ o,

CRYSTAL GROWTH

Crystallization of human prostatic acid phosphatase using biphasic systems
R. Kuciel, C.G. Jakob, L. Lebioda
1

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Unitersity of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA

and W.S. Ostrowski
Institute of Medical Biochemistry, N. Copernicus Academy of Medicine, Kopernika 7, 31-034 Krakow, Poland

Crystals of prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP) have been obtained using several vapor diffusion experiments. The only crystals which diffract X-rays, however, are those grown using biphasic systems. This method has yielded crystals of PAP which diffract X-rays to 6 A resolution. Biphasic systems like the one described in the text may provide an alternative method for obtaining X-ray quality crystals of proteins when monophasic systems of polyethylene glycol or ammonium sulfate are not successful. A discussion of some possible pathways which lead to equilibrium is also included.

1. Introduction Protein phosphatases together with protein kinases play a crucial role in many aspects of cell function [1]. Most protein phosphatases, however, are membrane bound insoluble proteins which are unlikely to produce crystals. Because prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP) is not a membrane protein and is found at a relatively high concentration in seminal fluids, PAP is a convenient model to study acid phosphatase activity [2]. It is interesting to note that PAP levels in serum have been correlated with the presence of prostatic tumors. Unfortunately, even though current assays for PAP are very sensitive, screening of the general male population by these methods is not an effective means of early identification of prostate cancer. The elevated serum levels of PAP are believed to result from the secretion of PAP into the blood by metastatic prostate cells [31. herefore, the majority of testing is used for T
1

Corresponding author.
--

monitoring treatment efficacy once the diagnosis of a prostatic tumor has been made. To date, the physiological role of PAP has not been determined despite the fact that the physical properties of the enzyme have been studied in great detail. The protein molecule is known to be a dimeric glycoprotein of identical subunits with a molecular weight of 100 kDa. Each subunit of PAP is believed to contain one active site which catalyzes two relatively non-specific reactions: hydrolysis of N- and 0-linked phosphomonoesters, and transphosphorylation [4]. Although many studies have already been completed, the key questions about the structure, mechanism, and physiological role of PAP remain unanswered. Currently, no three-dimensional (3D) structure for any acid phosphatase is known. Here we report our efforts to obtain single crystals of PAP that would be of suitable diffraction quality to determine the molecular 3D structure. One new approach utilizing biphasic systems has yielded several morphologically different crystal forms of PAP which diffract to approx-

0022-0248/92/$05.0()  1992

Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. All rights reserved

200

R. Kuciel et al.

/ Crystallization of human PAP using biphasic systems small. However, large, morphologically single crystals were obtained after microseeding some of the drops. A series of solutions containing different concentrations of finely crushed PAP crystals was used as a source of seeds. The resulting hexagonal rods grew to approximately 1.2 X 0.4 X 0.4 mm. Unfortunately though, none of the crystais grown in AS have diffracted X-rays either. Because the crystals of PAP grown in PEG or AS were not useful for X-ray structural studies, an attempt was made to grow crystals in a solution containing both PEG and AS. Droplets contaming 25% AS as the precipitating agent, 6 mg/mi PAP, and 100mM citrate buffer at pH 4.5 were allowed to equilibrate through vapor diffusion against 50% AS for several days. Those drops which did not contain crystals, but were nearly saturated with protein, were microseeded with a solution containing PEG 4K and finely crushed crystals which had been previously grown in PEG 4K. Again, a dilutional series was used to determine the best concentration of seeds to promote optimum crystal growth. The seeding solution which seemed to promote growth of the largest single crystals of PAP consisted of one
=

imately 6 A. The method of growing crystals at a biphasic interface using a hanging drop set-up is described in detail below,

2. Experimental procedure All crystallization experiments were carried out using the vapor diffusion method. A wide variety of crystallization conditions was screened using the hanging drop set-up [5]. When 25% polyethylene glycol (PEG) 4K was used as the precipitating agent along with 200mM ammonium sulfate (AS) and 6 mg/mI PAP, ldng needle shaped crystals of PAP were formed over a pH range of 4.5 to 8.0 in 100mM citrate buffer. The crystals were approximately 2.0 x 0.2 x 0.2 mm, but despite their relatively large size, they did not scatter X-rays. Occasionally, formation of multiple twins was observed, Hanging drop experiments using 50% ammonium sulfate as the precipitating agent, 6 mg/ml PAP and 100mM citrate buffer at pH 4.5 also yielded crystals of PAP. Initial experiments produced PAP crystals which were very
=

Fig. 1. Photograph of PAP crystals grown in AS at the hiphasic interface of AS (outer droplet) and PEG 4K (inner droplet). The hexagonal rods are nucleated at the interface and grow in the AS rich phase to approximately 0.8 >< 0.2 x 0.2 mm.

R. Kuciel et al.

/ Crystallization of human PAP using biphasic systems

201

PAP crystal of approximately 0.3 x 0.05 x 0.05 mm, crushed and diluted to 200 ~l with 28% PEG 4K. The volume of the added PEG solution was one-third the total volume of the drop. Upon addition of the PEG solution containing the PAP seeds to the drop containing protein and AS, two phases formed. The outer droplet was rich in AS, and the inner droplet was rich in PEG. After a few days, hexagonal rods began growing at the interface of the two phases in the AS rich phase, as shown in fig. 1. Upon close examination, it can be seen that the crystals have concave ends (fig. 2). This defect would indicate a non-uniform crystal growth front, but nevertheless, the crystals diffracted X-rays to approximately 6 A resolution and had unit cell dimensions of a 57 A and c 208 A. The quality of the X-ray photographs would not permit the unequivocal determination of the space group. Additional biphasic experiments using a pH range of 4.5 to 7.5 have produced crystals with different morphologies. These crystals also diffract to approximately 6 A resolution. One inconvenience of using biphasic systems is the difficulty in transferring crystals grown in biphasic drops directly to X-ray capillaries with= =

out the presence of the other phase. Thus far, attempts to develop artificial mother liquors have not been successful. Crystals transferred to solutions other than the mother liquor no longer diffract X-rays. Currently, additional experiments using biphasic systems are underway.

3. Discussion The equilibrium between the components in the two phases and the well solution is a complex process. The initial AS rich hanging drop is nearly equilibrated with the well solution after two days, and at the concentrations used, the drop is nearly saturated with protein. Also, the PEG seeding solution is saturated with PAP and contains a relatively low concentration of seeds. When the PEG solution is added to the AS rich hanging drop, the previously established equilibria are disturbed. Once the two phases are combined, they begin to equilibrate with each other and the well solution. Some amount of AS will diffuse through the interphase boundary into the PEG phase, and likewise some PEG will diffuse into the AS phase. Although the concentrations of AS

Fig. 2. High magnification photograph of crystals grown at the hiphasic interface of AS and PEG 4K. as shown in fig. 1. The concave crystal ends indicate a non-uniform crystal growth front, yet the crystals diffract X-rays to 6 A resolution.

202

R. Kuciel et al.

/ Crystallization of human PAP using biphasic systems tion and promotes slow crystal growth. The formation of stable nuclei at the interface in those experiments which did not contain seeds is favorable, perhaps as a result of the small degree of order, surface tension, or other phenomena present at the phase boundary. Although nucleation occurs at the interface of the two phases, crystals appear to grow solely in the AS rich phase. One possible explanation why this occurs is that the PEG rich phase is merely saturated with PAP. Otherwise, if it were below saturation, the crystals along the interface would dissolve into the PEG phase until saturation was achieved, and if the PEG solution were supersaturated, it would promote crystal growth into the PEG rich phase. This is consistent with the fact that low concentrations of salts increase the solubility of proteins in PEG solutions. However, diffusion of PEG into the high salt phase apparently lowers the solubility of PAP. It can also be speculated that the AS rich phase is supersaturated only to the extent that it will maintain crystal growth and not nuclei formation. Upon examining numerous experiments of this type, nucleation and crystal growth were only associated with the interface and not found in the bulk of the AS phase or on the outer drop surface. This hypothesis would lead to the possibility that the phase boundary contributes some amount of order to the system which lowers the concentration of protein necessary for nuclei formation. If this is so, biphasic interfaces could be used to promote the process of nuclei formation at lower supersaturation and slow crystal growth. Recently, similar biphasic systems have been used in attempts to produce protein crystals. Ray and Bracker [7] have reported their use of a biphasic system to obtain crystals of phosphoglucomutase (PGM). In their experiments, a monophasic system produced two phases upon warming to 25C;one phase was rich in PEG and PGM, and the other phase was rich in AS. The results showed that PGM has a marked preference for the PEG rich phase, and the concentration of PGM in the PEG phase was nearly the same as that found in the crystals. Observations of the crystallization experiments revealed that the PEG and PGM rich droplets were converted

and PEG are quite different in each phase, the activities of each component should be the same in both phases as they reach equilibrium, Not only is there a partitioning of AS and PEG across the phase boundary, but most probably there is a partitioning of PAP as well. As previously discussed, initially the AS rich phase is nearly saturated with PAP, and the PEG rich phase contains seeds. The solubilities of PAP in these two phases, however, appear to be quite different. Therefore, the partitioning of PAP between the two phases may play a key role in nucleation and crystal growth. Diamond et al. [61 have reported significant differences in protein partitioning between two phases consisting of PEG 3400 and potassium phosphate, and that the partition coeficients for proteins or peptides are dependent on the amino acid sequence. Another factor which needs to be addressed is the rate of equilibration of the different components in this biphasic system. It is known that ionic equilibria are established relatively quickly between phases; however, it is not obvious which component, PEG 4K or PAP, diffuses at a faster rate. The rates of diffusion across the phase boundary for each will depend not only on their gyration radius but also on the make-up of the solution as governed by the partition coeficients. Many experiments in which the PEG size, volume, and concentration of PEG and AS varied were performed. From the results it is obvious that the range of conditions necessary to produce diffracting crystals of PAP is fairly narrow. Our observations seem to confirm that the kinetic pathway for crystal growth at a biphasic interface in this instance is complex. In order to determine if nucleation at the phase interface was a result of the seeds, additional experiments were performed in which the PEG solution did not contain seeds. In these experiments, crystals formed and continued to grow at the interphase boundary in the AS rich phase as before. However, these crystals were multiple twins. Since the presence of seeds promotes better crystal growth, it would stand to reason that the seeds do not dissolve when the two phases are initially mixed. It appears that the presence of seeds prevents any large supersatura-

R. Kuciel et al.

/ Crystallization of human PAP using biphasic systems

203

into crystals. Also, the presence of detergents led to a biphasic system in experiments with the membrane protein porin, as reported by Garavito et al. [8]. Both of these phenomena, however, are different from what has been observed in our experiments with the PAP/PEG/AS system. Growing crystals at a biphasic interface may also provide another added benefit should rapid freezing of crystals before X-ray studies be necessary. Ray et al. [9] have recently reported methods for removing salt in the absence of crosslinking from salt induced crystals before rapid freezing. This method relies on establishing a biphasic mixture in which the activities of various components are the same as those in the mother liquor. If however, crystals were grown using a biphasic system, the need to develop an artificial secondary phase would be eliminated.

libration between the two phases. The fact remains, however, that despite a few handling difficulties, this method provides a relatively simple laboratory experiment which produces diffracting crystals from a biphasic mixture of components which when used by themselves are not effective.

Acknowledgements This work was supported by the National Science Foundation grant DMB9018114 to L.L. and a grant from the Polish Academy of Sciences to W.S.O. References
[1] P. Banks, J. NIH Res. 2 (1990) 62. [2] K.W. Lam, C.Y. Li, L.T. Yam, R.S. Smith and B. Hacker, Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 390 (1982) 1. 13] M. Tannenbaum, Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 390 (1982) 142. 141 W. Ostrowski, in: Male Accessory Sex Glands, Eds. E. Spring-Mills and E.S.F. Hafez (Elsevier/North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1980) p. 197.

4. Summary It is clear that there are some benefits to growing crystals at biphasic interfaces, as well as inconveniences. From examining crystals of similar morphology grown in PEG 4K alone, AS alone, and PEG 4K and AS together, both PEG 4K and AS are needed in relatively high concentrations to promote growth of diffracting PAP crystals. This theoretically complex biphasic systern for obtaining quality crystals poses many questions with respect to kinetic factors and equi-

[51A. McPherson, European J. Biochem. 189 (1990) 1.

[61 A.D. Diamond, K. Yu and iT. Hsu, in: Protein Purification -- From Molecular Mechanisms to Large Scale Processes, ACS Symposium Series (American Chemical Society Washington, DC, 1990) ch. 4, p. 52. [7] W.J. Ray, Jr. and C.E. Bracker, J. Crystal Growth 76 (1986) 562. [8] R.M. Garavito, Z. Markovic-Housley and J.A. Jenkins, J. Crystal Growth 76 (1986) 701. [91W.J. Ray, Jr., iT. Bolin, J.M. Puvathingal, W. Minor, Y. Liu and SW. Muchmore, Biochemistry 30 (1991) 6866.

