JMB--MS 324 Cust. Ref. No. PEW 93/94

[SGML] J. Mol. Biol. (1995) 247, 125­145

Refined Crystal Structure of Spinach Ferredoxin Reductase at 1.7 Å Resolution: Oxidized, Reduced and 2'-Phospho-5'-AMP Bound States
Christopher M. Bruns and P. Andrew Karplus*
Section of Biochemistry Molecular, and Cell Biology Cornell University, Ithaca NY 14853, U.S.A. The crystal structure of spinach ferredoxin-NADP +-oxidoreductase (FNR), determined by multiple isomorphous replacement at 2.6 Å resolution, has been refined at 1.7 Å resolution to an R-factor of 17.9%. The structure of FNR bound to the competitive inhibitor 2'-phospho-5'-AMP (P-AMP) has also been refined at 1.7 Å to an R-factor of 17.4% and dithionite-reduced/P-AMPbound FNR has been refined at 2.0 Å to an R-factor of 14.9%. The P-AMP-bound structure was used to construct a model for the binding of NADP + . Over 200 solvation sites were included in each structure, and many of the best defined solvation sites stabilize buried turns. A bulk solvent correction obviated the need for a low-resolution data cutoff. An acidic side-chain likely to be responsible for the low pH requirement for crystallization has been identified. Three large networks of the hydrophobic side-chains help define the FNR structure. One of these contains a large cavity far from the active site, which coincides with the lone site of sequence heterogeneity in FNR, and may provide a site for membrane attachment. The reduced structure shows that Ser96 moves toward atom N-5 of FAD and a water molecule moves toward atom N-1 of FAD, while the flavin moiety remains planar. Possible sources of a proton that must be picked up upon reduction are discussed. Keywords: ferredoxin reductase; crystallographic refinement; flavoprotein; electron transferase; photosynthesis

*Corresponding author

Introduction
Ferredoxin-NADP + oxidoreductase (FNR), also known as ferredoxin reductase, catalyzes the final electron transport step of linear photosynthesis. In photosynthesis, the energy of an absorbed photon is transferred in the form of electrons through a series of electron carriers, ultimately forming NADPH, which is a source of reducing equivalents for many reductive biosynthetic reactions. FNR receives one electron from each of two molecules of the one-electron carrier ferredoxin (Fd), and uses these two electrons to convert NADP + into NADPH via hydride (H - ) transfer from atom N-5 of flavin

adenine dinucleotide (FAD), the redox active prosthetic group of FNR: 2Fdred + NADP + + H + 34 2Fdox + NADPH (1) The three-dimensional crystal structure of spinach ° FNR was solved using X-ray diffraction data at 2.2 A resolution (Karplus et al., 1991). The folding pattern of FNR consists of two structural domains (Figure 1). The N-terminal (FAD-binding) domain is a sixstranded antiparallel beta-barrel and is responsible for most of the polar contacts with FAD, which is sandwiched between the two domains. The C-terminal (NADP + -binding) domain is a fivestranded parallel beta-sheet flanked by alphahelices, and shares topological similarity with six-stranded dinucleotide binding folds (Wierenga et al., 1985), but differs from them in structural details (Karplus et al., 1991; Swindells, 1993). FNR was the first structure with this overall fold to be solved. Since then the structure of a homologous protein, phthalate dioxygenase reductase (PDR), has been reported (Correll et al., 1992). In addition to having two domains with the same fold as those of FNR, PDR has an additional structural domain at its
7 1995 Academic Press Limited
(FNR)

Present address: 223 Biotechnology Building, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, U.S.A. Abbreviations used: FNR, ferredoxin NADP + oxidoreductase; PDR, phthalate dioxygenase reductase; Fd, ferredoxin; MIR, multiple isomorphous replacement; P-AMP, 2'-phospho-5'-AMP = adenosine 2',5'-diphosphate; ATP-ribose = 2'-monophosphoadenosine 5'-diphosphoribose; r.m.s., root-mean-square.
0022­2836/95/110125­21 $08.00/0

JMB--MS 324 126
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

Figure 1. Ribbon diagram of spinach FNR. The N-terminal FAD-binding domain is on the left and the C-terminal NADP + -binding domain is on the right. The isoalloxazine ring system of the FAD cofactor is sandwiched between the 2 domains. The inhibitor P-AMP is bound to the bottom of the C-terminal domain. Beta-strands are represented by arrows, alpha-helices are represented by helical ribbons, and other structures are represented by narrow tubes. Residue numbers are provided at the termini of selected secondary structural elements. The overall fold of FNR is extremely similar both to the first 2 domains of phthalate dioxygenase reductase (PDR), which shares only 15% sequence identity with FNR (Correll et al.,93), and to the C-terminal portion of nitrate reductase (Lu et al., 1994).

C terminus that is homologous to ferredoxin. The detailed comparison of the structures of FNR and PDR has been reported (Correll et al., 1993). Sequence alignments reveal many other homologous proteins, most of which, like PDR, have additional structural domains (Andrews et al., 1992; Karplus et al., 1991; Taylor et al., 1993; our unpublished results). Recently the crystal structure of a third FNR family member, nitrate reductase, has been reported (Lu et al., 1994). The previous report on the spinach FNR structure (Karplus et al., 1991) gave an overview of the protein structure with little emphasis on details, because the refinement was not complete. Here, we report the refinement of the native FNR model ° against data between a and 1.7 A resolution, as well as the structures of FNR bound to 2'-5'-ADP ° (P-AMP) at 1.7 A resolution, and reduced/P-AMP° bound FNR at 2.0 A resolution. These structures permit us to describe several interesting structural features and to evaluate the binding of NADP + and its analogs.

Results and Discussion
Effects of refinement The FNR model refinement has been pursued as far as is reasonable with the current data. The crystallographic R-factor has ceased to decrease significantly in each round of refinement. All of the largest peaks in the Fo - Fc difference Fourier map (greater than 4s, both positive and negative) are not interpretable as potential errors in the model. The coordinate shifts observed during refinement have become small (see Figure 16a), well below the expected coordinate error of the model. The regions that do continue to shift significantly are those with high mobilities (see Figure 16a and b), and are thus unlikely to ever be better determined. Finally, the geometry of the final model is reasonable as indicated both by the r.m.s. deviations of bond lengths and angles (Table 1), and the distribution of main-chain torsion angles (Ramachandran et al., 1966) (Figure 2).

Table 1
Refinement statistics
Starting model FNRox FNRox + P-AMP ENRred + P-AMP MIR Native cycle 216 P-AMP cycle 531 Cycles/ rounds 946/33 531/17 60/3 r.m.s. r.m.s. Resolution lengths angles ° ° range (A) (A) (deg.) a­1.7 a­1.7 a­2.0 0.017 0.017 0.017 2.5 2.5 2.4 r.m.s. DB ° (A2 ) 4.7 4.6 4.7 Bsol ° (A2 ) 470 510 480 R-factor (%) 17.9 17.4 14.9

Ksol 0.90 1.01 0.98

Water 221 216 216

Data for the 3-refined models presented in this work. Columns specify the model name, starting model, number of cycles of minimization and rounds of manual refinement, data resolution limits used in refinement, r.m.s. deviations from ideality for bond lengths, and bond angles in the final model, r.m.s. differences in temperature factors for bonded atoms in the final model, the refined bulk solvent parameters Ksol and Bsol in the final model, the total number of ordered water molecules included, and the final R value with respect to the resolution range used for refinement. The final weights supplied to the TNT refinement program were as follows: rfactor = 0.00075, bond = 0.8, angle = 1.5, torsion = 0, trigonal = 1, plane = 3, contact = 10 and B = 0.04. These values reflect the relative restraint placed upon each parameter.

JMB--MS 324
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

127 Brookhaven protein data bank). However, many local changes in conformation and the inclusion of the ordered solvent model have resulted in a substantial improvement in the accuracy of the FNR model as measured by its agreement with the X-ray data. A Luzzati plot (Luzzati, 1952) suggests that the accuracy of the well-ordered regions of the model is ° currently about 0.17 A (see Figure 15c). The FAD prosthetic group provides a striking example of a major error that escaped detection until late in refinement (Figure 3). Although the positions of the hydroxyl groups at positions 3 and 4 of the ribityl moiety needed to be switched, this was not obvious in the 2Fo - Fc electron density map. Improvements in the rest of the model had resulted in increasingly significant Fo - Fc difference peaks in the vicinity of the ribityl moiety (up to five standard deviations at the time the change was made). When we saw the structure of PDR (Correll et al., 1992), in which the FMN ribityl conformation resembles the true FAD conformation in FNR, it became clear to us that the Fo - Fc difference peaks echoed a correctable error in our model. The 2Fo - Fc density shown in Figure 3 is from cycle 536, just before the correction was made. While that map is ambiguous, later maps strongly reflect the correctness of the mended conformation (data not shown). Perhaps the error would have been detected earlier if we had used additional electron density maps for fitting, such as 3Fo - 2Fc maps or omit maps.

Figure 2. Ramachandran plot of FNR main-chain torsion angles. Glycine residues are indicated by a circle. Other residues are shown with an X. Energy contours are plotted at intervals of 2 kcal/mol, over a range of 8 kcal/mol as calculated for an alanine dipeptide (Peters & Peters, 1981). All of the non-glycine residues fall within the favorable region of the plot, with the exception of Asp53 and Glu236, which have high temperature factors and poorly defined conformations.

Refinement of the FNR model has not altered the topology or major features of the fold initially reported (Karplus et al., 1991: entry 1FNR in the

Figure 3. A significant error found late in refinement. The incorrect conformation of the ribityl moiety of FAD escaped detection until late in refinement. The final (correct) model of FAD is shown as filled bonds. Broken bonds show the FAD model from the cycle 85 structure (1FNR in the Brookhaven protein data bank). 2Fo - Fc electron density contoured at 2.3s calculated from the model immediately before the correction was made (cycle 536) surrounds the models, and does not clearly favor the correct model. Maps calculated later in refinement are much less ambiguous in this region (see the text). Another error, involving the stereochemical configuration of the ribose moiety of the adenosine portion of FAD, was corrected early in refinement.

JMB--MS 324 128 Although the cycle 536 map shown in Figure 3 is not the final electron density map, the density in the region of the isoalloxazine ring is essentially unchanged, and is representative of the quality of the electron density in the well-fixed regions of the model. How can the density around the isoalloxazine ring be exemplary, while in the neighboring ribityl group, a serious error was permitted to persist? One factor is the fact that the conformational freedom of the ribityl moiety permits many conformations to follow the same approximate path through space. Another contributing factor is the steep mobility gradient along the FAD molecule. The atoms in the isoalloxazine ring, being at the active site, are among the best-fixed in the entire structure, with tempera° ture factors around 5 to 10 A2. In contrast, the atoms of the FAD adenosine moiety are quite mobile, with ° some temperature factors truncated at the 100 A2 maximum value. The ribityl group lies between these two extremes, and thus has weaker electron density than does the isoalloxazine ring. The FAD molecule spans the complete range of mobility seen in the entire FNR model. The marginal electron density in the region of the FAD adenosine moiety is well-formed enough to specify, for example, the orientation of the adenine ring, and yet the density is weak enough that another error, in the chirality of the adenosine ribose (see Figure 3), persisted through phase I of refinement. Secondary structures Not surprisingly, the best-fixed portions of the molecule are in the central core and around the active center, while the peripheral regions are generally
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

more mobile. Figure 16b shows the temperature factors along the FNR chain. Secondary structural elements (alpha-helices and beta-strands) are generally well fixed, with some exceptions such as the alpha-helices on the far side of the parallel beta-sheet (helices Na3, Na3', Na4, and Na4'). Not all organized secondary structural elements have extremely low temperature factors, but all regions with extremely high temperature factors are between such structural elements. Turns constitute an important class of secondary structural elements, often connecting helices and/or strands together (Schulz & Schirmer, 1979). Of the many turns in FNR, three merit special attention. A type II turn involving Gly73 in the FAD-binding domain (Figure 4) is buried in the interface between the two structural domains. Glycine 73 is extremely well conserved in members of the FNR structural family (Andrews et al., 1992; Taylor et al., 1993), implying that the turn conformation is also conserved, because glycine is usually found at position 3 (i + 2) of type II turns such as this (Wilmot & Thornton, 1988). Because a different turn type or a side-chain at this position would interfere with packing against the C-terminal domain, the conservation of this motif throughout the family may reflect the importance of the interface between the two domains. In buried beta-turns the peptide oxygen and nitrogen atoms at positions i + 1 and i + 2 cannot recruit hydrogen-bonding partners from the surrounding solvent. This particular turn is stabilized by a hydrogen bond between the side-chain of Gln74 and the main-chain nitrogen atom of Arg71, although these residues are not well conserved in the FNR family. Side-chain contacts from Glu72 and

Figure 4. The tight turn involving Gly73. The glycine residue at position i + 2 of this turn is well conserved in the sequences of members of the FNR family. A variety of polar contacts, including 2 buried water molecules, stabilize the buried main-chain polar atoms of this turn (see the text). Water numbers with a star (*) are buried within the protein, and these help to stabilize the buried polar main-chain atoms. Hydrogen bonds are represented by broken lines, along ° ° with the donor to acceptor distance in A. The carbonyl oxygen atom of Met155 is only 3.2 A from the alpha carbon atom of Gly73. Residues 96 and 312 at the bottom of the Figure are in the active center.

JMB--MS 324
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

129

Figure 5. The unusual meander around Ser100. Residues 100 to 106 form an S-shaped double turn, which utilizes 3 buried water molecules to stabilize the polar atoms of the main chain. The stars (*) on the water numbers indicates that they are buried within the protein. Hydrogen-bonding interactions are indicated with broken lines along with the donor ° to acceptor distance measured in A. Most of the atoms at the periphery of the Figure are solvent exposed, and are thus able to satisfy hydrogen-bonding requirements with bulk solvent. The peptide nitrogen atoms of residues 107 and 110 fail to make good hydrogen bonds.

Gln74 plus two buried water molecules (401 and 405) help to satisfy the hydrogen-bonding requirements of the peptide atoms in residues 71 to 74. The carbonyl oxygen atom of Gly73 also hydrogen-bonds to water 415, which is not completely buried, but does provide a link to the active site of FNR by hydrogen-bonding with Ser96 and Glu312. All of the polar peptide atoms in this turn have hydrogenbonding partners, although the nearby carbonyl oxygen atom of Met155 has no good hydrogen-bonding donor nearby, but instead makes a close contact ° (3.2 A) with the alpha carbon atom of Gly73. Perhaps the glycine alpha carbon atom can serve as a weakly polar hydrogen-bond donor. Another peculiar turn in the beta-barrel involves Ser100, although sequence alignments suggest that this structure is conserved only within the FNRs themselves (data not shown) (Figure 5). This S-shaped structure is actually one tight turn followed immediately by another. Residue Gly103 occupies both the fourth position of the first turn and the first position of the second turn. This structure is much more solvent-exposed than the turn containing Gly73, but three buried water molecules (403, 411 and 414) help to satisfy main-chain hydrogen-bonding requirements. Only two polar main-chain atoms in this region fail to make good hydrogen bonds: the peptide nitrogen atoms of Asp107 and Ser110. The peptide nitrogen atom of Ala101 hydrogen-bonds to the side-chain of Glu72, providing a link to the other buried turn described above. Ser100 hydrogenbonds to the peptide nitrogen atom of Gly103 with both its peptide oxygen atom and its side-chain hydroxyl group. The putative site of binding for the pyrophosphate moiety of NADP + lies near residues 171 to 176. These

residues belong to one of the best-conserved sequence motifs in the FNR family: 171GXGXXP. Residue Gly171 is at position i + 1 of a type II' turn (a position that requires glycine) and the subsequent residues form a series of type I turns, resulting in one complete turn of 310 helix at residues 170 to 175. Proline 176 breaks this pattern by depriving the carbonyl group of Gly173 of a hydrogen-bonding partner, and the subsequent chain forms a standard alpha-helix. The peptide oxygen atom of Gly173 is completely buried and has no hydrogen-bonding partner. This unfavorable situation is repeated in only one other place in FNR: the carbonyl group of Met155 is completely buried and has no conventional hydrogen-bonding partner, but is directed toward the Ca of Gly73 (see above and Figure 4). It is unclear what the role of the buried carbonyl group at residue 173 is, although it is probably involved in NADP + binding, and it contacts the side-chains of two other extremely well conserved residues, Pro176 and Cys272. Domain interface The FNR domain interface determines the relative orientation of the domains, involves a large proportion of the protein atoms, and is the site of electron transfer. FAD is sandwiched between the domains, and the nicotinamide moiety of NADP + is expected to be sandwiched there during catalysis. The interface can be described as either a twodimensional or a three-dimensional entity. The domain interface can be viewed as a two-dimensional surface on which side-chains from the N-terminal domain contact side-chains from the C-terminal domain. FAD is included as part of the

JMB--MS 324 130 Table 2
Hydrophobic clusters: networks of non-polar contacts between buried side-chain atoms.
Cluster number 1 2 Residues I27, C42, N45, M60, F62, H64, I68, Y70, Q74, V76, V78, I79, P80, I97, V111, L113, V115, C132, L136, C137, V145, L147, T150, L156 T49, A53, E72, S96, A98, C114, M155, M157, P158, A163, I165, M167, I174, A175, P176, F177, F180, L181, M184, F185, F194, A198, L200, L202, V204, L210, L211, F216, M219, F227, L229, V233, Y270, C272, N310 I166, L168, W199, F201, I247, M251, L258, W259, L262, T267, V269, M271, M277, I281, M285, A289, W296, W309, V313 Buried ° area (A2 ) 1700 2400 Volume ° (A3 ) 2000 3600 Comment Interior of beta-barrel, interdomain bridge, N-terminal stretch Domain interface

Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

3

1400

1600

Far side of parallel beta-sheet

Note that cluster 1 would be continuous with cluster 2 if FAD were considered a part of the hydrophobic network.  Buried area refers to the buried side-chain surface area for all residues in the cluster.  Volumes reported are for all side-chain atoms of the cluster residues calculated with the program VOLUME (Richards, 1985: see Materials and Methods).

N-terminal domain, with which it makes most of its ° contacts. Each domain buries about 1100 A2 of the Connolly surface of the other domain, or about 15% of the total surface area. The interface therefore ° ° buries about 2200 A2 (1100 A2 from each domain). The interface is primarily hydrophobic, providing a driving force for the association. Another possible definition of the domain interface is as a three dimensional network of contacts spanning the space from the exterior of the main-chain portion of the N-terminal beta-barrel to the main-chain portion of the parallel beta-sheet. This network includes the FAD molecule, as well as the side-chains from residues on one external face of the beta-barrel, the helices Na1 and Na2 between the two beta-structures, and the side-chains from one face of the parallel beta-sheet. The atoms in this region form a continuous hydrophobic network (see below). About 50% of the total buried hydrophobic side-chain network of FNR is contained in this region, a far stronger testament to the role of the domain interface than is the contact area alone. This value ignores the contribution of the atoms of FAD, and the atoms of the main chain of the buried alpha-helices. The two domains are physically bridged by the polypeptide chain around residue 155. On the rim of the interdomain surface there are several polar contacts, including a main-chain hydrogen bond between the peptide nitrogen atom of Gly50 and the peptide oxygen atom of Ser208. Side-chain polar contacts between the two domains include hydrogen bonds between Ser96 and Glu312, His59 and Tyr212, Cys114 and Tyr212, Ser100 and Glu187, and between Arg178 and Asp104. The extended N-terminal segment (residues 20 to 25) makes several contacts with the C-terminal domain. Side-chain/main-chain polar contacts between the two domains occur from the nitrogen atom of Ala53 to Ser208, from Ser179 to the carbonyl group of Ser99, and from Arg178 to the carbonyl group of Ala98. Although the domain interface is extensive and both domains appear to be conserved in all FNR family members, the recently reported structure of nitrate

reductase (Lu et al., 1994) shows that variations in packing of the two domains do occur.

Buried hydrophobic clusters/possible membrane attachment site Burial of hydrophobic side-chains is known to be an important driving force in protein folding (Dill, 1990). As in most globular proteins, the majority of buried side-chains in FNR are hydrophobic. Thus the distributions and solvent-exposure patterns of hydrophobic residues in FNR are likely to reflect features important to determining its particular three-dimensional fold. The residues that comprise three large clusters of buried hydrophobic side-chains in FNR are listed in Table 2. Cluster 1 includes the interior of the six-stranded beta-barrel and thus establishes the structures necessary for binding to FAD. It includes some side-chains of the interdomain bridge and the extended N-terminal segment. Cluster 2, the interdomain region, is the largest, burying nearly twice as many residues as clusters 1 or 3, demonstrating the intimate association of the two domains. Cluster 3 on the far side of the parallel beta-sheet is loosely packed and distant from the active site. It possesses fewer conserved residues than do the first two clusters. A unique and unexplained feature within cluster ° 3 is a 200 A3 cavity (Figure 6a). The 2Fo - Fc electron density values (F000 not included) are negative throughout the cavity, showing that it contains no ordered solvent. It is lined with hydrophobic residues and is located at the site of the lone amino acid difference between the sequence of FNR purified from spinach and that of expressed recombinant spinach FNR. Clones from cDNAs of two spinach FNR genes have been prepared, one with valine at codon 269 (V269) and one with phenylalanine (F269: Jansen et al., 1988). The F269 form (herein called recombinant FNR) has been used for many of the studies of spinach FNR expressed in bacteria

JMB--MS 324
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

131

(a)

(b) Figure 6. An unusual hydrophobic cavity within the third hydrophobic cluster of FNR. (a) Dot surface showing the position and environment of the hydrophobic cavity. It is completely surrounded by hydrophobic residues, and there is no evidence of any ordered solvent inside the cavity. The electron density within the cavity is among the lowest in the ° ° crystal. The size of the cavity is approximately 200 A3, as defined by a molecular surface using a probe radius of 1.6 A. The parallel beta-sheet can be seen at the top of the Figure. The dot surface at the bottom of the Figure shows the surface of the protein. (b) The Val to Phe change in recombinant FNR partly fills the cavity. The only sequence difference between natural and recombinant FNR is in the region of the hydrophobic cavity. Difference Fourier density (recombinant - natural) is shown contoured at +5.0s (continuous cage) and -5.0s (broken cage). Because the phenylalanine side-chain fits into part of the cavity, almost no additional structural change is needed to accommodate this bulkier side-chain. The Val to ° ° Phe substitution reduces the size of the cavity by 160 A3 because the 1.6 A radius surface probe can no longer fit into the large lobe of the cavity.

(Aliverti et al., 1990), while the V269 form (natural FNR) is the predominant form of FNR purified from spinach itself, as shown both by chemical protein sequencing (Karplus et al., 1984) and X-ray crystallography (this work). Figure 6b shows experimental models for both the natural and recombinant proteins in this region, along with a difference Fourier electron density map calculated with data from crystals of both natural and recombinant FNR, providing crystallographic verification of the amino acid heterogeneity. The phenylalanine side-chain of the F269 variant pokes

straight into the larger lobe of the cavity, leaving only ° the smaller lobe, which encloses about 40 A3. Because of the difference in cavity size between the two, the thermal stability of the F269 variant should be greater than that of the V269 (natural) variant. This difference in cavity size is slightly larger than the largest single-site cavities examined in phage T4 lysozyme mutants (Eriksson et al., 1992). It should be ° noted that their work defined cavities using a 1.2 A radius probe, which results in larger calculated ° volumes than will the 1.6 A probe used here. If we ° use a 1.2 A probe radius, the cluster 3 cavity becomes

JMB--MS 324 132 Table 3
Buried water molecules
Water 401 403 404 405 407 411 414 416 420 453 488 Hydrogen bonding partners Wat 427, E72 O, M 157 N D104 N, S112 OG 114 N, 114 O, 96 O, FAD O4AF G73 N, Q74 O, I97 O Y314 OH, T172 O, FAD O4AF, S96 OG, (FAD N5) S100 OG, S100 N, D104 OD2 F105 N, D107 OD1, S110 N, S110 OG, L102 O, Wat 431 Wat 492, N266 OD1, T267 OG1 K146 N, I79 O, D81 OD2, Wat 530 Wat 488, W309 NE1, K300 NZ Wat 453, E278 O, D288 OD1 Comment 70's loop 100's loop Active site 70's loop Active site 100's loop 100's loop Loose domain Loose domain

Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

These buried water molecules were defined by iterating the following procedure, starting with the full solvent FNR model: (1) calculate a molecular surface; (2) strip away water molecules that contribute to the molecular surface. The process was repeated until no more water molecules could be removed, thus the remaining are buried in the interior of the protein. The molecular surface was calculated using ° a probe radius of 1.4 A. Although all of these water molecules fail to participate in the molecular surface, several make hydrogen bonds to water molecules that are on the surface of the protein. The close approach between water 407 and FAD atom N-5 is in parentheses because water 407 already has 4 stronger hydrogen-bonding partners.

a gorge (continuous with the protein surface) rather than a cavity and thus more difficult to examine quantitatively. Also, many other small cavities ° appear in FNR if a 1.2 A radius probe is used, while ° a 1.6 A probe generates the single unique cavity in cluster 3. It is difficult to directly compare the cavity in FNR with those in the lysozyme mutants, but from their results we conclude that the V269 variant should be less stable than the F269 variant of FNR by a measurable amount (2 to 5 kcal/mol). To our knowledge this value has not been measured. Because there is almost no structural accommodation associated with the change from valine to phenylalanine at position 269 of FNR, this heterogeneity corresponds to the ``rigid'' mutations observed in T4 lysozyme (Eriksson et al., 1992). There is no corresponding cavity in the structure of PDR, as cluster 3 is where the FNR-like portion of PDR differs most from the structure of FNR (Correll et al., 1993). Such a large cavity in a natural protein is uncommon, and it may have a functional role, such as forming the attachment site of FNR to the thylakoid membrane or to a membrane-docking protein. There is no direct evidence for such an hypothesis, but consider the following: the cavity is distant from the active site, which would be ideal for a membrane attachment site; the residues lining the cavity are absolutely conserved in vascular plant leaf FNR sequences including spinach, pea and ice plant (see Karplus & Bruns, 1994); there is evidence that there are two pools of FNR with different binding affinities for the thylakoid membranes (Matthijs et al., 1986; Shin et al., 1994); and the cavity is close enough to the protein surface that a hydrophobic attachment site might poke into it. The V269 and F269 variants could thus have different binding affinities. Our current FNR purification method, and the purification method used for chemical sequencing (Karplus et al., 1984) might select one out of two pools of FNR with different membrane affinities. Such a

selection would explain why we see no sequence heterogeneity in FNR purified from spinach. Alternatively, it may be that only the V269 variant is actually expressed in spinach, and the observed physiological heterogeneity is due to a factor unrelated to primary structure. Solvent structure Solvent molecules provide more than simply a context for protein function, as individual water molecules play specific structural and functional roles. For example, certain solvent positions in the active site appear to be ``conserved'' in the structure of PDR (Correll et al., 1993), although almost all of the amino acid residues have mutated since the time of their common ancestor. If we assume that eukaryotic FNR and prokaryotic PDR are derived from an ancient protein found in the common ancestor of prokaryotes and eukaryotes, then they have been diverging for over a billion years (Knoll, 1992). In FNR there are 11 buried water molecules (Table 3): two are at the active site and contact FAD, five are involved in hydrogen bonds stabilizing the main-chain of the two buried turns at the domain interface discussed above, two are buried together in the loosely packed domain on the far side of the parallel beta-sheet, and the remaining two are near the surface in small pockets formed by interacting surface side-chains. All of these water molecules are found in both the native and P-AMP-bound structures. The vast majority of the located solvent molecules ° lie in the first solvation shell (within 3.8 A of a protein atom). The two ions and 187 water molecules lie within this first shell (not including the 11 buried water molecules). The remaining 23 water molecules are members of the second solvation shell, and most are near intermolecular contacts. Three water molecules lie on or near the crystallographic 2-fold axes. These three water molecules are each

JMB--MS 324
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

133

Figure 7. A pH-sensitive crystal contact. This view looks almost straight down a crystallographic 2-fold axis. Hydrogen bonds are shown with broken lines. The cages show 2Fo - Fc electron density around the side-chain of Asp191 contoured at +1.5s. The very close contact between the side-chain of Asp191 and its symmetry mate implies that it is protonated to make a hydrogen bond. This explains the observation that the crystals dissolve when the pH is raised above 5.5, as that would destabilize this crystal contact. Water 568 lies directly on the 2-fold axis and is modeled at one half occupancy because it is symmetry-related to itself. The shape of the density around Asp191 suggests that the 2 symmetry mates may be in 2 slightly different conformations, neither of which is perfectly fit by the average electron density. The other conformation (not shown) has the carboxylate groups offset, so that they would share a single proton between them, rather than both being protonated as in the displayed conformation.

modeled at one half occupancy in order to account for their symmetry mates (see the next section and Figure 7). In the unliganded structure the modeled solvent molecules represent approximately 15% of the total amount of solvent expected to be in the crystal. The remaining solvent is presumably too disordered to be located as individual atoms. However, this ``bulk'' solvent contributes to X-ray scattering. A resolutiondependent correction to the calculated scattering (Moews & Kretsinger, 1975; Tronrud, 1992) greatly improves agreement between the model and the low-resolution data (Figure 15b). Crystal contacts Eight symmetry-related molecules make contact with each FNR chain, burying 15% of the molecular surface area. Crystal contacts are notably absent in the vicinity of the NADP + -binding site, so symmetry-related molecules are unlikely to interfere directly with catalysis in the crystal. Nonetheless, large-scale conformational changes could be inhibited by the restraining forces of crystal contacts. One place where crystal contacts could affect the observed FNR structure is at the beta-hairpin at residues 119 to 127. The tip of this mobile region is involved in a crystal contact, and thus the beta-hairpin itself, for example, could be an artifact of the crystalline lattice. Two of the crystal contact regions involve a strict 2-fold axis, causing some residues to interact with symmetry-related versions of themselves. In the center of one of the 2-fold contact regions lies the side-chain of Asp191, which makes a contact with its

own symmetry mate (Figure 7). This contact is so close that the side-chain is presumably protonated and makes a hydrogen bond to its symmetry mate. This interaction may be responsible for the dissolution of these crystals above pH 5.5, where this aspartic acid side-chain should become ionized to create an unfavorable contact. There is only one place where three symmetryrelated molecules of FNR make contact with one another. This contact involves residues Arg41, Glu83 and Glu298, each from different symmetry-related chains. The FAD binding site The redox-active dinucleotide prosthetic group FAD is not covalently bound to FNR, but it is very tightly associated. Because electron transfer proceeds directly between FAD in FNR and NADP + or ferredoxin, the FNR polypeptide chain can be viewed as a complex scaffold for FAD, the true catalytic agent. From this perspective the polypeptide chain serves to modulate the reactivity of FAD, and to provide binding sites for NADP + and ferredoxin. The environment of FAD and its hydrogen-bonding interactions are shown in Figures 8 and 9. Mending the conformation of the FAD ribityl group provided a paradigm case in the Effects of refinement section of this work. This significant change had secondary effects upon atoms not directly involved in the change. For example, it resulted in a small change in the conformation of the FAD pyrophosphate linkage, which in turn revealed

JMB--MS 324 134
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

Figure 8. Hydrogen-bonding environment of the active site. Broken lines indicate hydrogen bonds. Most of the labeled residues are very well conserved in the FNR family. The nicotinamide ring of NADP + is expected to displace the side-chain ° of Tyr314 during catalysis to permit hydride transfer from N-5 of FAD. The 3.4 A distance from water 407 to N-5 of FAD is in parentheses because there are already 4 good hydrogen bonds to water 407. Note that the water numbering in FNR is now different from that used by Correll et al. (1993).

that Arg93 actually only makes one good hydrogen bond to the phosphate groups, rather than two or even three as it had appeared to at earlier stages of refinement. The side-chain of Tyr95 now makes a better hydrogen bond to the ribityl 4' hydroxyl group than it had appeared to make to the 3' hydroxyl group when that group was modeled in a similar location. In general, the extended resolution and exhaustive refinement now permit us to make much stronger statements about the geometry of particular atomic interactions. For example, it is now clear that the side-chain hydroxyl group of Ser96 does not make a strong hydrogen bond to the redox active nitrogen atom at position 5 of FAD, while there had been some question in the earlier structure. The adenosine moiety of FAD is much more mobile than the rest of the molecule and actually makes no hydrogen-bonding interaction with the protein, but does make van der Waals contact with the side-chain of Tyr120. This weak association of the adenosine half of FAD may explain why the FNR fold is the only known protein fold that can productively use both FAD and FMN, which lacks adenosine (FMN is found in PDR and vanillate demethylase; FAD in others). The detailed comparison of the binding of FMN versus FAD in PDR and FNR has been reported (Correll et al., 1993). The NADP + site NADP + is the soluble dinucleotide that accepts a hydride from FNR to form NADPH, one of the final products of photosynthesis. We have analyzed the NADP + binding site in FNR by soaking crystals with a series of NADP + fragments. Each of these soaks has confirmed the binding site for the adenosine half of NADP +, but none has elucidated the binding of the nicotinamide moiety. We have synthesized the available crystallographic and biochemical data into a plausible model for the binding of the entire NADP + molecule to FNR.

The binding of the competitive inhibitor P-AMP, which corresponds to the adenosine phosphate half of NADP +, is well ordered and involves local conformational changes of several residues of FNR. This complex has been extensively refined in the current study. Seven water molecules and a phosphate ion are displaced by the binding of P-AMP. The refined 2Fo - Fc electron density map around the inhibitor is shown in Figure 10a. The binding site is analogous to that seen for nucleotides in the structure of PDR (Correll, 1992; Correll et al., 1992). The comparison of these two structures and the specificity for NADP + in the case of FNR versus the specificity for NAD + in the case of PDR have

Figure 9. Hydrogen bonds to the FAD molecule. Hydrogen bonds are represented with broken lines with their distances indicated. Lysine 116 is the only residue that makes hydrogen bonds to both FAD and P-AMP. The geometry shown is not exact.

JMB--MS 324
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

135

(a)

(b) Figure 10. The P-AMP binding site. (a) 2Fo - Fc density contoured at 1.9s. The 5'-phosphate moiety is modeled in 2 alternative conformations, designated A and B, to account for the electron density. (b) Motions associated with inhibitor binding. The native structure is shown with thin bonds, the P-AMP bound structure is shown with thick bonds. All of the motions shown here are associated with significant corresponding difference Fourier peaks (data not shown).

been examined (Correll et al., 1993). The 5' phosphate group of the inhibitor has been modeled in two conformations, labeled A and B in Figure 10, each at about one half occupancy, in order to account for the extended electron density in this region. Conformation A corresponds to the + syn or + sc 5'-phosphate conformation, while B corresponds to the anti or ap conformation (Saenger, 1983). The base is in the anti conformation and the ribose has a C(2')-endo conformation, to accommodate the 2'-phosphate group. Most of the key residues involved in the binding of P-AMP have been described (Karplus et al., 1991) at lower resolution. The current high-resolution refinement has changed some of the details, such as the side-chain of Thr170, which is now clearly not in position to hydrogen bond to the inhibitor. The motions of several residues associated with binding of P-AMP are shown in Figure 10b. The 2'-phosphate

group of P-AMP is particularly well-ordered and interacts with Ser234, Arg235, Lys244 and Tyr246. These interactions are responsible for the specific binding of NADP + versus NAD + (Correll et al., 1993). The affinity of this site for a phosphate group is demonstrated by the fact that a phosphate ion occupies a similar position in the structure of unliganded FNR. Additional polar contacts are made by Gln248, which interacts with the adenine ring system, and Wat547, which interacts with the ribose group. All of these polar groups move toward the inhibitor in the soaked crystals. Non-polar contacts with the inhibitor are made by the side-chains of Leu274 and Tyr246, which also move toward the inhibitor upon binding, and by the main chain of residues 203 through 205, which moves away from P-AMP. All of these motions observed in the refined structures are associated with corresponding peaks in difference Fourier maps (Fsoak - Fnat ). The inhibitor

JMB--MS 324 136
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

Figure 11. Hydrogen bonds to P-AMP. Residues that hydrogen bond to the 2'-phosphate group (Ser234, Arg235, Tyr246) are largely responsible for discrimination between NAD + and NADP + (Correll et al., 1993). The geometry shown is not exact. The 2 conformations of the 5'-phosphate group (labeled A and B) are alternative conformations, and do not appear simultaneously.

makes several additional contacts with the protein that are not associated with significant difference Fourier peaks. All hydrogen-bonding interactions between FNR and P-AMP are summarized in Figure 11. Attempts to bind NADP + or NADPH to FNR crystals have met with limited success. One large FNR crystal soaked in 30 mM NADPH for five days under reducing conditions became cloudy and failed to diffract X-rays. Another crystal soaked overnight in 20 mM NADPH under reducing conditions ° diffracted to 1.9 A resolution. The difference Fourier electron density map revealed some binding of the phosphoadenosyl half of NADPH at about 40% occupancy, which was nearly indistinguishable from

the density associated with P-AMP binding. Unfortunately no density was observed for the nicotinamide nucleoside moiety, which was presumably disordered. Similarly, soaking FNR crystals with NADP + or with ATP-ribose, an NADP + fragment lacking only the nicotinamide base, also showed ordered binding of only the adenosine phosphate moiety. The lone difference observed for these soaks compared with the binding of P-AMP is that the 5'-phosphate group appears predominantly in the conformation labeled B in Figure 10 and some weak density for the b-phosphoryl group (which P-AMP lacks) trails off into the solvent region (data not shown). Soaking NADP + into two other crystal forms of spinach FNR, grown under different conditions in different space groups, also failed to show the binding site for the nicotinamide moiety (data not shown). Despite repeated efforts, cocrystallization experiments with FNR and NADP + have failed to yield crystals. Interestingly, work on the homolog PDR has also failed to reveal the productive binding mode of the nicotinamide dinucleotide (Correll et al., 1992). Our interpretation of these observations is that a conformational change incompatible with the crystalline lattice, possibly involving domain motions, is required to achieve the physiologically relevant binding mode of nicotinamide. Some features of the probable binding mode of NADP + during hydride transfer have been discussed previously (Karplus et al., 1991), based upon the observed binding mode of P-AMP and available biochemical data. Here we extend that interpretation of NADP + binding based upon the high-resolution structures and actually construct a full model of NADP + in complex with FNR (Figure 12). The adenosine moiety of NADP + is placed at the site of P-AMP binding. The nicotinamide-proximal phosphoryl group of NADP + is positioned to hydrogen

Figure 12. Model for NADP + binding. In the absence of a crystal structure of NADP + bound to FNR in a productive complex, this model is proposed for the binding of NADP + . Three criteria were used in its construction: (1) the adenosine moiety is located at the site of P-AMP binding; (2) the nicotinamide ring is stacked against the isoalloxazine ring of FAD (displacing the side-chain of tyrosine 314) so as to optimize the geometry for hydride transfer from the re face of FAD at atom N-5 to the A face of nicotinamide at atom C-4; and (3) the pyrophosphate moiety of NADP + interacts with the loop containing glycine 171 and glycine 173.

JMB--MS 324
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

137 satisfying model of the FNR:ferredoxin interaction (Correll et al., 1993). The refined FNR structure does not provide many new insights into the binding of Fd, but a few points deserve mention here. Ferredoxin is believed to bind within a large shallow cleft between the two domains of FNR. In the center of this cleft the dimethylbenzene moiety of FAD is exposed to solvent, and this is presumably where the iron:sulfur cluster of ferredoxin passes its electrons to FNR. The surface of FNR around the site of electron transfer has some hydrophobic sidechains including Leu92, Leu94, Val151, Val311 and Val313, which might contribute to the binding strength between the two proteins. Surrounding these, on the rim of the concave surface of FNR, are several patches of charged residues, which may enhance binding specificity. These are mostly positively charged, complementing ferredoxin's predominately negative charge, and include Glu24, Glu25, Lys33, Lys35, Lys85, Lys88, Lys91, Arg93, Lys153, Glu154, Lys275, Glu278, Lys279, Asp282, Asp283, Asp295, Glu298, Lys300, Lys301, Lys304, Lys305 and Glu307. Several of the positively charged residues in this region have been implicated in ferredoxin binding in chemical modification studies (Jelesarov et al., 1993; Medina et al., 1992a,b; Zanetti et al., 1988). The binding site for the sulfate ion seen in the structure of FNR is also on the rim of the putative ferredoxin cleft. This ion interacts with the side-chains of His90, Lys91 and Arg93, and with the peptide nitrogen atom of Lys91. This sulfate binding site could serve to bind acidic side-chains from ferredoxin. Reduced structure and catalytic mechanism The flavin in FNR is ordinarily reduced by ferredoxin in the chloroplast. For crystallographic study, sodium dithionite (Na2 S2 O4 ) has been used to reduce crystalline FNR. A total of five data sets of chemically reduced FNR have been collected: one soaked with P-AMP, one soaked with NADPH, and three without any ligands. Only one of the reduced unliganded crystal data sets is represented in Table 4. The structure of reduced FNR bound to P-AMP was chosen for refinement because out of all of the reduced data sets, it was verified to have remained reduced after a data collection (based upon color). Difference Fourier maps of all of the reduced data sets reveal the same features near the active site, whether or not nucleotides have been soaked into the crystal. No new structural change was observed in the P-AMP binding site in the reduced structure. Thus we conclude that reduction and P-AMP binding are structurally independent events, and the reduced structure with P-AMP bound described here is representative of the unliganded reduced structure. Upon full reduction of the flavin (i.e. two electron reduction), the isoalloxazine ring of FAD may either accept a single proton on atom N-5, forming an anion with a formal negative charge on atom N-1, or it may accept two protons forming a neutral species with

bond to the main chain of glycine 171 (the best-conserved residue of the FNR family; our unpublished results). This contact is most easily made when the adenosine 5'-phosphate moiety is in the conformation labeled B in Figure 10. This phosphate conformation happens to be the one observed in soaks with NADP +, NADPH and ATP-ribose. The nicotinamide ring is stacked against the isoalloxazine ring of the flavin, displacing the side-chain of tyrosine 314, so as to position C-4 of nicotinamide to accept a hydride from N-5 of the flavin by analogy with the binding of NADPH to glutathione reductase (Karplus & Schulz, 1989; Pai et al., 1988). Hydride transfer from FNR is known to involve the A face of nicotinamide (Krakow et al., 1965), thus constraining the nicotinamide geometry. Taken together, these constraints yield a reasonably well defined model for NADP + binding. While many qualitative features of the NADP + binding model proposed here are likely to be correct, extreme caution should be exercised in inferring the precise details of the interaction, especially because we have failed to account for any major conformational changes. With this caveat in mind, some potentially significant interactions of this binding model follow. The nicotinamide moiety of NADP + in this model contacts the side-chain of Cys272, one of the best-conserved residues of the FNR family. Mutation of this cysteine residue has been shown to decrease catalytic activity (Aliverti et al., 1993). The amide group of the nicotinamide ring is in an excellent position to hydrogen bond to the side-chain of Glu312, another well-conserved residue, although because the side-chain of Tyr314 must be moved to accommodate the nicotinamide ring, the position of nearby residue 312 in the complex is uncertain. The recently reported structure of corn nitrate reductase (Lu et al., 1994) lacks both the acidic residue and the aromatic residue at this site. As modeled, the nicotinamide-proximal ribose 3'-hydroxyl group lies very close to the position of water 571 in the reduced/P-AMP-bound structure (which moves dramatically upon reduction), thus reduction of FNR may favor this binding site. Our NADP + binding model is consistent with the available data; however, it does not explain why such a complex has not been observed crystallographically. Ferredoxin binding site The protein ferredoxin, which transfers electrons to FNR, is an iron:sulfur protein about half the size of FNR, which binds to FNR with a dissociation constant of less than 50 nM in the absence of NADP + (Batie & Kamin, 1984). Attempts to crystallize FNR in complex with ferredoxin have not succeeded in our hands. Previous reports have attempted to build models of the FNR:ferredoxin complex based upon the known crystal structures and chemical crosslinking data (De Pascalis et al., 1993; Karplus & Bruns, 1994; Karplus et al., 1991). The structure of PDR, which has a ferredoxin-like domain attached to its FNR-like domains, does not provide a completely

JMB--MS 324 138
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

Figure 13. Active site of reduced FNR. Very little structural change accompanies chemical reduction of FNR. The refined reduced/P-AMP-bound structure is shown with thick bonds, while the oxidized structure is shown with thin bonds. Difference Fourier density (reduced - oxidized) is shown contoured at +4.6s (continuous cages) and -4.6s (stippled ° cages). The only large change upon reduction is the movement of water 503 about 0.9 A toward N-1 of FAD. This water ° molecule also becomes much better ordered. Ser96, Tyr314 and water 410 also move about 0.2 A, which is of the order of the estimated coordinate error of the model, but the existence of corresponding peaks in the difference Fourier maps from multiple reduced crystals (Table 4) verifies that these movements are genuine.

both N-5 and N-1 protonated. We do not know which is true for FNR. In the case of PDR, there is evidence that at neutral pH the reduced flavin is anionic (Correll, 1992). FNR has a much lower redox potential than PDR, so reduction may not be completely analogous. Also, the fact that our FNR crystals are at pH 4.5 might tend to favor a neutral reduced dihydroflavin. In either case, protonation of N-5 permits (but does not require) bending of the ring about an axis through atoms N-5 and N-10. Although this bending is electronically allowed, the flavin remains planar in reduced FNR. The most obvious structural change in the reduced ° FNR structure is the motion of water 571 0.8 A ° toward the isoalloxazine ring of FAD, placing it 3.3 A ° from atom N-1. Water 406 moves 0.2 A away to make room. These motions reflect the altered hydrogenbonding potential of atom N-1, which gains either a proton or a negative charge during reduction. Other ° small motions of the Ser96 hydroxyl group 0.2 A ° toward N-5 of FAD and the Tyr314 ring 0.2 A away from FAD are also observed (Figure 13). The Ser96 motion brings it within hydrogen-bonding distance of N-5 and the Tyr314 motion may reflect a loss of p/p interaction with the reduced flavin system. Although most of these motions are not much larger than the expected coordinate error of the model, the existence of significant difference Fourier peaks in multiple data sets corresponding to these shifts verifies that they are genuine. Most of the changes observed at the active site during reduction are analogous to those observed in the structure of PDR (Correll, 1992; Correll et al., 1992). The geometry of hydride transfer in FNR has been proposed previously (Karplus & Bruns, 1994; Karplus et al., 1991). In this model, the side-chain of

Tyr314 is displaced by the nicotinamide moiety of NADP + , which stacks against the isoalloxazine ring of FAD to permit hydride transfer from N-5 of FAD to C-4 of NADP + , forming NADPH. The peptide nitrogen atom of Ser96 could orient the lone pair of electrons on N-5 of reduced FAD, facilitating hydride transfer to nicotinamide. Atom N-5 of FAD, which accepts a proton during reduction by ferredoxin, is not exposed to solvent in the crystal structure so the question arises as to where this proton comes from. Two possibilities present themselves. The first is that the proton could come from the side-chain hydroxyl group of Ser96, which is conserved as a serine or threonine residue in all FNR family members. Ser96, in turn, could get a proton from the side-chain of Glu312, which is exposed to solvent. To play this role, Glu312 would have to be protonated. Most of the sequences in the FNR family (except nitrate reductase and cytochrome b5 reductase) have a conserved acidic residue corresponding to Glu312 of FNR. However, the analogous residue in PDR does not hydrogen bond to the catalytic serine as it does in FNR. The different positions of the acidic residue may simply be due to it being protonated in the lower pH of the FNR crystal form (pH 4.5 in FNR compared with 6.7 in PDR). The other candidate for donating a proton to FAD is water 407, which is buried at the active site and actually closer to N-5 than is the side-chain of Ser96. Water 407, in turn, could get a replacement proton from the side-chain of Tyr314 or Ser96. There is no corresponding water molecule in the structure of PDR, although there is a threonine residue nearby (Correll et al., 1993). This raises the possibility that water 407 plays a role in establishing the relatively low redox potential of FNR.

JMB--MS 324
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

139
breakdown at low pH (Alivisatos et al., 1965), crystals soaked with NADP + analogs other than P-AMP were maintained in storage buffer at pH 5.2 rather than pH 4.5. We could not use a higher pH because near pH 6.0 the crystals dissolve. The ligand concentrations used in soaking experiments are summarized in Table 4. To examine the reduced structure, crystals of FNR were chemically reduced within a glove box or glove bag in which the ambient oxygen concentration was kept below 0.1% (v/v). In this environment, the crystals were placed in storage buffer containing 10 mM sodium dithionite (sometimes supplemented with ligands) with incubation times of seven hours to five days. Crystals thus reduced remained yellow, but had a less intense brown/red color. Fully reduced FNR in solution is colorless, so these crystals may be only partially reduced or may contain some flavin semiquinone (one electron reduced form). The reduced crystals were mounted in glass X-ray capillaries that were then sealed with fast-setting epoxy glue while still in the glove box. Even within the sealed capillaries, most crystals reoxidized within one to two days after removal from the glove box (as indicated by the reappearance of the bright yellow color). The low redox potential of FNR (-377 mV at pH 8.0 (Batie & Kamin, 1986)) combined with the diminished reducing power of dithionite at low pH (Mayhew, 1978) contribute to the difficulties encountered in reducing these crystals. The color of the crystals was periodically checked during data collection to monitor re-oxidation. Most of the X-ray diffraction data were collected by a single multiwire area detector from San Diego Multiwire Systems (SDMS; (Hamlin, 1985)) using a Huber three-circle goniostat and Cu-Ka radiation from a graphite monochromater on a Rigaku RU-200 rotating anode operating with a 0.5 × 5.0 mm point focus at 50 kV and 150 mA. The crystal to detector distance was 360 mm

Materials and Methods
Crystal growth and data collection Natural spinach FNR was prepared using a modification of the procedure of Apley et al. (1985). Briefly, FNR was released from washed chloroplast membranes by treatment with EDTA. This crude extract was further purified by three chromatographic steps, utilizing DEAE-cellulose, Procion Red dye-coupled agarose (BIO-RAD), and hydroxyapatite. The progress of purification was monitored by measuring transhydrogenase activity (Colowick et al., 1952). Yields varied from 1 to 7 mg of pure FNR per kg of spinach. Pure recombinant spinach FNR was provided by Zanetti and co-workers (Aliverti et al., 1990) in lyophilized form. The protein was reconstituted in 10 mM phosphate buffer (pH 8.0) to about 5 mg/ml and passed over a Procion Red affinity column to remove denatured protein. Both natural and recombinant FNR were stored at -20°C at 3.4 mg/ml in 2 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0). Rounded, wedge-shaped (miter or ``bishop-hat'' shaped) crystals as large as 0.04 mm3 were grown by vapor diffusion at 4°C from hanging-drops produced by a 1:1 (v/v) mixture of the stored FNR stock with a reservoir containing 1.5 M (NH4 )2 SO4 and 0.2 M McIlvaine's buffer (sodium citrate/phosphate) at pH 4.9. These crystals belong to space group C2, with unit cell parameters ° ° ° a = 90.7 A, b = 57.7 A, c = 68.1 A, b = 100°. For storage purposes and data collection, crystals were kept in 2.3 M (NH4 )2 SO4 with 0.1 M sodium acetate (pH 4.5). Isomorphous crystals could be grown using a reservoir solution of 15% (w/v) polyethylene glycol 1000 (Sigma) with 50 mM sodium acetate (pH 4.4). NADP + and its analogues NADPH, P-AMP and ATP-ribose were obtained from Sigma. Because NADPH is particularly susceptible to

Table 4.
Data collection statistics
Data set FNRox (2) (natural) FNRox + P-AMP (1) FNRred + P-AMP (1) FNRred (1)> FNRox + NADP + (1) FNRred + NADPH (1)> FNRox + ATP-ribose (1) rFNRox (1) (recombinant) xtal size (mm3 ) 0.04 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.04 0.02 Res. limit ° (A) 1.7 1.7 2.0 2.0 2.0 1.65 1.8 2.0 Number of reflections 145,352 95,754 44,245 50,897 47,894 90,715 58,778 48,088 Unique reflections 38,542 37,112 21,432 21,643 23,052 40,263 28,328 21,233 % comp. 98 96 89 90 92 93 85 85 Rsym § (%) 7.5 5.0 5.9 5.8 8.2 9.3 6.8 7.8 R versus native (%) -- 15.2 14.5 9.0 13.7 15.1 12.7 16.1 Soak -- 300 mM 2 days 10 mM Na2 S2 O4 100 mM 7 days 10 mM 7 days 100 mM 4 h 20 mM 7 h 100 mM 4 days --

Eight data sets are described. The columns show crystal volume, Bragg spacings of the highest resolution data collected, total observations in the data set, unique reflections in the data set, completeness with respect to the stated resolution limit, internal R value, the R value versus the native data set, and the conditions of reductant and ligand soaks.  Number of crystals merged is given in parentheses.  For data sets using more than 1 crystal the largest crystal is described. § Rsym , a measure of internal data agreement is defined as follows: Rsym = Shkl Si =Ii - I =/Shkl Si I . where Ii is an individual intensity measurement for a particular reflection, and I is the average intensity for that reflection. This is the value reported as R3 by the SDMS data reduction programs (Hamlin, 1985). For FNRox , the value for the high-resolution crystal is given. > Crystal reoxidized significantly during data collection.

JMB--MS 324 140
through air, and data were collected in 0.1 to 0.12° frames with exposure times of 30 to 60 seconds per frame. Exceptions are the NADPH-soak data set, which was collected using a similar setup in the laboratory of Martha Ludwig at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, and the data from one crystal contributing to the native data set, which was collected at the MAXD Biotechnology Resource (Karplus et al., 1991; Sobottka et al., 1990). Statistics for each data set are shown in Table 4. Refinement ° The structure of FNR was solved at 2.6 A resolution by isomorphous replacement methods using two heavy-atom derivatives (Karplus et al., 1991). All heavy-atom positions for the two derivatives have been included in the refined native coordinate file in the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank and are available on request. The accession number is not available at the time of publication. When discussing the course of crystallographic refinement, we make a distinction between phases, rounds and cycles of refinement. One cycle of refinement refers to a single step of computer conjugate-gradient minimization. One round of refinement involves an episode of manual adjustment of the model followed by many cycles of computer minimization. One phase of refinement includes all of the rounds that used data within a particular resolution range. The native FNR refinement was more protracted than that of the other two structures presented here. Starting from the MIR model, the native refinement included four phases, composed of a total of 33 rounds and 946 cycles (Figure 14). The first three phases of refinement used an early version of the TNT suite of refinement programs (Tronrud et al., 1987), while the final phase was performed with TNT release 5A. The latter version permits straightforward correction for bulk solvent (Moews & Kretsinger, 1975), and uses updated minimization algorithms (Tronrud, 1992). In all cases, refinement proceeded with restraints on bond angles, bond lengths, planar groups and bad contacts, but not torsion angles. During the final rounds, the B-factors of covalently bound atoms were restrained so as to give a final r.m.s. difference ° below 5 A2 between bonded atom pairs. Refinement phases I through III were computed on a VAXstation 3600; electron density maps were viewed and protein models adjusted on a Hewlett-Packard 9000/835 Turbo SRX workstation running the crystallographic fitting program FREIBAU (developed by P.A.K.). Eventually, both refinement and manual fitting were relocated to a Silicon ´ Graphics Indigo Elan R4000, running TNT version 5A and the crystallographic fitting program CHAIN (Sack, 1988). Refinement on the Indigo proceeded approximately 50 times faster than refinement on the VAX station. Rounds of alternating computer and manual refinement were performed until the Fo - Fc difference electron density map contained no significant interpretable peak. The model described by Karplus et al. (1991) and deposited as entry 1FNR in the Protein Data Bank corresponds to the model after three rounds of refinement were completed (phase I). As part of each subsequent round of refinement, solvent molecules were modeled into the largest (greater than 4 sigma) positive peaks of the Fo - Fc map. First, water molecules were automatically placed into difference peaks which were between 1.7 and ° 3.6 A from the nearest protein atom. Next, each water position thus created was visually inspected to ensure that the difference peak corresponded to a plausible water position, rather than, say, an error in the nearby protein

Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

Figure 14. R-factor change during native FNR refinement. The crystallographic R-factor is plotted on the y-axis. The x-axis represents sequential cycles of computer minimization. Phase I includes refinement against data to ° ° 2.6 A resolution and initial refinement at 2.2 A resolution. The resolution ranges for each of the other phases are indicated in the plot. R-factors are calculated with respect to the data ranges actually used for refinement in each phase. For comparison, the R-factor of the final model against the data in each of the 4 resolution ranges is reported in the inset. Open circles indicate rounds of manual adjustment of the model. The final model has a higher R-factor than the models around cycle 570 because some questionable solvent molecules were removed and restraints were placed on the temperature factor correlation between bonded atoms. model. Two solvent positions were ultimately modeled as a sulfate ion and a phosphate ion. The distinction between the sulfate (residue 317 near His90 and Arg93) and the phosphate (residue 316, near Arg235 at the binding site of the 2'-phosphate group of P-AMP) was based upon two criteria. First, an isomorphous crystal form grown in the absence of sulfate (data not shown) lacked density at the sulfate position while maintaining the phosphate position. Also, the phosphate position coincides with the 2'-phosphate binding site of all NADP + analogs tested. The current assignment of ions is the simplest model that explains these observations. As refinement progressed, some weak density appeared near His19, so residues 17 and 18 were included in the model. However, even with these residues in the model, the density remained quite weak and ill-formed, so the residues were finally removed. During the final rounds of refinement water molecules were removed from the model if they failed to make plausible hydrogen bonds as determined using the program HBPLUS (McDonald et al., 1993), or if they occupied positions of low electron density (less than 0.5 sigma of the 2Fo - Fc map). A few water sites with high electron density but no hydrogen bonds were permitted to remain in the model. The present model of native FNR includes residues His19 through Tyr314, the FAD cofactor, 221 water molecules, one phosphate ion and one sulfate ion. Figure 15a shows the improvement of the R-factor as a function of resolution during the refinement, and Figure 16a shows the magnitude of the coordinate shifts in the model during each phase. Although we did not monitor a cross-validated R-factor (Brunger, 1992), it can clearly be ¨ seen that during the first two phases of refinement, the

JMB--MS 324
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

141

(a)

(b)

(c) Figure 15. R-factor as a function of resolution. (a) Curves are shown for the model before refinement (MIR model), and for models at the end of each of the 4 phases of refinement (Phase I­IV). The lines are thick within the resolution ranges against which refinement had been carried out for that phase, except for the MIR model line, which is thick within the resolution range used to calculate the MIR map. The line labeled data Rint measures the internal agreement of the data from the crystal used for high-resolution data collection, as measured by comparing the amplitudes or reduced unmerged Friedel pairs within each resolution bin as follows: Rint = S=F + - F - =/S((F + + F - )/2). Note that this value is distinct from the Rsym value reported in Table 4. In principle, a truly perfect model of the crystal structure would follow this line. (b) Effect of modeling ordered and bulk solvent on the R-factor. The bulk solvent correction exclusively improves agreement with the lowest-resolution data, while the ordered solvent model improves agreement across all resolution ranges. (c) Luzatti plot to estimate coordinate error. Based on the calculations of Luzatti (Luzzati, 1952), the agreement of the FNR model with the diffraction data suggests a mean coordinate error for the well-fixed ° portions of the model of around 0.17 A. This value is somewhat larger than the observed shifts in the model during the late stages of refinement (see Figure 16a). All 3 models show a similar pattern across most of the range. The ° reduced/P-AMP-bound structure deviates from the others beyond 2 A resolution, due to the poorer quality of the data at high resolution. model changes resulted in improved agreement not only with the data against which refinement was being carried out, but also with the higher-resolution data (Figure 15a). Phase I of the refinement accounted for the correction of most major errors in the MIR model, with numerous ° residues shifting more than 1 A (Figure 16a). The bulk of ° the residues shifted around 0.5 A, suggesting that this was the error level of the well-fit regions of the MIR model. This phase resulted in a drop of 15% in the R-factor in all but the lowest resolution ranges used (Figure 15a). Phase II, which included the addition of most of the ordered solvent ° model and shifted most residues approximately 0.2 A, resulted in a further decrease in the R-factor in all resolution ranges, with an especially large drop of 12% in the lower resolution range used. This improvement can be largely attributed to the addition of ordered water (Figure 15b), and is consistent with the effect of ordered solvent observed by other workers (Adman et al., 1991). Phase III resulted in small decreases in the R-factor and only small shifts in coordinates except in the three most mobile

JMB--MS 324 142
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

(a)

(b)

Figure 16. Chain accuracy and mobility. (a) The r.m.s. main-chain coordinate shifts during refinement. The main-chain shifts for each residue are plotted during the 4 main phases of refinement. Most of the large changes occurred in the earliest stages. The disordered loops around residues 52 and 240, and residue 19, the first residue for which electron density is observed, continued to shift significantly throughout refinement. Even the best-fixed portions of the protein continued ° to move of the order of 0.1 A during the late stages of refinement, establishing a limit on the coordinate accuracy of the model. (b) Temperature factors along the polypeptide chain. Average temperature factors for the main-chain atoms in a 3-residue window around each residue are plotted versus residue number. Notice the correlation between higher temperature factors and larger coordinate shifts during refinement, particularly in the most mobile regions around residues 19, 52 and 240. Secondary structural elements are indicated at the bottom of the Figure: a for alpha-helix, and b for beta-strand.

regions of the structure: residues 19­20, 50 to 54 and 240 to 244. During phase III at cycle 536, a significant change was made in the conformation of the ribityl moiety of FAD (see Figure 3). At the end of phase III we had judged the refinement complete, but with the availability of a new TNT release (Tronrud et al., 1987) we decided to assess the value of using low-resolution data with a bulk solvent correction. The parameters that define the scattering from the solvent ° refined to values of Ksol = 0.90 and Bsol = 470 A2. The inclusion of the bulk solvent correction dramatically improved the agreement with the lowest-resolution data ° (Bragg spacings <10 A, R = 24% versus R = 68%), although it is still worse than the accuracy of the data (R03%) and the agreement of the model with the medium-resolution data (R010%: Figure 15a). The bulk solvent correction also resulted in a small improvement in the agreement with the higher-resolution data (Figure 15a), which should only be affected indirectly. During phase IV of refinement only minimal changes occurred in the protein coordinates (Figure 16a), the temperature factors, and the ordered solvent model (data not shown). In this particular case bulk

solvent correction has had, at most, a small effect on model accuracy. The starting model for the P-AMP bound FNR refinement was the refined native structure after phase II, with the ligand built into difference Fourier density calculated from the two data sets. Refinement continued as in native phase III for 370 cycles, and as in native phase IV for an additional 161 cycles. The 5'-phosphate moiety of P-AMP was modeled in two conformations to account for the unusual density in this region (Figure 10a). Solvent molecules were placed in the P-AMP bound FNR model independently of those in the native model, but using the same criteria. For refinement of reduced FNR, the chosen data set was from a crystal that had been soaked with both dithionite and P-AMP, and that maintained the reduced coloration throughout a data collection (Table 4). The starting model for the reduced/P-AMP-bound structure refinement was the final refined P-AMP bound structure, after manually adjusting water 571 near atom N-1 of FAD in accordance with the observed difference Fourier peaks. The reduced/P-AMP-bound structure was

JMB--MS 324
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

143
(Gauss's theorem: Kaplan, 1984) over a uniform scalar field enclosed within the surface. Because the surface must be continuous, both re-entrant and contact area must be included. Three buried clusters of hydrophobic residues were defined using three criteria. First, only residues with no more than 3% solvent exposed side-chain surface area were considered. Next, networks of contacts between side-chain hydrophobic atoms (carbon or sulfur) separated by less ° than 4.2 A were built up. Finally, only clusters involving ten or more hydrophobic side-chain atoms were considered.

refined for three rounds, consisting of a total of 60 cycles. Water molecules were numbered in order of decreasing electron density in the oxidized native structure, starting at number 401. Water molecules occupying similar positions in the three structures were given the same numbers. Water molecules found in the P-AMP bound structure but not the native structure were numbered starting at 701. Coordinates of the three refined structures will be deposited in the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank. Observed structure factor amplitudes with MIR phases for the native FNR structure, and observed amplitudes with calculated phases for the reduced/P-AMP-bound and P-AMP-bound structures will also be deposited. Until then, all these data are available from the authors. Structural geometry analysis Secondary structure elements were assigned by the program DSSP (Kabsch & Sander, 1983), and are numbered by analogy with the corresponding structures in PDR (Correll et al., 1993). The geometries of hydrogen-bonding interactions were determined with the program HBPLUS (McDonald et al., 1993). Molecular surface areas (defined as the sum of contact and re-entrant surface areas) were calculated with the program MS ° (Connolly, 1983), using a probe radius of 1.6 A and a ° surface point density of 20 points/A2. Percentage solvent exposure for individual side-chains was calculated by dividing the contact surface area for a residue in the whole protein by a reference contact area for the residue in isolation with only its near bonded neighbor atoms (atoms one and two bonds away from the residue). This method corrects for solvent exposure differences due merely to local conformation. The re-entrant contribution to surface area was ignored for this calculation because its inclusion results in calculated solvent exposure in excess of 100% for some residues. Two techniques were used to calculate protein volumes. Volumes of the clusters of buried side-chain atoms were computed using the program VOLUME (Richards, 1985) implementing the method of radical planes (option 3; Gellatly & Finney, 1982). VOLUME is best suited for determining the volumes of completely buried atoms, because on the protein surface it depends upon the somewhat arbitrary placement of artificially generated solvent molecules. For volumes involving the protein surface, such as that of the entire FNR molecule and that of the hydrophobic cavity, the output of MS (Connolly, 1983) was used, which generates a set of points covering the surface of the protein. The volume of a space enclosed by such a group of points is calculated by summing over all points using the following equation: Volume = 1/3 s dAi (Ni · xi ), (2)

Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by NSF grant MCB9112699. We thank Dr Kay Diederichs for his helpful comments and for collecting the data of FNR bound to P-AMP, and Steven Jacques for growing several of the crystals used in these studies. Drs Domenico Gatti and Martha Ludwig at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor provided many hours of patient instruction and assistance in the use of their anaerobic crystallography facilities, and Giuliana Zanetti provided purified recombinant FNR. C.M.B. received support from NIH grant 5T32GM07273.

References
Adman, E. T., Sieker, L. C. & Jensen, L. H. (1991). Structure ° of rubredoxin from Desulfovibrio vulgaris at 1.5 A resolution. J. Mol. Biol. 217, 337­352. Aliverti, A., Jansen, T., Zanetti, G., Ronchi, S., Herrmann, R. G. & Curti, B. (1990). Expression in Escherichia-coli of ferredoxin NADP + reductase from spinach. Bacterial synthesis of the holoflavoprotein and of an active enzyme form lacking the first 28 amino acid residues of the sequence. Eur. J. Biochem. 191, 551­556. Aliverti, A., Piubelli, L., Zanetti, G., Luebberstedt, T., Herrmann, R. G. & Curti, B. (1993). The role of cysteine residues of spinach ferredoxin-NADP + reductase as assessed by site-directed mutagenesis. Biochemistry, 32, 6374­6380. Alivisatos, S. G. A., Ungar, F. & Abraham, G. J. (1965). Spontaneous reactions of 1,3-substituted 1,4-dihydropyridines with acids in water at neutrality. I. Kinetic analysis and mechanism of the reactions of dihydronicotinamide adenine dinucleotide with orthophosphates. Biochemistry, 4, 2616­2630. Andrews, S. C., Shipley, D., Keen, J. N., Findlay, J. B. C., Harrison, P. M. & Guest, J. R. (1992). The haemoglobin-like protein HMP of Escherichia coli has ferrisiderophore reductase activity and its C-terminal domain shares homology with ferredoxin NADP + reductases. FEBS Letters, 302, 247­252. Apley, E. C., Wagner, R. & Engelbrecht, S. (1985). Rapid procedure for the preparation of ferredoxin-NADP + oxidoreductase in molecularly pure form at 36 kilodaltons. Anal. Biochem. 150, 145­154. Batie, C. J. & Kamin, H. (1984). Ferredoxin:NADP + oxidoreductase: equilibria in binary and ternary complexes with NADP + and ferredoxin. J. Biol. Chem. 259, 8832­8839. Batie, C. J. & Kamin, H. (1986). Association of ferredoxin-NADP + reductase with NADP(H): specificity and oxidation-reduction properties. J. Biol. Chem. 261, 11214­11223.

where Ni is the unit normal vector at point i, xi is the vector containing the orthogonal Cartesian coordinates of the point, and dAi is the molecular surface area associated with the point. The standard output of MS includes all of the necessary information as it reports position, area, and surface normal for each surface point. Given that a surface is complete and continuous, it can be shown that this formula provides the enclosed volume. This is equivalent to numerical integration using an extremely simple instance of the divergence theorem

JMB--MS 324 144
Brunger, A. T. (1992). The free R value: a novel statistical ¨ quantity for assessing the accuracy of crystal structures. Nature (London), 355, 472­475. Colowick, S. P., Kaplan, N. O., Neufeld, E. F. & Ciotti, M. M. (1952). Pyridine nucleotide transhydrogenase I. Indirect evidence for the reaction and purification of the enzyme. J. Biol. Chem. 195, 95­105. Connolly, M. L. (1983). Solvent-accessible surfaces of proteins and nucleic acids. Science, 221, 709­713. Correll, C. C. (1992). Structure determination and analysis of an iron-sulfur flavoprotein: phthalate dioxygenase reductase. PhD thesis, University of Michigan at Ann Arbor. Correll, C. C., Batie, C. J., Ballou, D. P. & Ludwig, M. L. (1992). Phthalate dioxygenase reductase: a modular structure for electron transfer from pyridine nucleotides to iron sulfur. Science, 258, 1604­1610. Correll, C. C., Ludwig, M. L., Bruns, C. M. & Karplus, P. A. (1993). Structural prototypes for an extended family of flavoprotein reductases: comparison of phthalate dioxygenase reductase with ferredoxin reductase and ferredoxin. Protein Sci. 2, 2112­2133. De Pascalis, A. R., Jelesarov, I., Ackermann, F., Koppenol, W. H., Hirasawa, M., Knaff, D. B. & Bosshard, H. R. (1993). Binding of ferredoxin to ferredoxin:NADP + oxidoreductase: the role of carboxyl groups, electrostatic surface potential, and molecular dipole moment. Protein Sci. 2, 1126­1135. Dill, K. A. (1990). Dominant forces in protein folding. Biochemistry, 29, 7133­7155. Eriksson, A. E., Baase, W. A., Zhang, X.-J., Heinz, D. W., Blaber, M., Baldwin, E. P. & Matthews, B. W. (1992). Response of a protein structure to cavity-creating mutations and its relation to the hydrophobic effect. Science, 255, 178­183. Gellatly, B. J. & Finney, J. L. (1982). Calculation of protein volumes: an alternative to the Voronoi procedure. J. Mol. Biol. 161, 305­322. Hamlin, R. (1985). Multiwire area X-ray diffractometers. In Diffraction Methods for Biological Macromolecules. Part A, Methods in Enzymology (Wyckoff, H. W., Hirs, C. H. W. & Timasheff, S. N., eds), vol. 114, pp. 416­452, Academic Press, Inc., Waltham, MA. Jansen, T., Reilander, H., Steppuhn, J. & Herrmann, ¨ R. G. (1988). Analysis of cDNA clones encoding the entire precursor-polypeptide for ferredoxin: NADP + oxidoreductase from spinach. Curr. Genet. 13, 517­522. Jelesarov, I., De Pascalis, A. R., Koppenol, W. H., Hirasawa, M., Knaff, D. B. & Bosshard, H. R. (1993). Ferredoxin binding site on ferredoxin:NADP + reductase. Differential chemical modification of free and ferredoxin-bound enzyme. Eur. J. Biochem. 216, 57­66. Kabsch, W. & Sander, C. (1983). Dictionary of protein secondary structure: pattern recognition of hydrogenbonded and geometrical features. Biopolymers, 22, 2577­2637. Kaplan, W. (1984). Advanced Calculus, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. Karplus, P. A. & Bruns, C. M. (1994). Structure-function relations for ferredoxin reductase. J. Bioenerg. Biomembr. 26, 89­99. Karplus, P. A. & Schulz, G. E. (1989). Substrate binding and catalysis by glutathione reductase as derived from ° refined enzyme:substrate crystal structures at 2 A resolution. J. Mol. Biol. 210, 163­180.

Ferredoxin Reductase Structure

Karplus, P. A., Walsh, K. A. & Herriott, J. R. (1984). Amino acid sequence of spinach ferredoxin:NADP + oxidoreductase. Biochemistry, 23, 6576­6583. Karplus, P. A., Daniels, M. J. & Herriott, J. R. (1991). Atomic structure of ferredoxin-NADP + reductase: prototype for a structurally novel flavoenzyme family. Science, 251, 60­66. Knoll, A. H. (1992). The early evolution of eukaryotes: a geological perspective. Science, 256, 622­627. Krakow, G., Ammeraal, R. N. & Vennesland, B. (1965). The stereospecificity of the Hill reaction with triphosphopyridine nucleotide. J. Biol. Chem. 249, 1820­1823. Lu, G., Campbell, W. H., Schneider, G. & Lindqvist, Y. (1994). Crystal structure of the FAD-containing ° fragment of corn nitrate reductase at 2.5 A resolution: relationship to other flavoprotein reductases. Structure, 2, 809­821. Luzzati, P. V. (1952). Traitement statistique des erreurs dans la determination des structures cristallines. Acta Crystallogr. 5, 802­810. Matthijs, H. C. P., Coughlan, S. J. & Hind, G. (1986). Removal of ferredoxin:NADP + from thylakoid membranes, rebinding to depleted membranes, and identification of the binding site. J. Biol. Chem. 261, 12154­12158. Mayhew, S. G. (1978). The redox potential of dithionite and SO2- from equilibrium reactions with flavodoxins, methyl viologen, and hydrogen plus hydrogenase. Eur. J. Biochem. 85, 535­547. McDonald, I. K., Naylor, D. N., Jones, D. T. & Thornton, J. M. (1993). HBPLUS (computer program) Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University College, London. Medina, M., Mendez, E. & Gomez-Moreno, C. (1992a). Identification of arginyl residues involved in the binding of ferredoxin-NADP + reductase from Anabaena-sp.pcc 7119 to its substrates. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 299, 281­286. Medina, M., Mendez, E. & Gomez-Moreno, C. (1992b). Lysine residues on ferredoxin-NADP + reductase from Anabaena-sp.pcc 7119 involved in substrate binding. FEBS Letters, 298, 25­28. Moews, P. C. & Kretsinger, R. H. (1975). Refinement of the structure of carp muscle calcium-binding parvalbumin by model building and difference Fourier analysis. J. Mol. Biol. 91, 201­228. Pai, E. F., Karplus, P. A. & Schulz, G. E. (1988). Crystallographic analysis of the binding of NADPH, NADPH fragments, and NADPH analogues to glutathione reductase. Biochemistry, 27, 4465­4474. Peters, D. & Peters, J. (1981). Quantum theory of the structure and bonding in proteins. Part 8. The alanine dipeptide. J. Mol. Struct. 85, 107­123. Ramachandran, G. N., Venkatachalam, C. M. & Krimm, S. (1966). Stereochemical criteria for polypeptide and protein chain conformations. Biophys. J. 6, 849­872. Richards, F. M. (1985). Calculation of molecular volumes and areas for structures of known geometry. In Diffraction Methods for Biological Macromolecules, Part B, Methods in Enzymology (Wyckoff, H. W., Hirs C. H. W. & Timasheff, S. N., eds), vol. 115, pp. 440­464, Academic Press Inc., Waltham, MA. Sack, J. S. (1988). CHAIN--A crystallographic modeling program. J. Mol. Graph. 6, 224­225. Saenger, W. (1983). Principles of Nucleic Acid Structure, Springer-Verlag, New York.

JMB--MS 324
Ferredoxin Reductase Structure
Schulz, G. E. & Schirmer, R. H. (1979). Principles of Protein Structure, Springer-Verlag, New York, Berlin, Heidelberg, Tokyo. Shin, M., Nishikawa, T., Sekido, T. & Sakihama, N. (1994). Two bound forms of ferredoxin-NADP + reductase in chloroplast thylakoids. In Flavins and Flavoproteins 1993 (Yagi, K., ed.), pp. 413­422, Walter de Gruyter and Co., Berlin. Sobottka, S. E., Chandross, R. J., Cornick, G. G., Kretsinger, R. H. & Rains, R. G. (1990). Design and performance of the multiwire area X-ray diffractometer at the University of Virginia. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 23, 199­208. Swindells, M. B. (1993). Classification of doubly wound nucleotide binding topologies using automated loop searches. Protein Sci. 2, 2146­2153. Taylor, W. R., Jones, D. T. & Segal, A. W. (1993). A structural model for the nucleotide binding domains of the flavocytochrome b-245 beta-chain. Protein Sci. 2, 1675­1685.

145
Tronrud, D. E. (1992). Conjugate-direction minimization: An improved method for the refinement of macromolecules. Acta Crystallogr. sect. A, 48, 912­916. Tronrud, D. E., Ten Eyck, L. F. & Matthews, B. W. (1987). An efficient general-purpose least-squares refinement program for macromolecular structures. Acta Crystallogr. sect. A, 43, 489­501. Wierenga, R. K., De Maeyer, M. C. H. & Hol, W. G. J. (1985). Interaction of pyrophosphate moieties with alphahelices in dinucleotide binding proteins. Biochemistry, 24, 1346­1357. Wilmot, C. M. & Thornton, J. M. (1988). Analysis and prediction of the different types of beta-turns in proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 203, 221­232. Zanetti, G., Morelli, D., Ronchi, S., Negri, A., Aliverti, A. & Curti, B. (1988). Structural studies on the interaction between ferredoxin and ferredoxin-NADP + reductase. Biochemistry, 27, 3753­3759.

Edited by B. W. Matthews (Received 1 August 1994; accepted 11 November 1994)

