Article No. jmbi.1999.3086 available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

J. Mol. Biol. (1999) 292, 619±632

Ligand-linked Structural Changes in the Escherichia coli Biotin Repressor: The Significance of Surface Loops for Binding and Allostery
Emily D. Streaker and Dorothy Beckett*
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742-2021, USA The Escherichia coli repressor of biotin biosynthesis (BirA) is an allosteric site-speci®c DNA-binding protein. BirA catalyzes synthesis of biotinyl-5H AMP from substrates biotin and ATP and the adenylate serves as the positive allosteric effector in binding of the repressor to the biotin operator sequence. Although a three-dimensional structure of the apo-repressor has been determined by X-ray crystallographic techniques, no structures of any ligand-bound forms of the repressor are yet available. Results of previously published solution studies are consistent with the occurrence of conformational changes in the protein concomitant with ligand binding. In this work the hydroxyl radical footprinting technique has been used to probe changes in reactivity of the peptide backbone of BirA that accompany ligand binding. Results of these studies indicate that binding of biotin to the protein results in protection of regions of the central domain in the vicinity of the active site and the C-terminal domain from chemical cleavage. Biotin-linked changes in reactivity constitute a subset of those linked to adenylate binding. Binding of both bio-5H -AMP and biotin operator DNA suppresses cleavage at additional sites in the amino and carboxy-terminal domains of the protein. Varying degrees of protection of the ®ve surface loops on BirA from hydroxyl radical-mediated cleavage are observed in all complexes. These results implicate the C-terminal domain of BirA, for which no function has previously been known, in small ligand and site-speci®c DNA binding and highlight the signi®cance of surface loops, some of which are disordered in the apoBirA structure, for ligand binding and transmission of allosteric information in the protein.
# 1999 Academic Press

*Corresponding author

Keywords: protein footprinting; allostery; surface loops; ligand binding

Introduction
Regulation of protein function via small ligand binding remains a rich area for investigation of structure-energetic correlations in biological systems. Although this type of regulation is common few systems have been studied at detailed levels (Perutz, 1990). The site-speci®c DNA-binding proteins that regulate transcription initiation provide a wealth of systems in which to examine the structure-function relationships that form the basis
Abbreviations used: BirA, repressor of biotin biosynthesis; BioO, biotin operator; CTPKRS-BirA, C-terminal protein kinase recognition site BirA; w-HTH, winged helix-turn-helix. E-mail address of the corresponding author: dorothy BECKETT@umail.umd.edu
0022-2836/99/380619±14 $30.00/0

of allostery. Small molecule regulation of function in these proteins is ubiquitous and operates in systems as diverse as steroid hormone control of gene expression in eukaryotes and feedback inhibition of transcription of biosynthetic operons in prokaryotes. The Escherichia coli repressor of biotin biosynthesis, BirA, is an example of a transcriptional repressor that is regulated by small molecule binding. In addition to its role in the regulation of gene expression, BirA catalyzes two chemical reactions. A fundamental question associated with this multifunctionality is the nature of the ligand-linked structural changes associated with its regulation. A schematic outline of the biochemistry of the E. coli biotin regulatory system is provided in Figure 1 (Cronan, 1989). BirA functions both as an essential metabolic enzyme and as a transcriptional repres# 1999 Academic Press

620

Ligand-linked Structural Changes in the Biotin Repressor

Figure 1. Schematic outline of the biotin regulatory system. The repressor of biotin biosynthesis, BirA (i) catalyzes synthesis of biotinyl-5H -AMP from biotin, and ATP (ii) catalyzes transfer of biotin from bio-5H -AMP to the biotin carboxyl carrier protein (BCCP) subunit of acetyl-CoA carboxylase, and (iii) binds speci®cally to the biotin operator sequence (bioO) to repress transcription initiation at the biotin biosynthetic operon. BirA binds to bioO in its adenylate-bound form.

sor (Barker & Campbell, 1981). In metabolism the protein serves as a biotin holoenzyme synthetase, the function of which is to catalyze covalent linkage of biotin to the biotin-dependent acetyl-CoA carboxylase. This post-translational modi®cation reaction occurs in two steps; the ®rst is the synthesis of an activated form of biotin, biotinyl-5H AMP (Figure 1, (i)), and the second is the transfer of the biotin moiety of the adenylate to a unique lysine residue of the target apocarboxylase (Figure 1, (ii)) (Lane et al., 1964). This enzymatic function is essential for cell viability. BirA also functions as a transcriptional repressor by binding to the biotin operator (bioO) sequence in the transcriptional control region of the biotin biosynthetic operon (Figure 1, (iii)). Binding of the protein to bioO results in coordinate repression of transcription initiation from the two promoters of the operon. DNA binding requires binding of bio-5H -AMP (Prakash & Eisenberg, 1979) and this small molecule thus serves both as the intermediate in enzymatic transfer of biotin and an allosteric activator of DNA binding. At the physiological level, BirA function is regulated by the cellular requirement for biotin. If this requirement is high the protein preferentially functions as a biotin holoenzyme ligase. Once the cellular biotin requirement is satis®ed the protein switches to its transcriptional repression function. Little is known about the structural basis for functional switching in BirA. However, as indicated in Figure 1, there are at least four liganded forms of BirA: BirA Á biotin, BirA Ábio-5H -AMP, BirA Ábio-5H AMP Á apoBCCP, and BirA Ábio-5H -AMP ÁbioO, that correspond to distinct functional states of the protein. The availability of snapshots of the protein in each of these states will prove invaluable in elucidating the mechanism of regulation of the protein. A three-dimensional structure of apoBirA has been solved by X-ray crystallography (Figure 2; Wilson et al., 1993). The protein is composed of three domains; the N-terminal or DNA-binding domain, the central, and C-terminal domains. The N-terminal domain folds into the winged helixturn-helix (w-HTH) structure which is found in

many transcriptional regulatory proteins including the catabolite repressor protein, (CRP; McKay & Steitz, 1988) and heat shock factor (Harrison et al., 1994). The central domain which adopts an alphabeta structure is, on the basis of the homology of its sequence to those of other biotin holoenzyme synthetases (Tissot et al., 1997) as well as data obtained from mutants (Barker & Campbell, 1981;

Figure 2. A model of the three-dimensional structure of BirA determined by X-ray crystallography (Wilson et al., 1993). The ®ve surface loops indicated by the arrows are shown in black and their positions in the primary sequence are provided by the numbering. Segments of these loops for which no electron density was observed in the original X-ray diffraction studies were drawn by the MOLMOL program. The segments include residues 119-124 of loop 110-128, 194-197 of loop 194199, and residues 212-222 of loop 212-234. The amino acid side-chains indicated in black indicate the locations of the tryptophan residues in BirA. The Figure was prepared in the program MOLMOL (Koradi et al., 1996) using the input PDB ®le 1BIB.

Ligand-linked Structural Changes in the Biotin Repressor

621 linked conformational changes. One of these techniques is hydrogen-deuterium exchange, a method that has been used to study conformational changes associated with oxygen binding to hemoglobin (Englander & Englander, 1994) as well as the mechanism of protein kinase activation (Reising & Ahn, 1998). Another method that is enjoying increasing popularity involves the use of hydroxyl radical cleavage to map macromolecular interactions. Meares and co-workers have developed reagents that can be tethered to speci®c sites on proteins (Owens et al., 1998). Alternatively, a modi®cation of the Fenton reaction in which hydroxyl radicals are generated free in solution may be used (Heyduk & Heyduk, 1994; Greiner et al., 1996). The tethered reagents are advantageous for determining points of contact between macromolecules. Generation of the reactive hydroxyl radical species free in solution allows for non-speci®city in the reaction that is required to detect contact surfaces in a macromolecular complex as well as regions of the macromolecule that undergo conformational changes upon ligand binding. Results of mapping studies of the CRPDNA interaction using the latter method are in good agreement with results of X-ray crystallographic studies of the complex and free protein (Heyduk & Heyduk, 1994). These authors have also utilized this technique to examine structural changes in CRP that occur upon binding of the corepressor, cAMP (Baichoo & Heyduk, 1997). Here the hydroxyl radical cleavage technique has been employed to probe ligand-linked structural changes in the biotin repressor. The reactivities of the protein in its binary complexes with biotin and bio-5H -AMP and its ternary complex with bio5H -AMP plus the biotin operator have been compared with that of unliganded BirA. Results of these studies indicate that binding of any of these ligands results in reduced reactivity of the peptide backbone of BirA to hydroxyl radicals. While in both the biotin and bio-5H -AMP complexes large reductions in reactivity are limited to the activesite region of the central domain of the protein, some limited protection of the C-terminal domain from cleavage is also observed. Binding of bioO to the holorepressor results in changes not only in the reactivity of the DNA-binding domain to hydroxyl radicals, but also of signi®cant portions of the central and C-terminal domains. Changes in reactivities of the multiple surface loops of BirA are observed in all complexes. We conclude from these studies that binding of both biotin and bio-5H -AMP, is accompanied by structural changes in BirA signi®cantly more extensive than previously anticipated. The results indicate that structural changes in disordered surface loops of BirA are required for both ligand binding and transmission of allosteric information, and provide evidence supporting a role for the C-terminal domain, for which no function was previously known, in site-speci®c DNA binding.

Buoncristiani et al., 1986), concluded to contain the enzyme active site. However, since the active site is also the binding site for bio-5H -AMP, the allosteric activator of site-speci®c DNA binding, the central domain is also required for transcriptional regulation. The C-terminal domain adopts an all b structure and as yet no function has been associated with it. In addition to the regions of regular secondary structure shown in the model of BirA, multiple stretches of the polypeptide chain are found in loops (Figure 2). Furthermore, since no electron density was observed for segments of three of these loops in the X-ray crystallographic studies, they are partially disordered (see Figure 2). Although the available structural information provides a powerful tool in solution studies of BirA, its utility is limited by the fact that it provides a ``snapshot'' of only one functional state of the system. No structure of a complex of the protein bound to a biologically signi®cant ligand is yet available. Results of a number of solution studies of BirA provide evidence that the protein undergoes signi®cant ligand-linked structural changes in its functional cycle. Results of kinetic studies of binding of both biotin and bio-5H -AMP to BirA indicate that the binding processes occur in two steps (Xu et al., 1995). While the rate of the ®rst step is ligand concentration-dependent, the second shows no dependence on total ligand concentration. This observation is consistent with a kinetic model in which the ®rst step involves formation of a collision complex and the second re¯ects a unimolecular conformational change. The nature of this conformational change, as re¯ected both in the kinetic parameters associated with it and details of its partitioning into transition state enthalpies and entropies (Xu et al., 1996), is different for the two ligands. Furthermore, results of structural probing of the biotin and bio-5H -AMP-dependent conformational changes using proteolytic enzyme subtilisin, suggest that one locus of the structural transition associated with ligand binding lies in a segment of the polypeptide chain composed of residues 212-234 that is disordered in the apoBirA structure (Xu et al., 1995). Finally, results of studies of a BirA deletion mutant in which the N-terminal domain has been removed indicate that this domain is functionally important for tight binding of both biotin and bio-5H -AMP (Xu & Beckett, 1996). Based on the accumulated evidence we have proposed a low-resolution model for ligand-linked structural changes in BirA in which the small ligand-linked conformational changes entail, in part, closer association of the N-terminal and central domains of the protein than is observed in the aporepressor structure. Ultimately the availability of high-resolution three-dimensional structures of BirA complexes will provide the detailed information required to test the hypothesis outlined above. However, in the absence of this high-resolution data it is possible to use other techniques to probe for ligand-

622

Ligand-linked Structural Changes in the Biotin Repressor Table 1. Summary of analysis of biochemical activities of wild-type and CTPKRS-BirA
BirA variant bio-5 -AMP Synthesis n koff(sÀ1) BirAÁbiotin dissociationb koff(sÀ1) Initial rate of bio-5H -AMP synthesisc (sÀ1) bioO Bindingd ÁGO (kcal/mol) TOT
H
a

Wild-type 1.06 Æ 0.03 0.00025 Æ 0.00001 0.29 Æ 0.01 0.118 Æ 0.003 À23.5 Æ 0.4

CTPKRS 0.98 Æ 0.04 0.00025 Æ 0.00002 0.37 Æ 0.01 0.12 Æ 0.01 À23.9 Æ 0.3

Measurements of the biochemical activity of the C-terminal protein kinase recognition site (CTPKRS) derivative of BirA, with the exception of bioO binding, were performed at 20  C in the following buffer: 10 mM TrisHCl (pH 7.50(Æ0.02)) at 20.0(Æ0.1) C, 200 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2. a The time course of adenylate synthesis at saturating biotin and ATP concentrations is described by an exponential burst followed by a slow linear phase. The adenylate : enzyme stoichiometry in the burst complex is n and the unimolecular dissociation rate of the BirA Ábio-5H -AMP complex is koff (Xu & Beckett, 1994). b The unimolecular dissociation rate of the BirAÁbiotin complex measured by stopped-¯ow ¯uorescence (Xu et al., 1995). c The pseudo-®rst-order rate constant of BirA-catalyzed bio-5H -AMP synthesis measured by stopped-¯ow ¯uorescence (Xu & Beckett, 1994). d The total standard Gibbs free energy for binding of each holoBirA variant to bioO was measured at 20  C by DNase I footprinting in buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.50(Æ0.01)) at 20.0(Æ0.1) C, 50 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 0.1 mg/ml bovine serum albumin, 20 mg/ml sonicated calf thymus DNA (Abbott & Beckett, 1993). The value for wild-type is from Streaker & Beckett (1998a,).

Results
Construction, purification, and biochemical characterization of a BirA fusion protein A gene that encodes a BirA derivative, in which a target sequence for cAMP-dependent protein kinase, VRRAS, is fused to the carboxy terminus of the protein, was constructed. The resulting fusion protein which is referred to as CTPKRS-BirA (C-terminal protein kinase recognition site BirA) could be end-labeled with [33P]phosphate for detection of the products of chemical footprinting reactions on polyacrylamide gels following their electrophoretic separation. The derivative of the birA gene was constructed using the polymerase chain reaction as described in Materials and Methods, and protein was puri®ed using a modi®cation of a previously published procedure (Abbott & Beckett, 1993). The ®nal puri®ed protein was at least 95 % pure as judged by SDS-PAGE analysis. The biochemical function of the fusion protein was measured at multiple levels. First, the protein was shown, using stoichiometric titrations, to be at least 95 % active in bio-5H -AMP binding (data not shown). The activities of the protein in catalyzing synthesis of bio-5H -AMP from biotin and ATP, binding biotin, and binding to bioO were measured and results of these studies indicate that the fusion protein is similar to the wild-type BirA at all of these levels (Table 1). Given the results of the biochemical comparison we are con®dent that results of the hydroxyl radical footprinting studies of the fusion protein accurately re¯ect the changes that occur in the native protein.

Hydroxyl radical cleavage of unliganded BirA Results of hydroxyl radical cleavage of apoBirA are shown in Figure 3, lane 2. The reaction conditions utilized yield minimal cleavage of the protein such that comparison of Coomassie brilliant blue-stained samples of the protein that had been treated with the hydroxyl radical cleavage reagents to those that are untreated reveals no differences. Approximately 98 % of the protein remains intact and, therefore, single-hit kinetics apply (Brenowitz et al., 1986). Phosphorimaging of the gels was required to detect any cleavage of the radiolabeled protein and as indicated in the results of this imaging (Figure 4), the pattern of digestion of the free protein is irregular. The sequences of BirA that exhibit relatively low susceptibility to cleavage were localized on the basis of a calibration curve generated by determining the relative electrophoretic mobilites of products of treatment of BirA with BNPS-skatole, a reagent which cleaves to the C-terminal side of tryptophan residues. The BirA sequence contains seven tryptophan residues distributed throughout the protein sequence (Figure 2), and mobilities of products of partial digestion of BirA with this reagent are shown in Figure 3, lane 1. In addition to the intact protein and seven expected products (the product of cleavage at tryptophan 308 is not visible using this gel system), a product that has a mobility characteristic of a polypeptide resulting from cleavage at amino acid residue 90-91 consistently appears. This type of product, which has been observed in cleavage of other proteins with BNPS-skatole, is of unknown origin (D. L. Crimmins, personal communication) and was not included in construction

Ligand-linked Structural Changes in the Biotin Repressor

623

Figure 3. Products of hydroxyl radical cleavage of CTPKRS-BirA in its apo and ligand-bound forms. Lane 1, products of partial cleavage of BirA by BNPS-skatole; lane 2, hydroxyl radical cleavage of apoBirA; lane 3, cleavage of BirAÁ bio-5H -AMP; lane 4, cleavage of BirA Á biotin; lane 5, cleavage of BirA Á bio-5H -AMP ÁbioO; lane 6, untreated CTPKRS-BirA.

of the calibration curve. Segments of the BirA sequence that are relatively resistant to hydroxyl radical-mediated cleavage were assigned by the absence or low intensity of bands corresponding to products expected from cleavage in those regions of the protein sequence. These segments are highlighted on a model of the protein structure (Figure 5). The reproducibility with which these positions can be assigned in separate experiments is plus or minus two or three amino acid residues. In the DNA binding domain amino acid residues which form the C terminus of the ``recognition helix'' of the helix-turn-helix motif and residues 4957 which form one b-strand the connecting turn and a portion of the second b-strand of the ``wing'' are cleaved with low probability. A stretch containing amino acid residues 103-110 which forms one of the core strands of the central b-sheet exhibits a low susceptibility to hydroxyl radical-mediated cleavage. The region including residues 165-197 which forms three strands of the core b-sheet of the central domain is also resistent to cleavage, as well as the stretch including residues 215-222 that forms part of a disordered loop in the protein structure. Residues 242-247 which form part of a b-sheet in the central domain also constitute a region of the protein that is ``protected'' from hydroxyl radical-mediated cleavage. Finally, in the C-terminal domain residues 277-281 which form part of a b-strand are also relatively protected from cleavage. In summary, roughly 30 % of the BirA polypeptide backbone exhibits relatively low susceptibility to hydroxyl radical-mediated clea-

Figure 4. (a) Line scans of results of phosphorimaging of calibration standards (gray line), cleaved apoBirA (black line) and cleaved BirA Ábiotin (red line). The numbers above the frame indicate the positions of calibration standards resulting from cleavage of CTPKRS-BirA with BNPS-skatole at the indicated tryptophan residues. The asterisk indicates the position of the unidenti®ed product of BNPS-skatole cleavage of BirA. (b) Difference line scan for cleavage of the BirA-biotin complex generated as described in Materials and Methods. The bars at the bottom of the frame indicate locations in the BirA primary sequence of regions protected from hydroxyl radical cleavage as a consequence of biotin binding. Color-coding: white, 5-20 % loss in peak intensity; red, 20-90 % loss in peak intensity; yellow, 90-100 % loss in peak intensity.

vage, and although many of the resistant sequences are found in regions of regular secondary structure, signi®cant segments of solventexposed regions are also somewhat unreactive to cleavage in apoBirA.

Figure 5. Model of BirA indicating the regions shown in gray that exhibit low susceptibility to hydroxyl radical cleavage in the apo-protein. Regions that exhibit relatively high susceptibility to cleavage are shown in black. (a) Front view; (b) back view. The model was generated using MOLMOL (Koradi et al., 1996).

624 Biotin-linked changes in hydroxyl radical cleavage of BirA Biotin is a substrate in BirA-catalyzed synthesis of bio-5H -AMP and its binding to the protein has been measured using kinetic and equilibrium techniques. The equilibrium dissociation constant governing the binding process is in the 10 nM range of concentration (Xu et al., 1995) and the kinetics are consistent with the occurrence of ligand-linked conformational changes upon binding. The products of hydroxyl radical cleavage of the biotinbound protein and apoBirA are shown in Figure 3. Comparison of lanes 2 and 4 which represent the products of digestion of the free and bound states of the protein, respectively, reveals several differences in reactivity. All of these differences correspond to decreases in the reactivity of the backbone to hydroxyl radical cleavage as a consequence of ligand binding. Line scans for the lanes corresponding to cleavage of the protein (/À) biotin as well as the standards lane (lane 1) are shown in Figure 4(a). A line scan illustrating the difference between the minus and plus biotin scans is shown in Figure 4(b). As indicated in the Figure, biotin binding to BirA results in the disappearance of some peaks as well as decreases in the intensities of others. No increases in reactivity to the reagent are found as a result of ligand binding. The apparent negative peaks in the difference scan are not reproducible and are due to the slight horizontal offset of the plus and minus ligand peaks in

Ligand-linked Structural Changes in the Biotin Repressor

the two scans. The molecular masses of products at which changes in hydroxyl radical-mediated cleavage occur, as indicated by the reproducible appearance of positive peaks in analysis of three independent difference scans, were established using the calibration standards referred to above. Results of this analysis are highlighted on a model of the protein structure in Figure 6(a). Regions characterized by large changes in reactivity (90100 % loss in peak intensity) resulting from biotin binding, which are shown in yellow on the model, are limited to two segments located in the central domain of the protein. These include residues 215220 of the disordered loop 212-234 as well as all of loop 194-199 and the N-terminal segment of the b-strand composed of residues 200-210 in the core of the central domain. The remaining changes in reactivity correspond to small decreases in the intensities of several peaks in line scans. These small changes have been assigned to segments of the central and C-terminal domains of BirA. They include residues 83-129 which form part of a b-strand, the connecting loop and an a-helix. In addition, two of the surface loops including residues 98-103 and 110-128 are protected from digestion. Residues 211-220 and 231-233 which constitute part of another disordered loop 212-234 are also protected. In the large a-helix formed by residues 235-256, the N-terminal two residues 235236, the central region 239-243, and the C-terminal segment 255-256 are all protected. The coil connect-

Figure 6. Models of BirA illustrating regions of the protein backbone protected from hydroxyl radical cleavage as a consequence of (a) biotin, (b) bio-5H -AMP or (c) bio-5H -AMP and bioO binding. Front and back views of the molecule are shown for each complex. In each model the colors indicate the percentage of loss in peak intensity observed for cleavage products in the complex relative to apoBirA. Black, 5-20 % loss in intensity; red, 20-90 % loss in intensity; and yellow, 90-100 % loss in intensity. All models were generated using MOLMOL (Koradi et al., 1996).

Ligand-linked Structural Changes in the Biotin Repressor

625 As observed with biotin, binding of bio-5H -AMP to BirA results in only protection from and no enhancement of cleavage. A difference line scan used to assign the regions of the protein that are protected from cleavage is shown in Figure 7(b). Although the locations of the majority of the bio5H -AMP-mediated changes in reactivity overlap with those observed in the biotin-bound protein, there are two signi®cant differences in the results obtained for the two complexes. First, as indicated by the color-coding of the bars below the difference scan, the magnitudes of the intensity changes for some of the protected regions are greater for bio-5H AMP than for biotin binding. Second, a larger segment of the disordered loop consisting of residues 212-234 is protected as a consequence of bio-5H AMP binding. The regions protected from cleavage as a consequence of bio-5H -AMP binding are mapped onto a model of the protein structure in Figure 6(b). The regions of 90-100 % decrease in band intensity, shown in yellow, are similar in biotin and biotin-5H -AMP complexes. A greater change in intensity for the group of peaks corresponding to residues 90-130 is observed for binding of the adenylate. The remainder of the small changes in reactivity localized to the central and C-terminal domains of the protein are similar for the biotin and bio-5H -AMP-bound protein. The ternary BirA Á bio-5H -AMP Á bioO complex In order to determine changes in hydroxyl radical reactivity mediated by binding of bioO, a ternary complex containing BirA, bio-5H -AMP and a 50 bp oligonucleotide was subjected to analysis (Figure 3, lane 5). The oligonucleotide sequence, which is shown in Materials and Methods, contains the bioO sequence ¯anked by the same two, ®ve base-pair sequences found in the natural context of the biotin operon (Otsuka & Abelson, 1978). This oligonucleotide has previously been shown to bind to holoBirA and at the concentrations of components used for the hydroxyl radical cleavage, the protein is saturated with the operator sequence (Eisenstein & Beckett, 1999). Since hydroxyl radical-mediated cleavage of DNA is well documented, control experiments were performed to determine if any cleavage of the DNA fragment occurs. Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of samples that had been treated with hydroxyl radical cleavage reagents in the presence of the protein indicated no breakdown of the DNA when it is complexed to holoBirA. Line scans for the lanes corresponding to cleavage of apoBirA and BirA in its ternary complex with bio5H -AMP and the bioO oligo are shown in Figure 8(a). As observed with binding of biotin and bio-5H AMP, formation of the ternary complex results in only decreases in reactivity of selected regions of the protein to cleavage relative to that observed in the unliganded protein The difference plot used to assign regions of protection on the protein sequence is shown in Figure 8(b). The changes in reactivity observed in the ternary complex are greater both

ing this helix to the a-helix that lies at the interface between the central and C-terminal domains of the protein as well as two segments of this interfacial helix are protected. Finally two portions of b-strands in the C-terminal domain exhibit small but reproducible protection from cleavage as a consequence of biotin binding. Bio-5H -AMP-linked changes in hydroxyl radical cleavage Line scans of cleavage of BirA in the presence and absence of bio-5H -AMP are shown in Figure 7(a). As with biotin, since the KD for binding of bio-5H -AMP to the protein is approximately 4 Â 10À11 M (Xu et al., 1995), we are certain that the protein is saturated with the ligand under the conditions employed for the cleavage reaction. Moreover, although bio-5H -AMP is known to promote dimerization of BirA which occurs in the 10 mM range of protein concentration (Eisenstein & Beckett, 1999), results of hydroxyl radical cleavage conducted at both 2 and 160 mM, concentrations at which the protein should be nearly 100 % monomer and dimer, respectively, were identical. This inability to observe dimerization-linked changes in cleavage may re¯ect the rapid kinetics of the dimerization process relative to the one hour time of exposure of the protein to the cleavage reagents.

Figure 7. (a) Line scans of results of phosphorimaging of calibration standards (gray line), cleaved apoBirA (black line) and cleaved BirAÁ bio-5H -AMP (red line). The numbers above the frame indicate the positions of calibration standards resulting from cleavage of CTPKRSBirA with BNPS-skatole at the indicated tryptophan residues. The asterisk indicates the position of the unidenti®ed product of BNPS-skatole cleavage of BirA. (b) Difference line scan for cleavage of the BirA Á bio-5H AMP complex generated as described in Materials and Methods. The bars at the bottom of the frame indicate locations in the BirA primary sequence of regions protected from hydroxyl radical cleavage as a consequence of bio-5H -AMP binding. Color-coding: white, 5-20 % loss in peak intensity; red, 20-90 % loss in peak intensity; and yellow, 90-100 % loss in peak intensity.

626

Ligand-linked Structural Changes in the Biotin Repressor

Discussion
Conditions utilized for hydroxyl radical cleavage of BirA Hydroxyl radical cleavage of proteins using the procedure employed in this work has previously been utilized for the study of a number of systems. Baichoo & Heyduk (1997) have used the method to probe ligand-linked changes in the CRP systems, and Greiner et al. (1996) have used the method to study the interaction of the subunits of E. coli RNA polymerase. The conditions employed by Baichoo & Heyduk are considerably less severe than those used in this work. The concentration of reagents utilized and the time of incubation are fourfold and 1.5-fold greater, respectively, in this work. However, as indicated in Results, even with these relatively harsh conditions the extent of cleavage of the protein is approximately 2 %. The protein is stored in 5 % (v/v) glycerol and it is possible that this reagent acts as a radical scavenger. However, comparison of the extent of cleavage of protein that had been directly diluted into buffer to that of samples that had been exchanged into buffer prior to preparation of solutions for cleavage indicated no differences. The comparatively severe conditions required for hydroxyl radical-mediated cleavage of BirA is an intrinsic property of this system, and successful application of the technique to studies of any protein requires empirical optimization of experimental conditions. Cleavage of ApoBirA with respect to the magnitude of the decreases in peak intensity and the range of the polypeptide chain protected than those observed as a consequence of small ligand binding. Changes in reactivity are observed in all three domains of the protein structure (Figure 6(c)). In the N-terminal domain the wing or b-hairpin and the recognition helix of the w-HTH motif are protected. The linker between the amino and central domains is protected. The protection in these three regions re¯ects large decreases (approximately 50 %) in the intensities of peaks corresponding to cleavage at these sites in apoBirA. In the central domain the entire N-terminal segment, including residues 65-170, is protected from cleavage in the ternary complex. This protection re¯ects large losses in the intensities of all bands resulting from cleavage in this region. Protection from cleavage at positions 187-221 which includes two b-strands of the central region, the disordered loop 194-199 and an N-terminal segment of the disordered loop 212-234 is nearly complete and corresponds to greater than 90 % decreases in the peak intensities for bands generated by cleavage in those regions. The remainder of the changes in reactivity in the central and C-terminal domain re¯ect losses of approximately 50 % of the intensity of the peaks corresponding to cleavage in these regions. It is assumed that in use of the modi®ed Fenton chemistry to generate hydroxyl radical species, freely diffusing hydroxyl radicals are responsible for cleavage of a macromolecule. Moreover, given the small size of this species and its lack of charge, the cleavage is assumed to re¯ect the solvent accessibility of regions of the macromolecular structure. Although a correlation between sovent accessibility and reactivity to hydroxyl radicals has been demonstrated in the cleavage of nucleic acids both free in solution (Latham & Cech, 1989; Cate et al., 1996) and complexed to proteins (Dixon et al., 1991), no such correlation has been shown for protein cleavage mediated by hydroxyl radicals generated using the free EDTA-Fe reagent. Ermacora et al. (1994) did observe some correlation between solvent accessibility and cleavage mediated by the EDTA-Fe analog, EPD-Fe, covalently tethered at speci®c cysteine residues on a staphylococcal nuclease. However, these authors noted that solvent accessibility alone was not a perfect predictor of sites of cleavage by this reagent. Results of cleavage of apoBirA, for which a high-resolution structure is available, suggest that no absolute correlation between the extent of hydroxyl radical cleavage and solvent accessibility exists. As indicated in Figure 4, although the majority of the protein segments that exhibit resistance to cleavage are found

Figure 8. (a) Line scans of results of phosphorimaging of calibration standards (gray line), cleaved apoBirA (black line) and cleaved BirAÁ bio-5H -AMP Á bioO (red line). The numbers above the frame indicate the positions of calibration standards resulting from cleavage with BNPS-skatole at the indicated tryptophan residues. The asterisk indicates the position of the unidenti®ed product of BNPS-skatole cleavage of BirA. (b) Difference line scan for cleavage of the BirA Ábio-5H -AMP Á bioO complex generated as described in Materials and Methods. The bars at the bottom of the frame indicate locations in the BirA primary sequence of regions protected from hydroxyl radical cleavage as a consequence of formation of the ternary complex. Color-coding, white, 5-20 % loss in peak intensity; red, 20-90 % loss in peak intensity; yellow, 90-100 % loss in peak intensity.

Ligand-linked Structural Changes in the Biotin Repressor

627 both their activities in BirA-catalyzed biotinylation and transcriptional repression (Barker & Campbell, 1981; Buoncristiani et al., 1986) and numerous biochemical studies of the protein have been performed (Xu et al, 1995, 1996; Xu & Beckett, 1996). It is, therefore, of interest to examine the relationship between these previous results and the results of hydroxyl radical cleavage studies presented in this work. For example, several mutations in the disordered loop region 110-128 have been characterized. Both the G to S mutation at position 115 and the R to G mutation at position 118 result in an in vivo biotin requirement signi®cantly higher than that found for strains expressing the wild-type protein (Barker & Campbell, 1981). The phenotypes of these mutants are consistent with defects in biotin and perhaps bio-5H -AMP binding. Binding of either of these ligands to the protein results in protection of the loop from hydroxyl radical-mediated cleavage. Furthermore, a segment of the polypeptide chain corresponding to residues 200-210 which forms a b-strand in the central domain is protected from hydroxyl radical cleavage as a consequence of either biotin or bio-5H -AMP binding. Mutation of residue 207 (I207S) results in an increased requirement for biotin, a result consistent with involvement of this region in binding biotin or bio-5H -AMP (Barker & Campbell, 1981). Although no mutants in the polypeptide segment that forms the unstructured loop 212-234 have been characterized, we have previously shown that binding of either biotin or bio5H -AMP results in decreased susceptibility of this loop to subtilisin-mediated proteolysis; an observation that is consistent with a ligand-mediated disorder to order transition in this region (Xu et al., 1995). The observed protection of this loop from hydroxyl radical-mediated cleavage as a consequence of biotin and bio-5H -AMP binding is consistent with this previous observation. Binding of the two small ligands to BirA results in decreased cleavage of the loop that includes residues 194-199. A mutation in this loop at position 197 results in a defect in transcriptional repression activity (Barker & Campbell, 1986), and we have shown that this defect in DNA binding re¯ects a defect in protein dimerization, thus implying a role for this loop in the dimerization interface (E.D.S., unpublished results). The small ligand-mediated protection of this loop region from chemical cleavage is consistent with a change in its structure upon small ligand binding. Perhaps this structural change is required for dimerization, which is critical for site-speci®c binding of BirA to bioO (Streaker & Beckett, 1998a). Although there is signi®cant agreement between the results of previous biochemical and genetic studies of BirA and the results of protein footprinting presented in this work, some of the results are unexpected. In particular, the observed protection of regions of the C-terminal domain, for which no function has previously been found, in all complexes suggests that it may play roles in small ligand and/or DNA binding.

in regular secondary structure, some surface loops also exhibit limited accessibility to cleavage by the reagent. Furthermore, based on results of hydroxyl radical cleavage of CRP using a number of reagents to generate the reactive hydroxyl radical species, it has been suggested that sensitivity to hydroxyl radical cleavage re¯ects a combination of solvent accessibility plus charge and/or hydrophobicity (Baichoo & Heyduk, 1999). Nevertheless, although the presence of regions of low reactivity to hydroxyl radicals may limit the dynamic range over which ligand-dependent changes in cleavage may be detected in those speci®c regions, it is still possible to detect loci of changes in reactivity of a protein that occur as a consequence of ligand binding. Furthermore, in the case of CRP binding to DNA it has been demonstrated that changes in hydroxyl radical-mediated cleavage do directly correlate to changes in solvent accessibility (Heyduk & Heyduk, 1994). Regions of biotin and bio-5H -AMP-linked changes in hydroxyl-radical reactivity are more extensive than previously anticipated As indicated in the Introduction, based on previous results it was anticipated that the biotin and bio-5H -AMP-mediated changes in BirA structure involve, in part, the formation of more extensive contacts between the central and N-terminal domains in the protein structure. This prediction is based, in part, on the observed requirement of the N-terminal domain for tight binding of the two small ligands to BirA (Xu & Beckett, 1996). The results of hydroxyl radical cleavage experiments indicate that while regions of the BirA sequence in the central domain including loops 110-128 and 212-234 that could conceivably participate in such an interdomain interaction are protected from hydroxyl radical cleavage upon binding of biotin or bio-5H -AMP, there is no obvious protection of any region of the N-terminal domain upon binding of either of these small ligands (Figure 6). While this result alone does not rule out the formation of this putative domain-domain interface, other methods will be required to test its existence. Both biotin and bio-5H -AMP-linked changes in hydroxyl radicalmediated cleavage extend to regions of the protein beyond the enzyme active site. Binding of either ligand results in protection of the loops 98-103 and 194-199 on the face of the protein opposite the active site (Figure 6). In addition, in both small ligand complexes, small but reproducible changes in reactivity to hydroxyl radical cleavage are found in the C-terminal domain, for which no function is yet known. Correlation of hydroxyl radical footprinting results to BirA mutant analysis and biochemical studies A number of BirA mutants have been isolated, sequenced and characterized in vivo with respect to

628 Relationship of protein footprinting results to sequence conservation among biotin holoenzyme synthetases BirA is a member of a class of enzymes referred to as the biotin holoenzyme synthetases, all of which catalyze covalent linkage of biotin to biotindependent carboxylases, and alignment of the available sequences of six biotin holoenzyme ligases reveals homology limited to the central domain of BirA (Tissot et al., 1997). The homology is scattered over approximately 100 residues of the protein sequence and includes three segments of b-strand extending from residue 168 to192 in the BirA sequence, the sequence of residues 114-118 in the disordered loop region 110-128 and the b-strand consisting of residues 201-210. Both the loop and the latter b-strand become protected from hydroxyl radical cleavage as a consequence of biotin and adenylate binding. The region including residues 168-192 does not, however, exhibit any alteration in reactivity upon binding of either small ligand. This apparent absence of a change in reactivity may stem from the absence of a signi®cant signal in this region in cleavage of apoBirA. Limited hydroxyl radical-mediated cleavage in this region is observed even in the free protein which decreases the dynamic range over which changes in reactivity may be observed. These results, therefore, do not rule out a role for this conserved sequence in small ligand binding.

Ligand-linked Structural Changes in the Biotin Repressor

Surface loops are critical for BirA function Structural transitions in loop regions of proteins have previously been shown to be functionally important. For example, binding of biotin to avidin or streptavidin results in the closing down of a loop over the ligand binding site of the protein (Livnah et al., 1993). A loop in trytophan synthase has been shown to be important in substrate binding and in transmission of allosteric information in the enzyme (Miles, 1991). The structure of apoBirA is characterized by several surface loops, including residues 110-128, 212-234, 194-199, 140-146, and 98103, and these loops all undergo ligand-mediated decreases in reactivity to hydroxyl radical. The ®rst two loops, both of which are protected from cleavage in all complexes, are found in the active site of the enzyme and potentially act as lids to protect the active site from solvent in the complex of the enzyme with substrates biotin and ATP. In addition, the 110-128 loop may be signi®cant for the allosteric linkage of bio-5H -AMP to DNA binding since a mutation in residue 119 results in a loss in repression activity but has no effect on the enzymatic function (Barker & Campbell, 1981). Finally, the 194-199 and 140-146 loops lie on a face of the molecule that, based on mutational and biochemical studies, is involved in protein dimerization. These combined results indicate that loops in BirA play critical functional roles and the results of hydroxyl radical cleavage of BirA indicate that they undergo signi®cant structural transitions upon ligand binding. Furthermore, the magnitude of the change in reactivity of each loop, and presumably the extent of the accompanying structural transitions, re¯ects the particular liganded state of the protein. The map of the transcriptional repression complex BirA, which is a member of the w-HTH class of site-speci®c DNA binding proteins binds to the 40 bp biotin operator as a dimer (Abbott & Beckett, 1993). Two holoBirA monomers bind cooperatively to the operator site (Streaker & Beckett, 1998a). Results of previous chemical and enzymatic footprinting of the DNA in the bound and free states indicate that each BirA monomer interacts with each 12 bp terminus of the operator site, and that the central region of the operator site is unoccupied by protein (Streaker & Beckett, 1998b). The mode of interaction of each DNA-binding domain with the DNA appears to be similar to that observed for other proteins of this class and involves interaction of the ``recognition helix'' of the helix-turn-helix model with the major groove and contact of the ``wing'' with the minor groove. The wing or b-hairpin of the DNA-binding domain of BirA does become protected from hydroxyl radical cleavage as a consequence of DNA binding, a result consistent with its hypothetical interaction with the DNA via the minor groove. Protection of

Transmission of allosteric information in BirA The observed alterations in the reactivity of regions of the C-terminal domain upon binding of biotin and bio-5H -AMP provide evidence for longrange transmission of allosteric information in the protein molecule. Scattered segments of the polypeptide chain that form the C-terminal domain exhibit small but reproducible decreases in cleavage in both complexes. This is despite the fact that the proposed binding site for the adenylate lies in the vicinity of the disordered loops 110-128 and 212-234. The small ligand-mediated structural changes probed by hydroxyl radical cleavage also include residues in the two loops 98-103 and 194199. As indicated above, we have characterized a D to Y mutation at position 197 which results in a repression minus phenotype. This mutant binds less tightly to bioO compared to wild-type BirA, and it is defective in bio-5H -AMP-induced dimerization. The observed protection of segments of the C-terminal domain from hydroxyl radicalmediated cleavage suggest that it functions in the enzymatic reaction and/or in site-speci®c binding to bioO. Signi®cantly, the magnitudes of the decreases in peak intensity observed for products resulting from cleavage in this domain are much greater in the ternary BirA Ábio-5H -AMP ÁbioO complex than in either binary small ligand complex.

Ligand-linked Structural Changes in the Biotin Repressor

629 ing of conformational changes in BirA provide a framework in which to further investigate the signi®cance of speci®c structural features of the protein for its function.

the turn and recognition helix of the HTH module is also consistent with its binding in the major groove of the DNA. The apparent absence of changes in the reactivity of the ®rst helix of the HTH may simply be a consequence of an inability to resolve the hydrolysis products in the size range corresponding to those expected from cleavage at the amino terminus of the protein. As BirA is a 321 amino acid protein, it is likely that the resolution in electrophoretic separation of products generated from cleavage of the protein in the N-terminal region is insuf®cient to identify changes in reactivity in the recognition helix. This includes residues 22-29 of helix 1 of the HTH module which are within 10 % of the full-length of the protein. Heyduk & Heyduk (1994) have reported a similar inability to reliably identify changes in hydroxyl radical cleavage at the termini of a protein sequence. In addition to the observed changes in reactivity in the N-terminal or DNA-binding domain of BirA upon binding bioO, signi®cant changes in the reactivity of the remainder of the protein to the cleavage reagent are observed. Although some of these changes undoubtedly re¯ect the formation of the monomer-monomer interface in the DNA-bound dimer, other decreases in reactivity may re¯ect a global change in the structure of the BirA monomer upon formation of the repression complex. An attempt was made to distinguish between protection due to formation of the protein-protein interface and that due to conformational changes within each monomer by perat forming cleavage of BirA Ábio-5H -AMP holorepressor concentrations at which the protein is primarily dimeric. However, as indicated in Results, no differences in the protection patterns were observed in comparing cleavage of the monomeric and dimeric holorepressor. This inability to map the monomer-monomer interface using hydroxyl radical footprinting may be due to the rapid kinetics of the protein assembly process relative to the incubation time required for the cleavage reaction. Other techniques will be required to dissect the structural basis of the observed changes in reactivity of BirA that are coupled to formation the repression complex. All ligand-mediated changes in the susceptibility of BirA to hydroxyl radical cleavage involve decreases in reactivity. This observation is consistent with a global tightening of the protein structure upon ligand binding. Although the loss in reactivity of the disordered loop regions is an extreme example of this tightening in structure, it extends to regions including the C-terminal domain that are structured in the absence of any ligand. While for biotin and bio-5H -AMP binding the decreases in reactivity are small, in the ternary complex approximately 50 % decreases in the intensities of peaks resulting from cleavage in this region are observed. We infer from these results that this domain for which no function has heretofore been assigned, plays a role in site-speci®c DNA binding (Figure 6). These results of hydroxyl radical prob-

Materials and Methods
Chemicals and biochemicals Restriction enzymes HindIII and EcoRI, phage T4 DNA ligase, and cAMP-dependent protein kinase were purchased from Promega. The [g33-P]ATP used in the labeling of proteins was from Amersham. The BNPSskatole was obtained from Pierce Chemical. Ferrous ammonium sulfate, sodium ascorbate, and EDTA, all 99  %, were from Aldrich. The 30 % H2O2, ACS grade, was from Fisher. The d-biotin, and ATP were purchased from Sigma. All other chemicals used in the preparation of buffers were reagent or analytical grade. Biotinyl-5H AMP was synthesized and puri®ed as previously described (Abbott & Beckett, 1993). The biotin operator, bioO, was constructed by hybridizing two, 50 bp oligonucleotides synthesized using standard chemistry. The sequence of the double-stranded oligonucleotide is as follows, with the operator sequence shown in upper case letters and the ®ve base-pair ¯anking sequences, identical with those found in the natural biotin operon context, shown in lower case letters (Otsuka & Abelson, 1978):
taatcGACTTGTAAACCAAATTAGAAAAGATTTAGGTTTACAAGTCtaac attagCTGAACATTTGGTTTAACTTTTCTAAATCCAAATGTTCAGatgtg

The two oligonucleotides were puri®ed by electrophoresis on a denaturing 10 % polyacrylamide gel to homogeneity. Hybridization of the oligonucleotides in 10 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, (pH 8.0) was performed by heating at 90  C for ten minutes and slow cooling to room temperature. The reaction was demonstrated to be complete by electrophoresis of the product on a native 10 % polyacrylamide gel. Construction of CTPKRS-BirA The gene designed for expression of C-terminal protein kinase recognition site BirA (CTPKRS-BirA) was ampli®ed from the plasmid pJMR1 (a gift from Anthony J. Otsuka) using primers encoding the recognition sequence for cAMP-dependent protein kinase (VRRAS), an N-terminal EcoRI site, and a C-terminal HindIII site. Ampli®cation of the BirA gene with these primers was performed using a Master Amp PCR kit (Epicentre Technologies). Following digestion with HindIII and EcoRI, the PCR product was ligated to the HindIII/EcoRIdigested plasmid pBtac 2. This plasmid was used to transform the strain JM109 using the CaCl2 method (Maniatis et al., 1982). Clones were screened for protein overexpression following induction using IPTG. Those showing induction of the correct-sized protein were sequenced (Sanger & Nicklen, 1977) and error-free clones retained for protein puri®cation. Protein purification The CTPKRS-BirA protein was expressed and puri®ed using the method developed for wild-type BirA (Abbott & Beckett, 1993) with the following changes. Proteins were overexpressed in JM109 cells grown at 30  C in

630
Luria Bertani medium containing 100 mg/ml ampicillin. Once the A600 of the cultures reached 0.9, IPTG was added to a ®nal concentration of 75 mg/ml and induction was allowed to proceed for three hours. Puri®cation thereafter followed the protocol developed for wild-type BirA. Chromatography was performed on a P11 cellulose phosphate (Whatman) column (3 cm Â 30 cm) equilibrated in 100 mM sodium phosphate (pH 6.5), 5 % (v/v) glycerol, and 0.1 mM DTT, employed a linear NaCl gradient (0-1.0 M NaCl). Pure CTPKRS-BirA was obtained by chromatography on an hydroxyapatite Ultrogel (Biosepra) column (1.5 cm Â 25 cm), as described for the wild-type BirA puri®cation. Pooled fractions containing CTPKRS-BirA were dialyzed against 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) at 4  C, 50 mM KCl, 5 % (v/v) glycerol, 0.1 mM DTT and loaded onto a Q Sepharose Fast Flow (Pharmacia) column (0.7 cm Â 10 cm) equilibrated in the same buffer. The protein eluted in the load fraction. The puri®ed protein was dialyzed into storage buffer (50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) at 4  C, 200 mM KCl, 5 % glycerol, 0.1 mM DTT) and stored in this buffer at À70  C. Protein concentrations were determined as described by Abbott & Beckett (1993). Biochemical characterization of the CTPKRSBirA protein The biochemical activity of the BirA derivative constructed for this study was characterized at multiple levels. The fractional activity in bio-5H -AMP binding was determined by stoichiometric titration of the protein with the ligand using the 40 % quenching of the intrinsic protein ¯uorescence signal that accompanies binding of the ligand to monitor the process (Abbott & Beckett, 1993). The time course of BirA-catalyzed bio-5H -AMP synthesis was utilized to measure the stoichiometry of the burst complex formed between the BirA derivative and bio-5H -AMP and the rate of dissociation of the BirA-bio-5H -AMP complex (Xu & Beckett, 1994). The unimolecular rate of dissociation of the BirA-derivative Á biotin complex and the initial rate of BirA-catalyzed bio-5H -AMP synthesis from substrates biotin and ATP were measured by stopped-¯ow ¯uorescence (Xu et al., 1995; Xu & Beckett, 1994). Site-speci®c binding of the derivative to bioO was measured by DNase I footprinting as described by Abbott & Beckett (1993). All stopped-¯ow ¯uorescence measurements were performed using a KinTek 2001 instrument. Steady-state ¯uorescence measurements were performed on either a SPEX Fluorolog 2 or an SLM 48000 instrument. End-labeling of proteins Radiolabeled CTPKRS-BirA was obtained using cAMP-dependent protein kinase (catalytic subunit) according to the methods described by Baichoo & Heyduk (1997) with the following changes. The reaction buffer used contained 20 mM Tris (pH 7.5) at 37  C, 100 mM NaCl, and 12 mM MgCl2. The [g-33P]ATP and DTT were added to ®nal concentrations of 0.2 mM and 1 mM, respectively. Each reaction contained 17 mM CTPKRS-BirA and 188 units of protein kinase. Reactions were allowed to proceed at 37  C for one hour. The reaction was batch-mixed with 2 ml of SP Sepharose Fast Flow resin (Pharmacia) equilibrated in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) at 4  C, 50 mM KCl, 5 % glycerol, incubated for ten minutes at 4  C , and transferred to a small column (0.8 cm Â 6 cm). The column was washed with six bed

Ligand-linked Structural Changes in the Biotin Repressor volumes of the same buffer and protein was eluted from it with 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) at 4  C, 333 mM KCl, 5 % glycerol. Fractions containing the radiolabeled protein, determined by liquid scintillation counting, were concentrated using an Ultrafree 4 centrifuge ®ltration device LMWCO 5000 (Millipore) and stored at À70  C. The concentration of each labeled protein was estimated by SDSPAGE using known quantities of unlabeled standards of the same protein. Generation of molecular mass standards Protein molecular mass markers for CTPKRS-BirA were generated using BNPS-skatole following the methods by Crimmins et al. (1990). BNPS-skatole cleaves proteins on the C-terminal side of tryptophan residues, of which BirA has seven. Partial cleavage of the labeled protein was performed by combining 60 ml of a 0.3 mg/ ml solution of BNPS-skatole in neat acetic acid with 20 ml of 1 mg/ml BirA derivative in 1 % (v/v) acetic acid in water. The reaction was carried out at room temperature in the dark for one minute after which 80 ml of water was added. The resulting mixture was vortexed and centrifuged for ®ve minutes to remove the precipitated BNPS-skatole, the supernatant was transferred to a clean Eppendorf tube, and the sample was dried by lyophilization. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 100 ml of water, vortexed repeatedly and the sample was again lyophilized to dryness. The ®nal pellet was resuspended in 150 ml storage buffer and stored at À70  C. Hydroxyl radical cleavage reactions Hydroxyl radical footprints were performed following a modi®cation of the methods described by Baichoo & Heyduk (1997). The buffer used in these reactions contained 10 mM Mops (pH 7.5) at 20  C, 200 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM CaCl2. Radiolabeled protein was exchanged into this buffer and concentrated using an Ultrafree 4 centrifuge ®ltration device (Millipore) immediately before use. The protein concentration was estimated from the cpm/ml of the recovered protein. Each 20 ml reaction contained approximately 2 mM [g-33P]PKRS-BirA and, where applicable, 10 mM biotinyl5H -AMP, 43 mM biotin, or 10 mM biotinyl-5H -AMP  1 mM bioO. The reactions were allowed to equilibrate at 20  C for ®ve minutes. Three solutions: 10 mM H2O2, 800 mM sodium ascorbate, and 40 mM Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2, 80 mM EDTA were prepared and incubated at 20  C. Hydroxyl radical cleavage was initiated by adding 2ml of each reagent as one drop on the inside wall of the tube and mixing it with the reaction. Reactions were incubated for 60 minutes at 20  C, quenched with 20 ml low molecular mass SDS-PAGE sample buffer (50 mM Tris (pH 6.8) at 20  C, 4 % (w/v) SDS, 30 % (v/v) glycerol, 0.67 mg/ml Coomassie brilliant blue G250), and stored at À70  C. One microliter of each reaction was counted by liquid scintillation and adjustments made for loading an equal number of counts in each gel lane. Reactions were loaded onto a 16 cm2 modi®ed Tris-tricine polyacrylÈ amide gel system described by Schagger & von Jagow (1987) consisting of a 16.8 % T, 6 % C separating gel, a 10 % T, 6 % C spacer gel, and a 4 % T, 6 % C stacking gel. The protein molecular mass markers were loaded alongside the reaction lanes. Electrophoresis was carried out using running buffer containing 0.1 M Tris, 0.1 M tricine, and 0.1 % SDS at 100 V through the stacking gel and increased to 600V for the remainder of the run. Gels

Ligand-linked Structural Changes in the Biotin Repressor were ®xed in 10 % acetic acid, 40 % methanol in water, transferred to 3MM Chr chromatography paper (Whatman), dried, and exposed overnight to a Molecular Dynamics (Sunnyvale, CA) storage phosphor screen.

631

References
Abbott, J. & Beckett, D. (1993). Cooperative binding of the repressor of biotin biosynthesis to the biotin operator. Biochemistry, 32, 9649-9656. Baichoo, N. & Heyduk, T. (1997). Mapping conformational changes in a protein: application of protein footprinting technique to cAMP-induced conformational changes of cAMP receptor protein (CRP). Biochemistry, 36, 10830-10836. Baichoo, N. & Heyduk, T. (1999). Mapping cyclic nucleotide-induced conformational changes in cyclicAMP receptor protein by a protein footprinting technique using different chemical proteases. Protein Sci. 8, 518-528. Barker, D. F. & Campbell, A. M. (1981). The birA gene of Escherichia coli encodes a biotin holoenzyme synthetase. J. Mol. Biol. 146, 451-467. Brenowitz, M., Senear, D. F., Shea, M. A. & Ackers, G. K. (1986). Quantitative DNase I footprint titration: a method for studying protein-DNA interactions. Methods. Enzymol. 130, 133-181. Buoncristiani, M. R., Howard, P. K. & Otsuka, A. J. (1986). DNA-binding and enzymatic domains of the bifunctional biotin operon repressor (BirA) of Escherichia coli. Gene, 44, 255-261. Cate, J. H., Gooding, A. R., Podell, E., Zhou, K., Golden, B. L., Kundrot, C. E., Cech, T. R. & Doudna, J. A. (1996). Crystal structure of a group I ribozyme domain: principles of RNA packing. Science, 273, 1678-1685. Crimmins, D. L., McCourt, D. W., Thoma, R. S., Scott, M. G., Macke, K. & Schwartz, B. D. (1990). In situ chemical cleavage of proteins immobilized to glass®ber and polyvinylidenedi¯uoride membranes: cleavage at tryptophan residues with 2-(2H -nitrophenylsulfenyl)-3-methyl-3H -bromoindolenine to obtain internal amino acid sequence. Anal. Biochem. 187, 27-38. Cronan, J. E., Jr (1989). The E. coli bio operon: transcriptional repression by an essential protein modi®cation enzyme. Cell, 58, 427-429. Dixon, W. J., Hayes, J. J., Levin, J. R., Weidner, M. F., Dombroski, B. A. & Tullius, T. D. (1991). Hydroxyl radical footprinting. Methods Enzymol. 208, 380-413. Eisenstein, E. & Beckett, D. (1999). Dimerization of the Escherichia coli biotin repressor: corepressor function in protein assembly. Biochemistry, In the press. Englander, S. W. & Englander, J. J. (1994). Structure and energy change in hemoglobin by hydrogen exchange labeling. Methods Enzymol. 232, 26-42. Ermacora, M. R., Ledman, D. W., Hellinga, H. W., Hsu, G. W. & Fox, R. O. (1994). Mapping staphylococcal nuclease conformation using an EDTA-Fe derivative attached to genetically engineered cysteine residues. Biochemistry, 33, 13625-13641. Greiner, D. P., Hughes, K. A., Gunasekera, A. H. & Meares, C. H. (1996). Binding of the s70 protein to the core subunits of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase, studied by iron-EDTA protein footprinting. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 71-75. Harrison, C. J., Bohm, A. A. & Nelson, H. C. M. (1994). Crystal structure of the DNA binding domain of the heat shock transcription factor. Nature, 263, 224227. Heyduk, E. & Heyduk, T. (1994). Mapping protein domains involved in macromolecular interactions: a novel protein footprinting approach. Biochemistry, 33, 9643-9650.

Data analysis The image of the electrophoretic pattern of the cleavage products obtained from exposure of a gel to a storage phosphor screen was used to produce line scans of the reaction and molecular mass marker lanes using the Image Quant software. The line scans for all lanes, including those corresponding to the molecular mass standards, the minus ligand control and the ligand bound samples, were normalized along the distance migrated axis by placing the apex of the peak corresponding to the uncut protein at the same position for all. In analyzing each pair of plus and minus ligand scans the two were normalized on the vertical or counts axis by setting the maximum for the uncut peak at the same number of counts for both. The validity of this normalization is based on the fact that the total extent of cleavage of the protein is less than 2 %, as judged by the fraction of the total counts found in bands corresponding to cleavage products versus the intact protein. Regions of changes in reactivity of the protein to hydroxyl radical cleavage were identi®ed by subtracting the plus ligand line scan from that corresponding to the minus ligand control to generate difference line scans for each complex. The endpoints of protected regions in each difference line scan were assigned based on their difference from the local background as well as the reproducibility with which they appeared in analyses of three independent experiments. A graph of the line scan of the molecular mass standard lane generated from BNPS-skatole cleavage of BirA was used to assign and calculate relative mobilities of the marker bands. These mobilities of the standards of known molecular mass were then used to generate a calibration curve for the gel by plotting the log(MW) versus relative mobility and ®tting the data to the equation for a line using Microsoft Excel to obtain the calibration constants (slope and intercept). The approximate molecular masses of the termini of difference peaks were assigned using these calibration constants. Residues corresponding to the termini of the appropriately sized fragments were assigned from the BirA amino acid sequence. In triplicate experiments the reproducibility with which the amino acid residues at the termini of the protected regions could be assigned was plus or minus two or three residues.The magnitude of the intensity decreases observed for the difference peaks for each plus/minus ligand pair were assigned to three categories, 5-20 %, 20-90 %, and 90-100 % decreases, based on the magnitude of the decrease in peak area observed. These assigments were reproducible in analysis of results of three independent footprinting measurements for each complex.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH grant RO1GM46551 to D.B.

632
Heyduk, T., Heyduk, E., Severinov, K., Tang, H. & Ebright, R. H. (1996). Determinants of RNA polymerase a subunit for interaction with b, bH and s subunits: hydroxyl-radical protein footprinting. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 10162-10166. È Koradi, R., Billeter, M. & Wuthrich, K. (1996). MOLMOL: a program for display and analysis of macromoleculer structures. J. Mol. Graph. 14, 51-55. Lane, M. D., Rominger, K. L., Young, D. L. & Lynen, F. (1964). The enzymatic synthesis of holotranscarboxylase from apotranscarboxylase and () biotin. II. Investigation of the reaction mechanism. J. Biol. Chem. 239, 2865-2871. Latham, J. A. & Cech, T. R. (1989). De®ning the inside and outside of a catalytic RNA molecule. Science, 245, 276-282. Livnah, O., Bayer, E. A., Wilchek, M. & Sussman, J. L. (1993). Three-dimensional structure of avidin and the avidin-biotin complex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 90, 5076-5080. Maniatis, T., Fritsch, E. F. & Sambrook, J. (1982). Molecular Cloning, A Laboratory Manual, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY. McKay, D. B. & Steitz, T. A. (1981). Structure of cataboÊ lite gene activator protein at 2.9 A resolution suggests binding to left-handed B-DNA. Nature, 290, 744-749. Miles, E. W. (1991). The tryptophan synthase a2b2 complex. J. Biol. Chem. 266, 10715-10718. Otsuka, A. J. & Abelson, J. (1978). The regulatory region of the biotin operon in Escherichia coli. Nature, 276, 689-693. Owens, J. T., Miyake, R., Murakami, K., Chmuru, A. J., Fujita, N., Ishihama, A. & Meares, C. F. (1998). Mapping the s70 subunit contact sites on Escherichia coli RNA polymerase with a s70-conjugated chemical protease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 6021-6026. Perutz, M. (1990). Mechanism of Cooperativity and Allosteric Regulation in Proteins, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. Prakash, O. & Eisenberg, M. A. (1979). Biotinyl 5H adenylate: corepressor role in the regulation of the biotin genes of Escherichia coli K-12. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 76, 5592-5595.

Ligand-linked Structural Changes in the Biotin Repressor Reising, K. A. & Ahn, N. G. (1998). Deuterium exchange mass spectrometry as a probe of protein kinase activation. Analysis of wild-type and constitutively active mutants of MAP kinase kinase-1. Biochemistry, 37, 463-475. Sanger, F., Nicklen, S. & Coulson, A. R. (1977). DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 74, 5463-5487. È Schagger, H. & von Jagow, G. (1987). Tricine-dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis for the separation of proteins in the range from 1 to 100 kDa. Anal. Biochem. 166, 368-379. Schultz, S. C., Shields, G. C. & Steitz, T. A. (1991). Crystal structure of a CAP-DNA complex: the DNA is bent by 90 degrees. Science, 253, 1001-1007. Streaker, E. D. & Beckett, D. (1998a). Coupling of sitespeci®c DNA binding to protein dimerization in assembly of the biotin repressor-biotin operator complex. Biochemistry, 37, 3210-3219. Streaker, E. D. & Beckett, D. (1998b). A map of the biotin repressor-biotin operator interface: binding of a winged helix-turn-helix protein dimer to a 40 base-pair site. J. Mol. Biol. 278, 787-800. Tissot, G., Douce, R. & Alban, C. (1997). Evidence for multiple forms of biotin holocarboxylase synthetase in pea (Pisum sativum) and in Arbidopsis thaliana: subcellular fractionation studies and isolation of a cDNA clone. Biochem. J. 323, 179-188. Wilson, K. P., Shewchuk, L. M., Brennan, R. G., Otsuka, A. J. & Matthews, B. W. (1992). The E. coli biotin holoenzyme synthetase/bio repressor crystal structure delineates the biotin and DNA-binding domains. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 89, 9257-9261. Xu, Y. & Beckett, D. (1996). Evidence for inter-domain interaction in the Escherichia coli repressor of biotin biosynthesis from studies of an N-terminal domain deletion mutant. Biochemistry, 35, 1783-1792. Xu, Y., Nenortas, E. & Beckett, D. (1995). Evidence for distinct ligand-bound conformational states of the multifunctional Escherichia coli repressor of biotin biosynthesis. Biochemistry, 34, 16624-16631. Xu, Y., Johnson, C. R. & Beckett, D. (1996). Thermodynamic analysis of binding of the Escherichia coli repressor of biotin biosynthesis to small ligands. Biochemistry, 35, 5509-5517.

Edited by M. Gottesman (Received 8 April 1999; received in revised form 15 July 1999; accepted 23 July 1999)

