A new view of a.n old pump: bacteriorhodopsin
J6rg Tittor
Max-Planck-lnstitut f6r Biochemie, Martinsried, Germany An atomic model based on a high-resolution three-dimensional map of bacteriorhodopsin together with functional studies of the mutagenized protein have provided new insights into the molecular Mechanism of proton translocation.

Current Opinion in Structural Biology 1991, 1:534-538 Introduction
Bactefiorhodopsin (BR) is a light-driven proton pump in the plasma membrane of Halobacteria. In its mature and functional form, it is a 26 kD chromoprotein with an alltrans retinal (Fig. 1) covalently linked via a protonated Schiff base to Lys216. It is one of only a few proteins that occur naturally in two-dimensional crystalline arrays, the purple membrane, which consist of 30% lipid and 70% protein. Upon capture of a photon, the retinal isomerizes around the 13-14 double bond (Fig. 1), a reaction which occurs very quickly (within 0.45 ps) [ 1,2] and with a quantum yield of 0.64 [3-5]. This isomerization leads to a release of the Schiff-base proton to the extraceHular side of the membrane, the reprotonation from the cytoplasmic side and protein-catalyzed reisomerization within --, 10 ms under physiological conditions. The absorbance maximum of the protein when the proton is released from the Schiff base is drastically changed from 568 nm to 412 nm. This latter (M) form of BR is characterized by its absorbance maximum and the C13 c/s, C15 anti configuration of the retinal (Fig. 1 ) and is the key intermediate during function. Under steady-state illumination, this vectorial catalysis of proton release and reuptake leads to a proton gradient across the cell membrane which is used by an ATPase to form ATP. This means of ATP production, an alternative to respiration, enables Halobacteria to live under conditions of high salt (up to 25% NaCl), high temperatures and markedly reduced oxygen levels. The first part of this review focuses on advances in elucidating the structure of BR by electron microscopy, neutron diffraction and X-ray crystallography. The results of these structural analyses provide a firm base for functional analyses such as spectroscopic and electrical measurements, w h i c h are discussed in the second part. The emerging structure-function relationships in BR have m a d e the past 12 months particularly exciting. proposed by Henderson and co-workers [6-.]. For the first time, electron microscopy was used to obtain nearatomic resolution of a protein - - in this case, a membrane protein, for which three-dimensional crystallization is still difficult and the quality, of crystals is not always reproducible. Through the combined analysis of larger areas of images obtained from tilted and untilted specimens of BR and the correction of distortions by image processing, the resolution of the phases was markedly improved. Subsequently, combining the phases calculated from these images with electron diffraction amplitudes yielded a three-dimensional electron-density, map of the structure. The actual resolution was 3.5A in sections parallel to the membrane plane, but lower (10~.) in the direction perpendicular to this plane. However, protrusions from the main densit3, of the seven a-helices were assigned to tyrosines, phenylalanines and tryptophans which then guided the assignments of smaller protrusions to the side chains of smaller amino acids, such as methionine, leucine and threonine. Furthermore, the cyclohexene ring of retinal was seen as a very dense region located well inside the ring formed by the seven a-helices and closer to the extracellular rather than the intracellular side of the protein. The more exact localization of the retinal was revealed by neutron-diffraction and linear-dichroism measurements (see below). Nevertheless, the uncertainty, associated with the structure means that further efforts at refinement are required. In an attempt to improve the phase accuracy., Ceska and Henderson [7 °] used heaw-atom labelling in a very thorough study. Despite the fact that two promising derivatives were found, the accuracy of phase measurement could not be improved. Nonetheless, the phases from every model can now be rigorously tested against those obtained experimentally. Another approach involved investigating another crystal type of the purple membrane - - the orthorhombic form [8"]. This form has proved to be ideal for testing the accuracy of phase determination b e c a u s e the phases of the structure factors in the projection down the orthorhombic twofold axis should be either 0 ° or 180 °. The results show that the final phases were less accurate than previously estimated and that only minor differences exist between the two crystal forms.

Structure
The past year of BR research was dominated by the evaluation of a model for the structure of the chromoprotein

Abbreviations BR--bacteriorhodopsin; Fl'lR--Fourier-transformed infrared spectroscopy. 534 (~ Current Biology Ltd ISSN 0959-440X

Bacteriorhodopsin Tittor

535

(a)

~
14

~Lys216

(b)

I Lys216

(c) Lys216
I H

13-c/s isomerization is compensated by an additional one at the Schiff-base bond, leading to a 15-syn configuration. The importance of this observation is clarified by the easily observable structural change in difference maps of the M intermediate and the light-adapted ground state [13]. In this state, the chromophore also adopts the 13-c/sconfiguration but this isomerization is not compensated by an isomerization around the Schiff-base. In this experiment, the M state was trapped at - 180 °C where it is stable for days; the main structural changes occurred at positions on the Schiff base as well as the cyclohexene ring. These observations were confirmed for physiological conditions by a time-resolved X-ray study using the mutant Asp96Asn [14.,]; the decay rate of M at room temperature and pH 7.0 was reduced by a factor of 50. The light-induced structural changes of BR could be monitored with a time resolution of 15ms. Timeresolved neutron and X-ray diffraction are very exciting new approaches to studying structure-function relationships in proteins. Neutron diffraction was again successfully applied in determining the orientation of the polyene chain of retinal within the protein. Using two different specifically deuterated retinals, one with five deuterons as close as possible to the Schiff base, and the other with 11 deuterons at the cyclohexene ring, the transmembrane location of the retinal was determined [15"]. The chromophore was found to be tilted 40+ 12" to the plane of the membrane, and the Schiff base was located near the middle of the membrane. Function Since point-mutated BRs first became available, our knowledge of the role of specific side groups in the function of the protein has drastically increased. Many biophysical methods have been applied to these mutants (for an excellent recent review see [16..]) and cannot all be discussed in this short summary. Summarizing the results from many laboratories, the proton-conducting pathway is formed by the helices surrounding the Schiff base, confirming the structural results described above (Fig. 2) [13,14.-]. This proton-conducting pathway can be divided into two halves. The cytoplasmic channel connects the cytoplasm with the Schiff base; its activity is regulated by the location of Asp96, and is concerned with reprotonation of the Schiff base and reisomerization of the retinal. The second half of the pathway is the extracellular channel connecting the Schiff base and the extracellular bulk phase. This half of the channel is functionally dominated by Asp85, Asp212 and Arg82 and represents the proton-release path. In several spectroscopic studies, Asp85 has been shown to serve as the proton acceptor when the Schiff base is deprotonated [17,18], whereas Asp96 serves as the internal donor for Schiff-base reprotonation [19,20], making the protonpumping process pH-independent over a large pH range [21]. These findings have been confirmed by a very thorough time-resolved Fourier-transformed infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) study in which amino acid side-group and

Fig. 1.Chemical configuration of retinal adopted during the bacteriorhodopsin photocycle. (a) AII-trans, 15-anti retinal (lightadapted initial state); (b) 13-cis, 15-anti retinal (major intermediate in photocycle). (c) 13-cis, 15-syn retinal (present in dark-adapted bacteriorhodopsin). A second very important set of experiments exploring structural features has used neutron diffraction. The advantages of this method for the study of biological membranes are the higher contrast obtained between protein and protein-associated water and between protein and lipid compared with that attained by electron scattering. In addition, the difference between the neutronscattering lengths of 1H and 2H is larger than that of electrons and additionally changes its sign ( - 3.7 fm to 6.67 fm), thus making deuteron labelling advantageous. A very important result from such experiments using fully hydrated samples and others measured at 15% relative humidity was a difference density peak in the projection map corresponding to 11 + 2 exchangeable protons around the Schiff base [9"]. Furthermore, it was concluded that eight of these protons belong to (four) water molecules. This is the first direct evidence that water is tightly bound close to the retinal-binding site and that the remaining exchangeable protons may participate in the proton-pumping process. Using difference maps of neutron diffraction, structural changes between different states can be monitored. A half-time of 26 h at 5"C allows enough time for data acquisition for the transition of fully light-adapted BR (chromophore in aU.trans configuration) to the dark-adapted form (mixture of all-trans and 13-c/s isomers) [10]. No structural changes were observed, confirming earlier measurements obtained by resonance raman spectroscopy [ 11 ] and NMR [ 12] which suggested that the

536

Membrane. proteins

H+

Cytoplasma

~
~

D ~J

S

p96

Lys216
Asp212-

[]

G

H÷

Fig. 2. Schematic representation of bacteriorhodopsin within the lipid bilayer. Amino acid residues involved in proton transport are shown together with the path of the proton through the membrane. Additional amino acids may be involved but have not as yet been identified. The boxed numbers indicate the sequence of the photocycle reactions.

chromophore protonation changes, as well as backbone motion were recorded simultaneously and shown to occur in a synchronized manner [22.]. The crucial question then arises: what causes the protonated Schiff base serving as a proton donor in the pre-M state delivering the proton to Asp85 (and then changing to perform an acceptor function) to accept the proton from Asp96 (during the decay of the M-state) and not from Asp85? An evaluation of the thermodynamic parameters of reactions during the BR photocycle, as previously performed for halorhodopsIn [23"], has shown that part of the energy after proton absorption is retained as a free energy change to shift the pK a of the chromophore, so enabling deprotonation [24..]. The excess free energy change is used to drive the 'switch' step, i.e. the transition between two slightly different M states, M 1 and M2, in which the Schiff base returns to its initial pKa value (becoming a proton acceptor) and regains a proton from Asp96. The recovery of the initial state is an entropy-driven reaction.

After reprotonation, reisomerization to the initial all-trans retinal is kinetically favoured [25]. It is important to note that the pKa values of Asp85 ( < 3 . 5 ) and Asp96 ( > 8 ) actually underline their assigned function despite the fact that the pKa values of internal groups, which do not equilibrate with the bulk phase, have not been defined. The experimental evidence for the MI-+M 2 transition comes from kinetic anomalies in the decay of states K and L (which precede the M state) and additionally from measurements with detergent (Triton X100)-solubilized BR A 4 nm separation of the maximal absorbance of two different M states with an observed transition from one to the other argues for the existence of M1 and M2 at least in detergent-solubilized BR [26,]. In support of the idea that the crucial M t --+M2 transition represents the switch step, an FTIR study has demonstrated that a conformational change in the chromoprorein is necessary to direct proton uptake of the Schiff base from Asp96 and not from Asp85 [27.]. The route of reprotonation was shown to change from Asp85 to

BacteriorhodopsinTittor 537
Asp96 between 240 K and 260 K, coupled to a change of the amide I bands at 1658cm -1 and 1669 cm -1, respectively. Another intriguing question addresses the specificity of ion transport. One set of experiments has shown that bacteriorhodopsin at pH 0.5 produces light- and aniondependent steady-state currents, suggesting that at lower pH values the pump loses its physiological proton-pump activity and turns into an anion-pump [28,29",30"]. This is interesting because in a closely related anion pump in Halobacteria, Asp85 and Asp96 (described above) are replaced by a threonine and an alanine residue, respectively. Consequently, the structure of the anion-binding site in halorhodopsin may be understood by comparisons with those of BR. (For a recent review concerning the similarities and differences of bacteriorhodopsin and halorhodopsin, see [31].)
This is the most important reference cited in this review. A detailed description is given of the way in which the structural model is evaluated. This study is highly recommended to the reader interested in electron microscopy. CESKA TA, HENDERSON R: Alla~is of High-Resolution Electron Diffraction Patterns from Purple Membrane Labelled with Heavy-Atoms. J Mol Biol 1990, 213:539-560. An attempt to use heavy-atom labelling in electron diffraction to yield an independent phase determination. Despite the lack of success in improving the phase accuracy derived from images, this very detailed and thorough study does produced two label candidates that may be useful in BR crysralliTation. 7. ·
8.

BULLOUGH HENDERSONR: Phase Accuracy ill High-Re.soPA, lution Electron Microscopy of Trigonal and Orthorhombic Purple Membrane. BiophysJ 1990, 58:705--711. A second crystal form of the purple membrane (orthorhombic) is used as an independent check on the accuracy of phase determination. .
PAPADOPOULOSG, DENCHER NA, ZACCAI G, BOLDT G: Water Molecules and Exchangeable Hydrogen Ions at the Active Centre of Bacteriorhodopsin Localized by Neutron Diffraction. J Mol Biol 1990, 214:15-19. The authors measure the difference densities in fully and partially hydrated BR, determining the location of water molecules in the projection map. Together with the knowledge of how many hydrogens (11 4- 2) can be exchanged by deuterons, this paper localizes the proton translocation pathway. 9.

··

Summary
The recent progress in BR research has led to insights into the principles of ion transport on a molecular level. Structural methods have generated a model of nearatomic resolution and have extended the limit of our understanding of structural changes associated with function. In addition, a variety of spectroscopic (visible, NMR and FTIR) and electrical methods have contributed to our understanding of the mechanism of the transport function. In particular, we have begun to understand the thermodynamic coupling that exists between the conformations of retinal and the protein, although many details still elude us. Thus, the hope that we might fully understand the structure-function relationship in BR, the simplest membrane transport protein known, and that we might thus be afforded some general insight into membrane transport principles, has been satisfied at least in part during the past year.

DENCHERNA, PAPADOPOULOSG, DRESSELHAUSD, BOLDT G: Light- and Dark Adapted Bacteriorhodopsin, a Time Resolved Neutron Diffraction Study. Biochem Biophys Acta 1990, 1026:51-56. This study proves that the structural changes reported in [9 ··] are the result of 13-cisisomerization, which also occurs in dark-adapted BR; the additional isomerization around the Schiff base minimizes the structural changes below the level of resolution in these experiments (7A.). 11. SMITHSO, MYERS AB, P ~ E N JA, WINKEL C, MULDER PPJ, LUGTENBURGJ, MATHIES R: D e t e r m i n a t i o n of Retinal Schiff Base Configuration in Bacteriorhodopsin. Proc Naa Acad Sci USA 1984, 81:2055-2059. SMITH SO, COURTINJ, VAN DER BERG E, WINKELC, LUGTENBURG
J, HER72ELD J, GRIFIN R: Solid-State t3C NMR of the Retinal

10.

12,

Chromophore in Photointermediates of Bacteriorhodopsin: Characterization of Two Forms of M. B/ochem/stry 1989, 28:237-243. 13. DENCHER NA, DRESSEIMAUSD, ZACCAIG, BOLDT G: Structural Changes in Bacteriorhodopsin During Proton Translocation Revealed by Neutron Diffraction. Proc Naa Acad Sci USA 1989, 86:7876-7879.

References and recommended reading
Papers of special interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as: · of interest ·. of outstanding interest 1. DOBERJ, ZaNTH W, KAISERW, OESTERHELT D: Excited-State Reaction Dynamics of Bacteriorhodopsin Studied by Fernto.second Spectroscopy. Cbem Pbys Lett 1988, 144:215-220. MATHIES BRrro CRUZ CH, POLLARDWT, SHANKCV: Direct RA, Observation of the Femtosecond Excited-State ci&trans lsomerization in Bacteriorhodopsin. Science 1988, 240:777-779. Trl'roR J, OESTERHELT D: The Quantum Yield of Bacteriorhodopsin. FEBS Lett 1990, 263:269-273. GOVlNDJEE BALASHOVSP, EBREY TG: Quantum Efficiency R, of the Photochemical Cycle of Bacteriorhodopsin. B ~ b y s J 1990, 58:597-608. xm A: The Quantum Etliciency of Bacteriorhodopsin Photochemical Reactions. BiophysJ 1990, 58:1127-1132. HENDERSON BALDWINJM, CESKATA, ZEMUNF, BECKMANNE, R, DOWNING KH: Model for the Structure of Bacteriorhodopsin Based on High-Resolution Electron Cryo-Microscopy. J Mol Biol 1990, 213:899-929. 14. ··

KOCHMHJ, DENCHERNA, OESTERHELTD, PLOHN H-J, RAPP G, BOLDT Time Resolved X-Ray Diffraction Study of StrucG: tural Changes Associated with the Photocycle of Bacterio rhodopsin. EMBO J 1990, 10:521-526. Direct proof that structural changes are inherent to the BR photocycle, extending the data reported in [13] by the fact that measurements are obtained under physiological conditions. HAUSST, GRESZIEK S, OTTO H, WESTERHAUSENJ, HEYN MP: Transmembrane Location of Retinal in Bacteriorhodopsin by Neutron Diffraction. B/~w..hem/str'y1990, 29:4904-4913. The direction of the polyene chain and the location of the Schiff base with respect to the membrane surface are determined using partially labelled retinals. 16. TRISSLHW: Photoelectric Measurements of Purple Mem·· branes. Photoc.t2era Photobiol 1990, 51:793-818. A very detailed review summarizing the results obtained from electrical measurements of BR and its mutants. 17. OTro H, MAma T, Hotz M, MOGI T, STERN LJ, ENGEL F, KHORANAHG, HEYN MP: Substitution of Amino Acids Asp85, Asp212 and Arg82 in Bacteriorhodopsin Affects the P r o t o n Phase of the Pump and the pK of the SchilI Base. Pro¢ Naa Acad Sci USA 1990, 87:1018--1022. 15. ·

2.

3. 4.

5. 6.
o·

538

Membrane proteins
18. Btrrr H-J, FENDLER K, BAMBERG E, TrrroR J~ OESTERHELT D: Aspartic Acids 96 and 85 Play a Central Role in t h e Function o f Bacteriorhodopsin as a Proton Pump. EMBOJ 1989, 8:1657-1663. GERWERT HESS B, SOPPAJ, OES'TEP, K, HELT D: Role of Aspartate 96 in Proton Translocation by Bacteriorhodopsin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989, 86:4943-4947. HOLZM, DRACt-mVL, MOGI T, OTTO H, KAULENA, HEYN MP, SKULACHEVVP, KHOgANAG: Replacement of Aspartic Acid 96 by Asparagine in Bacteriorhodopsin Slows Both the Decay o f t h e M Intermediate and the Associated Proton Movement. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989, 86:2167-2171. MIU.ER A, OESTERHELT D: Kinetic Optimization of Bacteriorhodopsin by Aspartic Acid 96 as an Internal Proton Donor. Biochim Biophys Acta 1990, 1020:57-64. VAROG, LAN~ JK: Kinetic and Spectroscopic Evidence for an Irreversible Step Between Deprotonation and Reprotonation. Biochemist O, 1991, 30:5008-5015. This paper focuses on crucial irreversible transition between the two different M fomls. The kinetic anab,sis of absorbance changes and the demonstration of two spectroscopical different M-forms in detergentsolubilized BR argue for the existence of two M forms. ORMOSP: Infrared Spectroscopic Demonstration of a ConformationaI Change in Bacteriorhodopsin Involved in Proton Pumping. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991, 88:47.ar-477. A demonstration that changes in the reprotonaUon pathway of BR coincide with conformational change of the protein. This proves that the vectorialittty of the proton" translocation is coupled to a crucial step in the protein and not to isomerization of the retinal alone. 28. KE.";~EUtq L, SZARAZ S, DER A, STOECKENIUS W: Bacteriorhodopsin and Halorhodopsin: Multiple Ion Pumps. Bi~_.lMm Bioph~s Acta 1990, 1018:260-262. 27. . 26. .

19.

20.

21.

GERWERTK, SOUVlGN1ER G, HESS B: Simultaneous Monitoring o f Light-lnduced C h a n g e s in Protein Side-Group Protonation, C h r o m o p h o r e Isomerization and Backbone Motion of Bacteriorhodopsin by Time-Resolved Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy. Proc Nail Acad Sci USA 1990, 87: 9774-9778. A global-fit analysis of the parameters indicating chromophore change, protein backbone motion and amino acid side chain protonation changes proves that all these events occur in a synchronized manner. This study highlights the power of the time-resolved FTIR method. SPENCER DB, DEWEY TG: Activation Parameters for the Halorhodopsin Photocycle: a Phase Lifetime Spectroscopic Study of t h e 520 and 640 N a n o m e t e r Intermediate. Bio chem~try 1990, 29:3140-3145. A quantitative analysis of the activation parameters in the halorhodopsin photocycle which shows that it is not the changes in free energy but changes in the entropy that drive some steps in the photocycle.
23. ·

22. .

DER A, SZARAZ S, TOTH-BOCONADI R, TOKAJI ZS, KESZTHELYI L, STOECKENIUS W: Alternative Translocation of Proton and Halide ions by Bacteriorhodopsin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991, 88:4751--4755. This stud3' uses the same method as that demribed in [28[, but ex panding the current measurements to time resolution. A model for the anion-binding site in BR is given (adapted from [30*]) and discussed with respect to its possible significance for halorhodopsin.
·

29.

VAROG, LANYIJK: T h e r m o d y n a m i c s and Energy Coupling in the Bacteriorhodopsin Photocycle. Biochemist~. 1991, 30:5016-5022. This paper focuses on the unanswered question in the function of BR of where the coupling step between retinal and protein conformaUonal changes is located. By determining the Arrhenius parameters of the re. actions of the photocycle, the enthalpy and entropy changes for the reactions are calculated and discussed in the context of principles of membrane t_mnsport. 25. TAVANP, SCHULTEN K, OESTERHELT D: T h e Effect of Protonation and Electrical Interactions o n the Stereochemistry of Retinal Schiff Bases. BiophysJ 1986, 47:415-430.

24. ·o

DE GROOT HJM, SMITH SO, COURTINJ, ','AN DER BERG E, WINKEL C, LUGTENBURGJ, GRIFFIN RG, HERZFELI)J: Solid-state tSNMR Study of the Low pH forms of Bacteriorhodopsin. Biocbem/stO, 1990, 29:6873-6883. A vet3, detailed study of the influence of pH on the Schiff-base nitrogen, showing the importance of the counterion being responsible for colour shifts. This counterion effect is described a.s a 'complex' one, meaning that the spatial charge of several ions in the neightx)urhix.-d contribute to the observed effects. In addition, the effect on anion binding at low pH values is demonstrated. 31. OESTERHELT Trrroa J: T w o Pumps, O n e Principle. Trends D, Biochem Sci 1989, 14:57%1.

30. .

J Tittor, Max-Planck-lnstitut for Biochemie, D-8033 Martinsried, Germany.

