Cell, Vol. 97, 767­777, June 11, 1999, Copyright ©1999 by Cell Press

Rescue of Cyclin D1 Deficiency by Knockin Cyclin E

Yan Geng,* Wendy Whoriskey,* Mary Y. Park, Roderick T. Bronson, Rene H. Medema,§ Tiansen Li, Robert A. Weinberg, and Piotr Sicinski*# * Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Pathology Harvard Medical School Boston, Massachusetts 02115  Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142  Department of Pathology Tufts University Schools of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine Boston, Massachusetts 02111 § Jordan Laboratory Department of Hematology University Medical Center Utrecht 3584 CX The Netherlands Berman-Gund Laboratory for the Study of Retinal Degenerations Harvard Medical School Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary Boston, Massachusetts 02114

Summary D-type cyclins and cyclin E represent two very distinct classes of mammalian G1 cyclins. We have generated a mouse strain in which the coding sequences of the cyclin D1 gene (Ccnd1) have been deleted and replaced by those of human cyclin E (CCNE). In the tissues and cells of these mice, the expression pattern of human cyclin E faithfully reproduces that normally associated with mouse cyclin D1. The replacement of cyclin D1 with cyclin E rescues all phenotypic manifestations of cyclin D1 deficiency and restores normal development in cyclin D1­dependent tissues. Thus, cyclin E can functionally replace cyclin D1. Our analyses suggest that cyclin E is the major downstream target of cyclin D1. Introduction Cyclins constitute critical components of the core cell cycle machinery in eukaryotic cells. They function to activate and provide substrate specificity to their partners, the cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). Two classes of cyclins are expressed in mammalian cells during the G1 phase of the cell cycle: D-type cyclins (cyclins D1, D2, and D3) and cyclin E (Sherr, 1993). Although these proteins are collectively referred to as "G1 cyclins," there are profound differences between the two G1 cyclin classes. While the three D-type cyclins share very
# To whom correspondence should be addressed (e-mail: piotr_ sicinski@dfci.harvard.edu).

similar amino acid sequence (over 70% identity), they display only weak sequence relatedness with cyclin E (38% within the most conserved "cyclin box" domain) (Inaba et al., 1992; Xiong et al., 1992). In fact, cyclin E shares more similarity with the S phase­ and M phase­ specific cyclins A, B1, and B2 than with the D-type cyclins (Xiong et al., 1992). The expression of these two classes of G1 cyclins occurs at different points of cell cycle progression and is governed by distinct mechanisms. Thus, the expression of D-type cyclins is controlled largely and perhaps entirely by extracellular signals. Cyclin D1 in particular is rapidly induced following mitogen challenge; its levels rapidly decline when mitogens are withdrawn or when antimitogens are added. For this reason, D-cyclins are regarded as functional links between the extracellular environment and the cell cycle machinery (Sherr, 1993). In contrast to the regulation of the D-type cyclins, the expression of cyclin E is controlled by an autonomous mechanism and peaks suddenly at the G1/S boundary. Once induced, D-cyclins bind and activate CDK4 and CDK6, while cyclin E associates with an entirely different catalytic partner, CDK2. Moreover, the cyclin D ­ and cyclin E­associated CDK complexes are activated at different times during cell cycle progression, cyclin D ­CDK4/6 complexes being active during the mid-G1 phase, whereas active cyclin E-CDK2 complexes are found at the G1/S boundary (Sherr, 1993). The activity of cyclin D ­ CDK4/6 complexes is negatively controlled by association with inhibitory molecules belonging to the INK4 family of CDK inhibitors. In contrast, cyclin E ­ CDK2 complexes appear to be immune to inhibition by members of this family of proteins (Sherr and Roberts, 1995). In the past, we and others generated mice lacking cyclin D1 using gene targeting in embryonal stem cells (Fantl et al., 1995; Sicinski et al., 1995). We found that these cyclin D1 / mice display several distinct tissuespecific phenotypes, namely a neurologic abnormality, hypoplastic retinas, and the failure to undergo normal mammary epithelial development during pregnancy. In the present study, we have used the properties of these cyclin D1­deficient mice as a tool to gauge the specific roles of cyclin D1 versus cyclin E in cell proliferation. To this end, we have created a cyclin ED1 knockin strain of mice in which the coding exons of the cyclin D1 gene (Ccnd1) have been deleted and replaced by a human cyclin E (CCNE) cDNA. Like the cyclin D1 / mice, these cyclin ED1 mice lack cyclin D1 but express cyclin E in its place. By studying the phenotypes of these mice, we have asked whether cyclin E can functionally substitute for cyclin D1 in various tissues of the mouse and rescue the phenotypic manifestations of cyclin D1 deficiency. Results Generation of Cyclin ED1 Knockin Mice In order to replace the coding sequences of cyclin D1 gene with that of cyclin E, we prepared a gene-targeting

Cell 768

Figure 1. Replacement of the Cyclin D1 Gene by Cyclin E (A) Restriction map of the mouse cyclin D1 gene and the structure of cyclin ED1 knockin vector. The coding exons are depicted as boxes and are numbered. Genomic fragments used as probes for Southern blotting are marked (probes A and B); arrows denote PCR primers (C, D, and E) used for genotyping the animals. Cyclin D1 un-trans, 5 -untranslated region of cyclin D1; PGKNeo, the neomycin transferase gene; PGKTK, thymidine kinase gene. Restriction enzyme sites: X, XbaI; E, EagI; H, HindIII; R, EcoRI; K, KpnI; Xh, XhoI; St, StuI; Sa, SalI; Sf, SfiI. (B) Western blot analysis of extracts prepared from indicated tissues or from embryonal fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from wild-type (WT), cyclin ED1 (KI), or cyclin D1 / mice (KO) probed with indicated antibodies. (C) Western blot analysis of extracts prepared from indicated tissues derived from wild-type (WT) or cyclin ED1 (KI) mice probed with indicated antibodies.

construct in which the coding exons of the cyclin D1 gene were removed and replaced with a human cyclin E cDNA (Figure 1A). The use of a human cyclin rather than its mouse homolog enables us to distinguish between the product of the introduced human cyclin E gene and the endogenous mouse cyclin E protein, using an antibody that recognizes human cyclin E but not its mouse counterpart. Mouse and human cyclin E display 85% sequence similarity, and for this reason, we predicted that they would be functionally interchangeable. The knockin construct was electroporated into embryonal stem (ES) cells, and heterozygous ES cells in which a homologous recombination event occurred were identified by Southern blotting. Heterozygous ES cells were then injected into mouse blastocysts, yielding chimeric mice. The chimeric mice were bred to produce cyclin ED1/ heterozygotes that were then crossed, giving rise to the cyclin ED1 homozygous knockin mice described below. Patterns of Cyclin D1 and Cyclin E Expression in the Knockin Mice To verify that the homozygous cyclin ED1 mice indeed lack cyclin D1, we prepared protein lysates from tissues derived from these animals, from control wild-type mice, and from cyclin D1 / mice and probed these lysates with anti-cyclin D1 antibodies. These analyses confirmed the absence of cyclin D1 protein in the tissues of cyclin ED1 mice (Figure 1B). Reprobing of the same blots with antibodies directed against human cyclin E revealed the presence of human cyclin E in the tissues of cyclin ED1 mice but not in those of wild-type or cyclin D1 / mice (Figure 1B). The knockin vector used here was designed to place the expression of human cyclin E under control of the mouse cyclin D1 promoter. Accordingly, we anticipated that human cyclin E would be expressed in tissue compartments that normally express cyclin D1. To test this prediction, we first determined the normal expression pattern of cyclins D1 and E in the tissues of wild-type animals using Western blotting.

As is evident from Figure 1C, the two cyclins showed very distinct, tissue-specific patterns of expression in wild-type mice. For instance, cyclin D1 levels were found to be high in the lung but low in the brain; the converse was true for cyclin E. We then prepared protein lysates from corresponding tissues of homozygous cyclin ED1 mice and probed them with an antibody that specifically recognizes human cyclin E but not its mouse counterpart. These analyses revealed that in the tissues of the knockin mice, human cyclin E is expressed in a tissuespecific fashion that precisely mirrors that of cyclin D1 in wild-type animals (Figure 1C). We then asked whether human cyclin E in cells of cyclin ED1 mice was expressed in the same parts of the cell cycle in which cyclin D1 is normally expressed. To address this issue, we isolated mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from cyclin ED1 or control wildtype mice and cultured these cells in vitro. The MEFs were rendered quiescent by serum deprivation and then stimulated to enter the cell cycle by serum addition; the entrance of cells into S phase was determined by measuring tritiated thymidine uptake. These analyses revealed that both wild-type and cyclin ED1 cells entered the S phase synchronously and with the same lag period, beginning at 15 hr following serum stimulation (not shown). We then prepared protein lysates from cells harvested at different time points after serum addition and probed them with antibodies directed against mouse cyclin D1, the endogenous mouse cyclin E, or the ectopically expressed human cyclin E. As anticipated, in the wild-type cells, cyclin D1 was induced approximately at 10 hr following serum challenge (Figure 2A). The induction of the endogenous mouse cyclin E in these wild-type cells took place several hours later and coincided with S phase entry (Figure 2A and not shown). In contrast, cyclin ED1 MEFs did not express cyclin D1 but instead expressed human cyclin E, which was induced approximately 10 hr following serum challenge--precisely the same time cyclin D1 appeared in the wild-type MEFs (Figure 2A). Thus, when the cyclin E coding sequences

Replacement of Cyclin D1 by Cyclin E 769

Figure 2. Cell Cycle­Specific Expression of Knockin Cyclin E (A) Levels of cyclin D1, endogenous mouse cyclin E, and ectopically expressed human cyclin E during cell cycle progression of wildtype (WT) or cyclin ED1 (KI) mouse embryo fibroblasts. (B) Kinase activity associated with endogenous mouse cyclin E and ectopically expressed human cyclin E during cell cycle progression of cyclin ED1 mouse embryo fibroblasts. Protein extracts were subjected to immunoprecipitation (IP) with antibodies against mouse cyclin E or human cyclin E, and kinase activity toward histone H1 was determined. Numbers below the lanes indicate hours after serum stimulation.

(Fantl et al., 1995; Sicinski et al., 1995), cyclin D1 / mice exhibited behavior that strongly suggested a neurologic abnormality: they display a leg-clasping reflex by retracting their limbs toward their trunks when they are lifted by their tails. Wild-type mice, in contrast, invariably respond by extending their legs (Figure 3A). Two other traits of cyclin D1 / mice indicated a developmental abnormality, possibly associated with the nervous system. First, growth of these mice was retarded, and by 3 weeks of life, cyclin D1­deficient mice were approximately two times smaller than wild-type littermates (Figure 3B). In addition, a large fraction of cyclin D1 / mice died early in life, usually within the first month (Sicinski et al., 1995). In striking contrast to cyclin D1 / mice, the homozygous cyclin ED1 knockin mice appeared to be completely normal and were outwardly indistinguishable from wild-type and heterozygous littermates. They had normal body size, exhibited no premature mortality, and never displayed the leg-clasping abnormality (Figures 3A and 3C). Hence, the expression of cyclin E in place of cyclin D1 fully rescues all of the developmental defects of cyclin D1­deficient mice. Since the precise histopathological basis of these defects in the cyclin D1 / mice has not been identified, we could not determine whether this defect was fully cured by the ectopically expressed cyclin E. Effects of Knockin Cyclin E on the Retinal Phenotype of Cyclin D1 / Mice We and others reported previously that cyclin D1­ deficient mice display a dramatic reduction in cell numbers in all layers of the neural retina (Fantl et al., 1995; Sicinski et al., 1995). Independent of this, we noted very high levels of cyclin D1 in the developing retinas of wildtype embryos (Sicinski et al., 1995). We thus speculated that the profound effects of cyclin D1 inactivation on retinal development are related to the intense expression of cyclin D1 in this tissue in wild-type mice. To assess whether human cyclin E could replace cyclin D1 in driving retinal proliferation, we first determined the expression pattern of human cyclin E mRNA in the developing retinas of cyclin ED1 mice through use of in situ hybridization and compared this pattern with that of cyclin D1 in wild-type retinas. As expected, retinas derived from wild-type mice expressed very high levels of cyclin D1 mRNA but no human cyclin E mRNA (Figure 4). Conversely, the retinas derived from cyclin ED1 embryos lacked cyclin D1, instead expressing human cyclin E mRNA. Importantly, the expression of human cyclin E was strictly confined to the neural part of the retina, precisely mirroring the expression of cyclin D1 in wild-type retinas (Figure 4). We then determined whether human cyclin E could replace cyclin D1 and rescue the phenotypic manifestations of cyclin D1 deficiency in retinal development. To address this question, we examined the histological appearance of retinas derived from cyclin ED1 mice and compared them with cyclin D1 / and wild-type retinas. As reported previously, cyclin D1­deficient mice developed hypoplastic, disorganized retinal tissue. In striking contrast, the retinas of cyclin ED1 had nearly normal appearance (Figure 5A). In order to obtain a functional measure of the observed

are placed under the control of the cyclin D1 promoter, expression of the cyclin E protein is redirected to a time in the G1 phase when cyclin D1 is normally expressed. We then asked whether the kinase activity associated with human cyclin E parallels the induction of cyclin E protein. To gauge this, protein lysates prepared from cyclin ED1 MEFs were split in half; one-half was subjected to immunoprecipitation with an antibody recognizing the endogenous mouse cyclin E, while the second half was incubated with an antibody directed against the ectopically expressed human cyclin E. The kinase activity in the immunoprecipitates was then determined using histone H1 as a substrate. In parallel, extracts from wild-type cells were analyzed. These analyses revealed that in both the wild-type and cyclin ED1 cells, the kinase activity associated with the endogenous mouse cyclin E peaked during the S phase, 18­21 hr after serum stimulation (Figure 2B and not shown). In contrast, the kinase activity associated with human cyclin E in cyclin ED1 cells peaked about 6 hr earlier at a time 12­15 hr after serum stimulation (Figure 2B). Thus, the kinase activity associated with human cyclin E parallels the induction of human cyclin E protein. Appearance of the Knockin Mice Having verified the expression pattern of knockin human cyclin E, we asked whether cyclin E could functionally replace cyclin D1 and rescue the phenotypic manifestations of cyclin D1 deficiency. As reported previously

Cell 770

Figure 3. Phenotype of Cyclin ED1 Mice as Compared with Cyclin D1 / Mice (A) Rescue of growth retardation and abnormal leg-clasping reflex in cyclin ED1 mice. When lifted by their tails, cyclin D1 / mice (KO) draw their limbs toward the trunk, while the cyclin ED1 (KI) or wild-type (WT) mice respond by extending their legs. (B) Representative growth curve of wild-type, heterozygous, and cyclin D1 / littermates. One cyclin D1 / mutant died at day 21. (C) Representative growth curve of wild-type, heterozygous, and homozygous cyclin ED1 littermates.

rescue, we subjected wild-type, cyclin D1 / , and cyclin ED1 mice to electroretinographic (ERG) testing. In this procedure, mice are exposed to a short pulse of light, and the electrophysiologic potentials generated in their retinas are recorded (Steinberg et al., 1991). As expected, wild-type mice responded to light by evoking a robust ERG response. Cyclin D1 / mice failed to normally respond to light and displayed an essentially

flat ERG readout. In contrast, cyclin ED1 mice responded to light with nearly normal ERG potentials (Figure 5A). The ERG amplitudes in cyclin ED1 mice were approximately 70% of the values seen in wild-type mice, in agreement with the slightly reduced cell numbers in knockin retinas (Figure 5B). Taken together, these analyses revealed that while cyclin D1 is critically required for retinal proliferation, human cyclin E, when

Replacement of Cyclin D1 by Cyclin E 771

Figure 4. Expression of Cyclin mRNA in the Retinas of Wild-Type and Cyclin ED1 Mice Detected by In Situ Hybridization Sections of 14.5 day postcoitum wild-type (WT) and cyclin ED1 (KI) embryos were hybridized with indicated probes. Specimens were photographed by double exposure using dark-field illumination with a red filter and Hoechst epifluorescence optics. The blue color represents the Hoechst staining of cell nuclei, and the red represents the hybridization signal. Note that the red signal within the retinal pigment layer represents a false positive signal that stains with all probes due to the presence of pigmented granules in these cells. R, neural part of the retina. Magnification approximately 116 .

expressed in place of cyclin D1, can substitute for cyclin D1 function in this tissue. Effect of Knockin Cyclin E on the Mammary Phenotype of Cyclin D1 / Mice As reported previously, cyclin D1­deficient mice develop normal mammary glands during sexual maturation. However, these mammary glands fail to undergo normal lobuloalveolar development during pregnancy. As a consequence, cyclin D1­deficient females display grossly underdeveloped mammary epithelial trees at the end of pregnancy and are unable to nurse their pups (Fantl et al., 1995; Sicinski et al., 1995). In our analyses of homozygous cyclin ED1 females, we first confirmed that the development of mammary glands during sexual maturation proceeds normally in these mice (not shown). We then turned our attention to lobuloalveolar development during pregnancy, a step that is profoundly compromised in cyclin D1 / females. Analyses of cyclin ED1 females at day 1 postpartum revealed that approximately 35% of mutant females underwent a lobuloalveolar mammary development that was indistinguishable from that of wild-type females (not shown). These cyclin ED1 females were able to nurse their pups normally. This behavior of cyclin ED1 mice was in stark contrast with cyclin D1 / females, which never breast-fed their pups. We noted, however, that approximately 30% of cyclin ED1 females underwent

mammary lobuloalveolar development that was intermediate between that seen in wild-type and in cyclin D1 / females. Moreover, the remaining 30% of cyclin ED1 females resembled cyclin D1 / females in their mammary development (not shown). We reasoned that the observed variability was likely caused by factors that were extrinsic to the mammary epithelium and varied from animal to animal due to the mixed genetic background of mice used for analyses. In order to eliminate this variability and to firmly establish whether cyclin E could replace cyclin D1 in driving pregnancy-induced mammary epithelial proliferation, we turned to a mammary epithelial transplantation technique (Robinson et al., 1998). In this procedure, a fragment of mammary epithelium derived from a mutant mouse is transplanted into a cleared mammary fat pad of a wild-type recipient female that is devoid of an epithelial tree. It is now well established that the engrafted epithelium behaves essentially like the mammary epithelium of host animals and undergoes the same morphological changes when host animals undergo sexual maturation or pregnancy (Robinson et al., 1998). Thus, this procedure allowed us to examine cell-autonomous properties of cyclin ED1 mammary epithelium and made it possible to compare side by side the development of mammary epithelia derived from different mutants within the same recipient mouse. We dissected mammary epithelia from wild-type, cyclin D1 / , and cyclin ED1 females and transplanted

Cell 772

Figure 5. Rescue of the Retinal Abnormality in Cyclin ED1 Mice (A) Histologic sections of retinas derived from a 16-day-old wild-type (WT), cyclin D1 / (KO), and cyclin ED1 (KI) mouse. The paraffin sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. G, ganglion cell layer; INL, inner nuclear layer; ONL, outer nuclear layer; PE, retinal pigmented epithelium. Magnification approximately 100 . Below, representative electroretinographic (ERG) potentials recorded from a 2- to 3-monthold wild-type, cyclin D1 / , and cyclin ED1 mouse in response to a 0.1 Hz flash of white light delivered at time 0. (B) Total thickness, the width of all layers of the neuroretina, measured from the boundary between pigment epithelium and neuroretina to the ganglion cell layer (inner limiting membrane); GCL, the number of cell nuclei in the ganglion cell layer per 175 m of retinal length; INL and ONL, the number of nuclear layers in the inner nuclear (INL) and outer nuclear (ONL) layers. The values for retinas of wild-type (dotted bars), cyclin D1 / (black bars), and cyclin ED1 mice (white bars) are represented in arbitrary units. The actual values for wild-type, cyclin 13 m, 152 18 m; GCL, 22.7 4.1, 7.7 D1 / , and cyclin ED1 retinas were (respectively): total thickness, 206 23 m ( SD), 71 2.7, 18.3 4.4; INL, 5.3 0.9, 2.2 0.4, 4.0 0.6; ONL, 10.9 0.6, 2.7 0.8, 5.8 0.9. The number of mice analyzed was n 16, 14, and 23, respectively; all animals were 16 days to 4.5 months old. One retinal section (such as those shown in [A]) per mouse was analyzed. Measurements were taken approximately at the midpoint between ora serrata and the optic disc.

them into cleared fat pads of wild-type hosts. When the recipients became pregnant, the transplanted wild-type epithelium underwent a massive lobuloalveolar development (Figure 6A) that was indistinguishable from the development of endogenous, unmanipulated mammary glands of the recipient animals (not shown). As demonstrated previously (C. Brisken and R. A. W., unpublished), the transplanted cyclin D1 / epithelium failed to undergo lobuloalveolar proliferation when the recipients became pregnant, confirming the intrinsic inability of mutant epithelium to respond to pregnancy-associated morphogenetic signals (Figure 6A). In striking contrast, the transplanted cyclin ED1 epithelium underwent full lobuloalveolar development that closely resembled the morphogenesis seen in wild-type epithelium (Figure 6A). The above conclusions were reached using transplantations of mammary epithelium derived from animals of mixed genetic background. The same results were obtained when the cyclin D1 / and cyclin ED1 alleles were bred into the pure 129Sv genetic background; these genetically pure mice were then used

as donors for mammary epithelial transplantations (not shown). Based on these experiments, we concluded that knockin human cyclin E can essentially fully replace cyclin D1 in driving mammary epithelial proliferation. Absence of Additional Phenotypes in Cyclin ED1 Heterozygous and Homozygous Mice In addition to the studies described above, we subjected tissues derived from cyclin ED1 mice as well as from cyclin ED1/ heterozygotes to detailed histopathological analyses. These analyses revealed normal morphogenesis in all tissues studied. Thus, apart from correcting the known phenotypes of cyclin D1 deficiency, the ectopic expression of cyclin E does not cause any detectable developmental abnormalities. Molecular Mechanism of the Rescue of Cyclin D1 / Phenotypes It was possible that the observed rescue of the phenotypic manifestations of cyclin D1 deficiency by human cyclin E might be due to the ability of this cyclin to elicit

Replacement of Cyclin D1 by Cyclin E 773

Figure 6. Rescue of Mammary Epithelial Defect in Cyclin ED1 Mice (A) The appearance of wild-type (WT), cyclin D1 / (KO), and cyclin ED1 (KI) mammary epithelial tree prior to the pregnancy (virgin) and 1 day after the delivery of pups (postpartum). The mammary epithelium was transplanted into wild-type recipients. The whole mounts of inguinal mammary glands were prepared, and the epithelial component was stained with carmine red. Magnification approximately 2 . (B) Expression of mouse cyclin D1 mRNA or human cyclin E mRNA in the mammary glands of pregnant (day 14.5 of gestation) wild-type (WT) or cyclin ED1 (KI) females, detected by in situ hybridization as described in the legend to Figure 4. Magnification approximately 116 .

an upregulation of endogenous mouse cyclins D2 or D3, resulting in functional replacement of cyclin D1. To test this notion, we determined the expression pattern of D-cyclins in the developing retinas and mammary glands of cyclin ED1 mice and compared these with the patterns seen in wild-type animals, using in situ hybridization and Western blotting. The analyses of developing retinas revealed that in wild-type mice this tissue expressed very high levels of cyclin D1, no cyclin D2, and very low levels of cyclin D3 mRNA (Figure 4) and protein (not shown). Analyses of retinas derived from cyclin ED1 mice showed that these retinas expressed very high levels of knockin human cyclin E, no cyclins D1 or D2, and only very low levels of cyclin D3 mRNA (Figure 4) and protein (not shown). Accordingly, the observed rescue of retinal morphogenesis and function in the cyclin ED1 mice seems to be caused directly by human cyclin E expression rather than indirectly through the ability of cyclin E to cause upregulation of cyclins D2 or D3. Similar analyses of mammary glands derived from pregnant wild-type and cyclin ED1 females demonstrated that the mammary glands of wild-type mice expressed cyclin D1, no cyclin D2, and low levels of cyclin D3 mRNA and protein (Figure 6B and not shown). The

same pattern of expression was observed in cyclin ED1 females, with the exception that cyclin D1 was replaced by human cyclin E (Figure 6B and not shown). Again we concluded that the observed rescue in cyclin ED1 mice seems to be caused directly by human cyclin E expression rather than indirectly through the ability of cyclin E to cause upregulation of cyclins D2 or D3. We next asked whether the knockin human cyclin E replaced cyclin D1 function by associating with the normal kinase partner of cyclin E, CDK2, or alternatively by binding to cyclin D­specific partners CDK4 or CDK6. To address these alternatives, we microdissected developing retinas or removed mammary glands from pregnant wild-type or cyclin ED1 mice, prepared protein lysates, immunoprecipitated mouse cyclin D1 or human cyclin E with appropriate antibodies, and probed immunoblots with antibodies directed against CDK2, CDK4, or CDK6. As expected, immunoprecipitation of cyclin D1 from wild-type tissues resulted in coprecipitation of substantial amounts of CDK4 and low levels of CDK6. In addition, cyclin D1 brought down small amounts of CDK2 (Figure 7A and not shown); indeed, cyclin D1 is known to form catalytically inactive complexes with CDK2.

Cell 774

Figure 7. Molecular Analyses of Cyclin ED1 Retinas and Mammary Glands (A) Association of ectopically expressed human cyclin E with CDKs. Protein extracts prepared from developing wild-type (WT) or cyclin ED1 (KI) retinas were immunoprecipitated with antibodies against human cyclin E (IP-hE) or mouse cyclin D1 (IP-mD1); immunoblots were probed with antibodies against CDK2 and CDK4. (B) Association of ectopically expressed human cyclin E with p27Kip1. Protein extracts prepared from developing wild-type (WT) or cyclin ED1 (KI) retinas were immunoprecipitated (IP) with antibodies against mouse cyclin D1 (mD1) or human cyclin E (hE); immunoblots were probed with antibody against p27Kip1. For comparison, immunoblots of retinal protein lysates were probed with the same antibody. (C) Retinoblastoma protein (pRB) phosphorylation in developing wild-type (WT), cyclin ED1 (KI), and cyclin D1 / (KO) retinas and in mammary glands of pregnant (day 16.5 of gestation) females. Immunoblots of protein lysates were probed with an anti-pRB antibody. Below, the ratio of hyperphosphorylated to hypophosphorylated pRB in the retinal lysates, as determined by densitometric scanning of relevant bands in three different immunoblots. Error bars represent SE. (D) Response of wild-type (WT), cyclin ED1 (KI), and cyclin D1 / (KO) mammary glands to estrogen. Ovariectomized mice received a single injection of estradiol. The induction of progesterone receptor mRNA was determined by Northern blotting. 0 h, ovariectomized

Immunoprecipitation of human cyclin E from cyclin ED1 extracts brought down CDK2, but neither CDK4 nor CDK6 was present in these precipitates (Figure 7A). Thus, in the retinas and mammary glands of cyclin ED1 mice, human cyclin E associates exclusively with its normal partner, CDK2, and not with the cyclin D­specific partners CDK4 and CDK6. We then turned our attention to two known properties of cyclin D1­CDK4/6 complexes, namely the ability to sequester the CDK inhibitor p27Kip1 and the ability to phosphorylate the retinoblastoma protein pRB. We asked whether ectopically expressed cyclin E­CDK2 complexes could drive cell cycle progression of cyclin ED1 cells by replacing these two functions of cyclin D1­CDK4/6 complexes or, alternatively, by bypassing them. To address these possibilities, we first examined the association of cyclin D1 and human cyclin E with p27Kip1 in the developing retinas. To this end, we prepared protein lysates from microdissected wild-type and cyclin ED1 retinas, immunoprecipitated cyclin D1 or human cyclin E with appropriate antibodies, and probed immunoblots with an antibody directed against p27Kip1. As expected, immunoprecipitation of cyclin D1 from wild-type retinas resulted in coprecipitation of substantial amounts of p27Kip1. In contrast, immunoprecipitation of human cyclin E from cyclin ED1 retinas failed to bring down significant amounts of p27Kip1 (Figure 7B). Hence, at this level of analysis, it appeared that the human cyclin E­containing complexes did not function through an ability to sequester cellular p27Kip1. Despite this result, it was nevertheless possible that knockin human cyclin E associated with p27Kip1 at a particular stage of cell cycle progression. To test this possibility, we synchronized wild-type and cyclin ED1 MEFs by serum deprivation and then stimulated them to enter the cell cycle by addition of serum. Cells were harvested at different points of cell cycle progression, protein lysates were prepared, and the association between cyclin D1 and p27Kip1 or human cyclin E and p27Kip1 was monitored as described above. Consistent with the previous result, we detected only very low levels of p27Kip1 associated with human cyclin E (not shown). We also entertained the alternative possibility that ectopically expressed human cyclin E, instead of binding and sequestering p27Kip1, might affect total levels of this protein by causing its premature degradation. To address this possibility, we used immunoblotting to determine the levels of p27Kip1 as well as that of another CDK inhibitor, p21Cip1, during cell cycle progression of wild-type and cyclin ED1 MEFs. These analyses revealed precisely the same pattern of p27Kip1 and p21Cip1 expression in wild-type and mutant cells during cell cycle progression (not shown). Hence, human cyclin E did not perturb the levels of these critical CDK inhibitors. We then asked whether ectopically expressed knockin cyclin E replaced cyclin D1 in driving the phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein. To address this issue, we prepared protein extracts from microdissected

mice; 6 h, ovariectomized mice 6 hr after estrogen injection. The sizes of ribosomal subunits are shown on the right. GAPDH hybridization was used to control for equal loading of samples.

Replacement of Cyclin D1 by Cyclin E 775

cyclin ED1, cyclin D1 / , and wild-type retinas and from mammary glands of pregnant animals. Immunoblots of these extracts were probed with an anti-pRB antibody that permits one to distinguish between hypophosphorylated pRB (fast-migrating form) and hyperphosphorylated pRB (slow-migrating form). We then determined the ratio between hyperphosphorylated and hypophosphorylated pRB. As shown in Figure 7C, the developing wild-type retinas expressed a high ratio of phosphorylated pRB (which we arbitrarily set at 100%). In contrast, in the retinas of cyclin D1 / mice, the proportion of hyperphosphorylated pRB was reduced to approximately 23%. Cyclin ED1 retinas displayed approximately 35% of normal pRB phosphorylation levels--a value clearly higher but still close to that seen in cyclin D1 / tissues (Figure 7C). A similar pattern of pRB phosphorylation was seen in mammary glands of pregnant animals (Figure 7C and not shown). We concluded that ectopically expressed cyclin E does not restore full pRB phosphorylation and that it must therefore function to drive cell proliferation by bypassing the requirement for full pRB phosphorylation in these tissues. This finding is consistent with the observations that overexpression of cyclin E in in vitro­cultured cells can overcome cell cycle arrest induced by a phosphorylation-deficient pRB mutant (Alevizopoulos et al., 1997; Leng et al., 1997; Lukas et al., 1997). Cyclins D1 and E and the Estrogen Receptor In addition to its role in cell cycle progression, cyclin D1 has been shown to play a CDK-independent role in mammary epithelium by interacting with the estrogen receptor (ER) and serving as an ER coactivator in cultured cells (Neuman et al., 1997; Zwijsen et al., 1997). For this reason, we decided to evaluate the responsiveness of cyclin D1 / and cyclin ED1 mammary epithelium to estrogen by gauging the induction of the major mammary epithelial ER-responsive gene, the progesterone receptor (PR) (Savouret et al., 1991). To this end, we injected ovariectomized wild-type, cyclin D1 / , and cyclin ED1 mice with a single dose of estrogen and determined the levels of PR mRNA 6 hr later using Northern blotting. As expected, administration of estrogen to wild-type mice led to a very strong, over 10-fold induction of the PR mRNA (Figure 7D). Importantly, cyclin D1 / and cyclin ED1 mammary glands responded to estrogen in precisely the same fashion (Figure 7D). Thus, the induction of the PR gene, the major ER-responsive target in the mammary epithelium, proceeds normally in the absence of cyclin D1, and this response is not altered by ectopic expression of cyclin E. Discussion The work described here derived from earlier observations that cyclin D1 / mice exhibit developmental defects in at least three distinct tissues (Fantl et al., 1995; Sicinski et al., 1995). In each of these three tissues, we presume that cyclin D1 is rate limiting for proliferation and that the other D-type cyclins are not present in amounts adequate to make up for its absence. In the

present work, we asked whether cyclin E can replace cyclin D1 and rescue the phenotypic manifestations of cyclin D1 deficiency. We reasoned that these analyses would represent a highly sensitive and stringent measure of functional interactions between these two cyclins. To address this issue, we have replaced the coding sequence of mouse cyclin D1 with that of human cyclin E in the mouse germline. As a consequence, we generated cyclin ED1 knockin mice that lack cyclin D1 (like cyclin D1 / mice) and express human cyclin E in its place. In the cells of these knockin mice, the expression of human cyclin E is driven by the cyclin D1 promoter, and consequently, human cyclin E is predicted to be targeted to tissues normally expressing cyclin D1. Indeed, our detailed analyses of cyclin ED1 mice fully validated this notion. Importantly, the levels of human cyclin E protein (not shown) and the schedule of its cell cycle­specific expression (Figure 2) faithfully mimic that of cyclin D1 in wild-type tissues. This outcome could not have been predicted, since the posttranslational fates of the cyclin D1 and cyclin E proteins are controlled by quite different mechanisms. Our analyses of cyclin ED1 mice revealed unexpectedly that the expression of cyclin E in place of cyclin D1 can rescue all known phenotypic manifestations of cyclin D1 deficiency. Thus, while cyclin D1 / mice display a neurologic abnormality, hypoplastic retinas and hypoplastic mammary glands, ectopic expression of cyclin E restores nearly normal development to these tissues. The second very unexpected outcome of our analyses is the observation that ectopic expression of cyclin E in cyclin ED1 mice did not lead to any novel, additional phenotypes. In short, we conclude that the functions of cyclin D1 and cyclin E are fully exchangeable. This functional replacement is hard to reconcile with current models of cell cycle progression. The cells of all higher organisms studied, from Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster to man, express distinct D-type and E-type cyclins during G1 phase progression. The schedule of activity of these two classes of cyclins during cell cycle progression is quite different. Thus, D-type cyclins operate in mid-G1 phase, while cyclin E and presumably mammalian E2 (Lauper et al., 1998; Zariwala et al., 1998; Gudas et al., 1999) act at the end of G1. This suggests a model in which these two types of cyclins act sequentially during the normal cell cycle to enable cells to progress through G1 and enter S phase. What then is the molecular basis of the observed rescue of cyclin D1 functions by cyclin E? We have considered two possibilities. (1) Knockin cyclin E-CDK2 complexes replace the functions normally executed by cyclin D1­CDK4/6 complexes. (2) The cyclin ED1 allele results in ectopic expression of the major downstream target of cyclin D1, thereby obviating the need for cyclin D1 in cell cycle progression, revealing that cyclin E is the major rate-limiting target for cyclin D1. The evidence presented in this paper strongly favors the latter scenario. Thus, cyclin D1 is believed to play at least two functions in cell cycle progression. First, it drives the phosphorylation of the pRB. Indeed, cells that have lost pRB no longer require cyclin D1 for their growth, indicating that pRB is the major downstream target of cyclin D1 (Sherr and Roberts, 1995). Second,

Cell 776

cyclin D1 induction causes the redistribution of a cellular kinase inhibitor, p27Kip1, from the cyclin E­CDK2 pool to the cyclin D­CDK4/6 pool, thereby liberating cyclin E­CDK2 complexes from inhibition and resulting in their activation (Sherr and Roberts, 1995). We have examined both functions of cyclin D1 in the tissues of cyclin ED1 mice and found that neither of these cyclin D1­dependent functions is replaced by the ectopically expressed human cyclin E. Consequently, we conclude that the ectopic cyclin ED1 allele rescues the proliferation of cyclin D1­dependent tissues by bypassing the functions of cyclin D1 rather than by replacing them. This indicates, in turn, that cyclin E activity is the major downstream rate-limiting target for cyclin D1 and that ectopic cyclin E expression, as achieved through the cyclin ED1 allele, bypasses the need for cyclin D1 in cell cycle progression. Currently available information on the mammalian cell cycle enables one to postulate how this functional replacement might occur. pRB is the major target for cyclin D­CDK4/6 complexes (Sherr and Roberts, 1995). When hypophosphorylated, pRB binds and sequesters several proteins, most notably transcription factors of the E2F family. The phosphorylation of pRB leads to the release of these captive proteins, which then proceed to transactivate target genes. Alternatively, the dissociation of pRB from E2Fs removes a transcription-repressing factor from E2Fs bound to control elements of certain promoters (Weinberg, 1995). One of the genes regulated by the E2Fs is cyclin E (Ohtani et al., 1995; Botz et al., 1996; Geng et al., 1996), leading to the hypothesis that cyclin D1 serves to control the activity of cyclin E via pRB and E2Fs. An elaboration of this model predicts that cyclin D1­CDK4/6 complexes bring about the initial, "preparatory" pRB phosphorylation, leading to the induction of small amounts of cyclin E (Lundberg and Weinberg, 1998). The end consequence of these steps is the activation of cyclin E, whose ectopic expression, as described here, appears to obviate the function of cyclin D1. Apart from its role as a partner of CDK4 and CDK6 kinases, cyclin D1 has been reported to play a unique role as an ER coactivator (Neuman et al., 1997; Zwijsen et al., 1997). This might suggest that the observed defect in the mammary development of cyclin D1 / mice derived from inadequate activation of the ER in this tissue. The evidence presented in this paper argues against this explanation. First, we have shown that cyclin E, which was reported not to bind the ER and not to serve as ER coactivator (Zwijsen et al., 1997), can replace cyclin D1 in driving normal mammary epithelial development. Second, we have shown that the induction of a major mammary epithelial ER-responsive gene, the PR (Savouret et al., 1991), proceeds normally in cyclin D1­ deficient mice. These findings have led us to the conclusion that the crucial role for cyclin D1 in mammary development reflects the activity of cyclin D1 toward other targets, such as pRB. The studies described in this paper strongly suggest that cyclin E is the major rate-limiting target for cyclin D1 in mammalian cells. This, together with the wellestablished fact that the D-type cyclins are controlled by extracellular signals, while E cyclins are controlled internally, might suggest that the cyclin D­pRB pathway

was evolved in order to enable metazoan cells to connect extracellular signals with cyclin E activation, thereby controlling the entrance into S phase. Since this cyclin D­pRB pathway is subverted in essentially all human cancers, the elucidation of its role in driving normal cell proliferation is essential to understanding the molecular basis of malignant cell growth.
Experimental Procedures Generation of Cyclin ED1 Mice The cyclin D1 knockout vector (Sicinski et al., 1995) was modified to obtain cyclin ED1 knockin vector as follows: (1) the 600 bp XbaI­XbaI fragment of the cyclin D1 gene was deleted; (2) the 1666 bp BamHI­HindIII fragment of human cyclin E cDNA (a kind gift from Dr. M. Pagano), starting at nucleotide position 84 within the 5 untranslated sequence, containing the entire coding sequence and 298 bp of 3 untranslated sequence, and ending at nucleotide 1750 (Ohtsubo et al., 1995) was cloned into the EagI site at nucleotide position 180 within the 5 untranslated sequence of the cyclin D1 gene (Figure 1). The procedure to obtain cyclin ED1 heterozygous ES cells and mice was as described for cyclin D1­deficient animals; the same probes were used for Southern blot analyses (Sicinski et al., 1995). Three hundred and eight ES cell clones were analyzed, and six underwent homologous recombination. Germline transmission was obtained with two clones, and mice deriving from both clones were used for subsequent studies. Genotyping of mice was performed as described (Sicinski et al., 1995) with the exception that the primer N was substituted with the primer E (5 -CAC AGA CTG CAT TAT TGT CCC AAG G-3 ). The sizes of amplification products are 224 bp for a wild-type allele and 461 bp for a mutated allele. Cell Cycle Analyses Embryonic fibroblasts were isolated from day 13.5 postcoitum homozygous cyclin ED1 or wild-type embryos as described (Sicinski et al., 1995). Cells were starved in serum-free Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium for 42­87 hr before being restimulated with 15% fetal bovine serum for indicated times. [3H]thymidine labeling was for 60 min before lysis and counting. Western Blot, Immunoprecipitation, and Kinase Assays Retinas were microdissected from 1-day-old neonates. Mammary glands were collected from pregnant mice at days 16.5 to 18.5 of gestation or at 1 day after delivery. Fifty to two hundred micrograms of proteins were separated using 10% SDS-PAGE (or 6% for pRB analyses) and transferred to NitroBind membrane (MSI). The immunoblots were probed with the following primary antibodies (all from Santa Cruz, except where indicated): anti-cyclin D1 (72-13G); anticyclin D2 (34B1-3); anti-cyclin D3 (C-16); anti-mouse cyclin E (M-20); anti-human cyclin E (HE-12); anti-CDK2 (M2); anti-CDK4 (C22); antip27 (C-19); and anti-pRB (245, Pharmingen). As a secondary antibody, peroxidase-conjugated IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch) was used, followed by enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) detection (Amersham). For immunoprecipitations, 100 g of protein lysates was incubated with anti-mouse cyclin D1 antibody (72-13G) or with antihuman cyclin E antibody (HE-111, Santa Cruz) conjugated to agarose beads. For kinase assays, 100 g of protein lysates was incubated with anti-human cyclin E antibody (HE-111) or with antimouse E antibody (M-20) conjugated to agarose beads. Immunoprecipitates were subjected to kinase reactions in 15 l of 20 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 5 mM MgCl2, 2.5 mM MnCl2, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.013 mM ATP, 2 Ci [ -32P]ATP, and 2.5 g histone H1 for 30 min at 30 C. In Situ Hybridization For human cyclin E probe, a 501 bp fragment of human cyclin E cDNA, nucleotides 1038­1539 (Ohtsubo et al., 1995) was cloned into pBluescript. Sense and antisense probes were generated using T3 or T7 polymerase, respectively. Mouse cyclin D probes were as described (Sicinski et al., 1995, 1996).

Replacement of Cyclin D1 by Cyclin E 777

Mammary Epithelial Transplantations These were done as described (Robinson et al., 1998). As donors, we used (1) mixed genetic background (129Sv/C57BL/6): six cyclin ED1, six cyclin D1 / , and eight wild-type (WT) females, age 1.5­10 months; (2) pure 129Sv background: four cyclin ED1, four cyclin D1 / , and six WT females, age 12­51 days. As recipients, we used Rag1 / females, B6,129-Rag1tm1Mom or C57BL/6J-Rag1tm1Mom, purchased from Jackson Laboratories. Each recipient mouse received two transplants (WT and cyclin ED1, WT and cyclin D1 / , or cyclin ED1 and cyclin D1 / ), one into each inguinal mammary gland. Two months after the transplantations, mice were mated; mammary glands were collected at days 1­2 postpartum and whole mounts prepared. Progesterone Receptor Analysis Virgin females (2 to 4.5 months old) were ovariectomized. Eight days later, mice received subcutaneous injection of 17 -estradiol (Sigma), 0.05 g per gram of body weight, and were sacrificed after 6 hr. Total RNA was isolated from pooled mammary glands derived from two to three mice per experimental group as described (Geng and Weinberg, 1993), and poly A mRNA was purified using an Oligotex mRNA kit (Qiagen). Eight micrograms of poly A RNA was resolved using 1% MOPS-formaldehyde gels, transferred to MagnaGraph membrane (MSI), and probed with radiolabeled fulllength murine PR cDNA (a kind gift from Dr. G. Shyamala) or glyceraldehyde dehydrogenase (GAPDH) cDNA as described (Geng and Weinberg, 1993). Other Procedures Histology, mammary gland whole mounts, and electroretinographic testing was performed as described (Sicinski et al., 1995). Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank the following individuals for their help and advice: B. Alpert, C. Brisken, Y.-C. Chou, S. Elledge, R. Guzman, R. Herrera, T. Makela, J. Liu-Donaher, A. Lundberg, R. ¨ ¨ Perlman, H.-C. Wang, J. Williams, C. Wong, and Q. Yu. This work was supported by a grant from the G. Harold and Leila Y. Mathers Foundation to R. A. W. and NIH grant 535CA39826. R. A. W. is an American Cancer Society Research Professor, and P. S. is a Barr New Investigator. Received February 5, 1999; revised April 30, 1999. References Alevizopoulos, K., Vlach, J., Hennecke, S., and Amati, B. (1997). Cyclin E and c-Myc promote cell proliferation in the presence of p16INK4a and of hypophosphorylated retinoblastoma family proteins. EMBO J. 16, 5322­5333. Botz, J., Zerfass-Thome, K., Spitkovsky, D., Delius, H., Vogt, B., Eilers, M., Hatzigeorgiou, A., and Jansen-Durr, P. (1996). Cell cycle regulation of the murine cyclin E gene depends on an E2F binding site in the promoter. Mol. Cell. Biol. 16, 3401­3409. Fantl, V., Stamp, G., Andrews, A., Rosewell, I., and Dickson, C. (1995). Mice lacking cyclin D1 are small and show defects in eye and mammary gland development. Genes Dev. 9, 2364­2372. Geng, Y., and Weinberg, R.A. (1993). Transforming growth factor beta effects on expression of G1 cyclins and cyclin-dependent protein kinases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90, 10315­10319. Geng, Y., Eaton, E.N., Picon, M., Roberts, J.M., Lundberg, A.S., Gifford, A., Sardet, C., and Weinberg, R.A. (1996). Regulation of cyclin E transcription by E2Fs and retinoblastoma protein. Oncogene 12, 1173­1180. Gudas, J.M., Payton, M., Thukral, S., Chen, E., Bass, M., Robinson, M.O., and Coats, S. (1999). Cyclin E2, a novel G1 cyclin that binds Cdk2 and is aberrantly expressed in human cancers. Mol. Cell. Biol. 19, 612­622. Inaba, T., Matsushime, H., Valentine, M., Roussel, M.F., Sherr, C.J.,

and Look, A.T. (1992). Genomic organization, chromosomal localization, and independent expression of human cyclin D genes. Genomics 13, 565­574. Lauper, N., Beck, A.R., Cariou, S., Richman, L., Hofmann, K., Reith, W., Slingerland, J.M., and Amati, B. (1998). Cyclin E2: a novel CDK2 partner in the late G1 and S phases of the mammalian cell cycle. Oncogene 17, 2637­2643. Leng, X., Connell-Crowley, L., Goodrich, D., and Harper, J.W. (1997). S-phase entry upon ectopic expression of G1 cyclin-dependent kinases in the absence of retinoblastoma protein phosphorylation. Curr. Biol. 7, 709­712. Lukas, J., Herzinger, T., Hansen, K., Moroni, M.C., Resnitzky, D., Helin, K., Reed, S.I., and Bartek, J. (1997). Cyclin E-induced S phase without activation of the pRb/E2F pathway. Genes Dev. 11, 1479­ 1492. Lundberg, A.S., and Weinberg, R.A. (1998). Functional inactivation of the retinoblastoma protein requires sequential modification by at least two distinct cyclin-cdk complexes. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18, 753­761. Neuman, E., Ladha, M.H., Lin, N., Upton, T.M., Miller, S.J., Di Renzo, J., Pestell, R.G., Hinds, P.W., Dowdy, S.F., Brown, M., and Ewen, M.E. (1997). Cyclin D1 stimulation of estrogen receptor transcriptional activity independent of cdk4. Mol. Cell. Biol. 17, 5338­5347. Ohtani, K., De Gregori, J., and Nevins, J.R. (1995). Regulation of the cyclin E gene by transcription factor E2F1. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 12146­12150. Ohtsubo, M., Theodoras, A.M., Schumacher, J., Roberts, J.M., and Pagano, M. (1995). Human cyclin E, a nuclear protein essential for the G1-to-S phase transition. Mol. Cell. Biol. 15, 2612­2624. Robinson, G.W., Johnson, P.F., Hennighausen, L., and Sterneck, E. (1998). The C/EBP transcription factor regulates epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation in the mammary gland. Genes Dev. 12, 1907­1916. Savouret, J.F., Bailly, A., Misrahi, M., Rauch, C., Redeuilh, G., Chauchereau, A., and Milgrom, E. (1991). Characterization of the hormone responsive element involved in the regulation of the progesterone receptor gene. EMBO J. 10, 1875­1883. Sherr, C.J. (1993). Mammalian G1 cyclins. Cell 73, 1059­1065. Sherr, C.J., and Roberts, J.M. (1995). Inhibitors of mammalian G1 cyclin-dependent kinases. Genes Dev. 9, 1149­1163. Sicinski, P., Donaher, J.L., Parker, S.B., Li, T., Fazeli, A., Gardner, H., Haslam, S.Z., Bronson, R.T., Elledge, S.J., and Weinberg, R.A. (1995). Cyclin D1 provides a link between development and oncogenesis in the retina and breast. Cell 82, 621­630. Sicinski, P., Donaher, J.L., Geng, Y., Parker, S.B., Gardner, H., Park, M.Y., Robker, R.L., Richards, J.S., McGinnis, L.K., Biggers, J.D., et al. (1996). Cyclin D2 is an FSH-responsive gene involved in gonadal cell proliferation and oncogenesis. Nature 384, 470­474. Steinberg, R.H., Frishman, L.J., and Sieving, P.A. (1991). Negative components of the electroretinogram from proximal retina and photoreceptor. In Progress in Retinal Research, N.N. Osborne and G.J. Chader, eds. (Oxford: Pergamon), pp. 121­160. Weinberg, R.A. (1995). The retinoblastoma protein and cell cycle control. Cell 81, 323­330. Xiong, Y., Menninger, J., Beach, D., and Ward, D.C. (1992). Molecular cloning and chromosomal mapping of CCND genes encoding human D-type cyclins. Genomics 13, 575­584. Zariwala, M., Liu, J., and Xiong, Y. (1998). Cyclin E2, a novel human G1 cyclin and activating partner of CDK2 and CDK3, is induced by viral oncoproteins. Oncogene 17, 2787­2798. Zwijsen, R.M., Wientjens, E., Klompmaker, R., van der Sman, J., Bernards, R., and Michalides, R.J. (1997). CDK-independent activation of estrogen receptor by cyclin D1. Cell 88, 405­415.

