Cell, Vol. 57. 869-880,

June 2. 1989, Copyright

0 1989 by Cell Press

The Interaction of E. coli IHF Protein with Its Specific Binding Sites
Chien-Chin Yang and Howard A. Nash Laboratory of Molecular Biology National Institute of Mental Health Bethesda, Maryland 20892 another, but that both are related to a family of nonspecific DNA binders, the type II or HU DNA binding proteins (reviewed in Drlica and Rouviere-Yaniv, 1987; Greene et al., 1987). The X-ray structure of one member of this family, the HU protein of B. stearothermophilus, is known (Tanaka et al., 1984), and the structure suggests a novel mode of interaction with DNA. The outstanding feature of this structure is a pair of two-stranded 8 ribbons (one from each subunit of a dimer) that emerge from the body of the protein in a fashion that would easily encircle the DNA double helix. Since the homology between IHF and the HU family is very convincing and extends over the entire protein chain, it seems clear that IHF resembles HU and therefore may use the 8 ribbon "arms" to recognize specific DNA sequences. To our knowledge this is unprecedented and would add a new element to the short list of motifs for sequence-specific recognition. A novel mode of interaction between IHF and DNA is also suggested by chemical protection studies (Craig and Nash, 1984). A constant feature of such footprints is the strong protection of three specific adenine residues from attack by dimethyl sulfate (DMS); no comparable protection of guanine residues is observed. Since alkylation of adenine and guanine takes place in the minor and major grooves of DNA, respectively (Gilbert et al., 1978) we have taken this observation to suggest that IHF may interact primarily with the minor groove of DNA, a mode not previously reported for sequence-specific DNA binding proteins. In an attempt to sharpen our understanding of the protein-DNA interaction, we have extended footprinting studies on the three IHF sites within attP to include alkylation interference experiments and hydroxyl radical protection experiments. Our results provide compelling evidence for the general conclusion that IHF binds to DNA in a novel way and for the specific conclusion that IHF has a very significant minor groove interaction. fn addition, we have determined the ratio of protein to DNA in complexes between IHF and its targets. Taken together with the footprinting data, the measured stoichiometry leads us to a model for IHF-DNA interaction in which bending of DNA by IHF involves more than the simple wrapping of the arms of the protein around its target site. Results Interference with IHF Binding by Alkylation of Bases in DNA Previous studies have demonstrated that IHF yields an unusual pattern of protection of residues in the major and minor grooves of DNA from attack by DMS (Craig and Nash, 1984). We have now asked how modification of naked DNA by DMS alters its capacity to interact with IHF. Following the protocol of Siebenlist and Gilbert (1980) end-labeled fragments containing a single IHF site were lightly modified by DMS such that each fragment contained no more than one alkylated base. The modified DNA was then mixed with IHF and protein-DNA com-

Summary We have used two kinds of footprinting techniques, dimethylsulfate interference and hydroxyl radical protection, to explore the way that IHF recognizes its specific target sequences. Our results lead us to conclude that IHF recognizes DNA primarily through contacts with the minor groove, an unprecedented mode for a sequence-specific binding protein. We have also determined that, although IHF is a small protein that protects a large region of DNA, only a single IHF protomer is present at each binding site. IHF bends the DNA to which it binds. We have combined this fact plus our footprinting and stoichiometry data together with the crystal structure of a related protein, the nonspecific DNA binding protein HU, to propose a model for the way in which IHF binds to its DNA target. Introduction Integration host factor (IHF) is an E. coli protein that plays an important role during the integration of the DNA of bacteriophage lambda into its host chromosome (reviewed in Friedman, 1988). IHF acts as a direct participant in this recombination reaction, binding to the region of the viral DNA that is concerned with the crossover. This region, the phage attachment site, or attP contains three binding sites for IHF that share a common sequence; these binding sites are interspersed with sites for the binding of Int, the viral recombinase. There is evidence that IHF helps in the folding of the Int-atiP complex into an ordered structure, the intasome (Richet et al., 1988). This suggestion is supported by the finding that IHF bends the DNA of aflP upon binding (Robertson and Nash, 1988; Thompson and Landy, 1988). Genetic and biochemical studies have shown that IHF is also an important component for many other processes in E. coli such as packaging of DNA into viral capsids, initiation of plasmid replication, movement of transposable elements, and control of gene expression (Friedman, 1988). In these other systems, the common sequence found at IHF binding sites within attP is also found within the region required for function. Where examined, there is evidence that, just as at attP IHF exerts its effect by binding to and bending these sites. In this paper we are concerned with the mode of binding of IHF to its DNA targets. There is reason to suspect that IHF represents an unusual class of specific DNA binding proteins. IHF is a dimer of nonidentical subunits (of M, = 11,000 and 9,000); the gene sequence of these subunits not only reveals that they are quite similar to one

Cell
870

a

b I +25

d
+26 +36 +46

1

+25

12

e
Figure 1. Methylation Interference

ATTATAA@@@&GCATT~~CTT@TC@@TTTGTT@CCCGGA TAATATTTTTTC~T@@G@@T@@TT@@@C@@C@@!GC~T +L +3l +40 +50

of the H' Site

A 279 bp Hindlll to BstNl fragment of plasmid pHN919, containing the H' site, was end-labeled at the Hindlll site and modified with DMS as described in Experimental Procedures. (a) and (c) present data for the top and bottom strands, respectively; in each case lane 1 shows the cleavage pattern of the partially methylated DNA that served as input to the experiment, and lane 2 shows the cleavage pattern of this DNA after isolation from IHF-DNA complexes. Densitometer tracings corresponding to (a) and (c) are presented in (b) and (d); the upper and lower portions are tracings of lanes 1 and 2, respectively. (e) presents the sequence of the H' region; the sequence following position +46 comes from a restriction site artificially introduced into the lambda DNA sequence at this point. As described in the text, residues that show strong and weak interference are marked with continuous and broken circles, respectively.

plexes were isolated by electrophoresis through polyacrylamide gels (Robertson and Nash, 1988). The DNA in these complexes was treated so as to break the phosphodiester backbone at the position of each alkylated base, and the resulting collection of fragments was displayed in a denaturing polyacrylamide gel. Comparison with a control set of fragments reveals those positions of the DNA sequence at which alkylation interferes with formation of the protein-DNA complex, i.e., the positions that are underrepresented in DNA extracted from the complex. Preliminary experiments showed that if large amounts of IHF were mixed with the modified DNA, no differences between control and complexed DNA could be discerned after the cleavage step. This indicates that the alkylation of a single residue does not create an absolute block to IHF binding. For the remainder of our experiments we used concentrations of IHF that did not saturate the binding of unmodified DNA fragments; this ensured that our assay was sensitive to moderate changes in affinity caused by alkylation of the fragment. Under these conditions, differences between complexed and uncomplexed DNA were readily seen. Figures la-ld present typical data for the H' binding site, the rightmost of three IHF sites found within atiP; Figure le summarizes the pattern that is observed. We characterize the interference effects as

strong or weak (indicated, respectively, by solid or broken circles around the relevant base). The former consistently show a dramatic underrepresentation in the DNA from the complex; the latter show more modest effects and/or are more variable between experiments. Three features of the observed pattern are noteworthy. First, a large region of DNA, encompassing coordinates 21 to 47, is subject to significant effects of alkylation. Second, within this 27 bp region, interference is not restricted to a few residues, but is dispersed over many residues. Third, although alkylation of both adenine and guanine causes interference, the pattern is biased toward adenine; 16 of the 18 adenines in the region show strong interference while only 3 of the 9 guanines in the region show strong interference. The same three features are also observed in the interference effects of alkylation on IHF binding to two other targets, the Hl and H2 binding sites that are found at the left and center of atiP respectively. As seen in Figure 2, interference effects of the H2 sites (a-c) extend over 25 bp; of the bases in this region, virtually every adenine causes interference (12 strong and 9 weak), but neither of the 2 guanines show a significant effect. Interference effects at the Hl site (Figures 2d-2f) are restricted to a region of 16 bp, but within this region, 9 of 12 adenines, but none of 4 guanines, cause strong interference.

Binding of IHF
871

a

d
e-108 m-116 g-122

e

c

GCAAAATCTAATTT~~~T~T~TTG~T~TTT~T~~!TC~~TTTTACGTTTC C G T T T T AG A T 7 A @ @ T

f

-50

T A T:@T@@C

-40

T@Tf&@@T$T

-30

AG T @ @ A A

T F CA AA G
-20

GTCACTAATACCATCT@@GTAGTTG@TTCATAGTGACTGC CAGTGATTATGGTAG@TTC($~C@@)CT@@GT$)TCACTGACG -130
-120 -110

Figure 2. Methylation

Interference

of the H2 and Hl Sites

A 136 bp Hindlll to Haell fragment of plasmid pWR243, containing the H2 site, and a 60 bp Hindlll to Ndel fragment of plasmid pPH54, containing the Hl site, were end-labeled at their Hindlll sites and modified with DMS as described in Experimental Procedures. (a) and (b) present the cleavage patterns of the top and bottom strands of the H2 site while (d) and (e) present the patterns for the top and bottom strands of the Hl site. In each case lane 2 shows the partially methylated DNA that served as input for the experiment, and lane 1 shows DNA that was isolated from IHF-DNA complexes. A summary of densitometer tracings for the H2 and Hl sites are presented in (c) and (f) respectively, using the convention described in Figure 1

Protection by IHF of Deoxyribose Residues in DNA The hydroxyl radical method of Tullius and Dombroski (1986) provides a valuable means to assess the interaction of a protein with the backbone of DNA. Hydroxyl radicals, generated by the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, are believed to cause strand breakage in DNA by extracting a proton from the deoxyribose moiety. Because the hydroxyl radical reagent is small, only severe changes in the exposure of the DNA backbone to the aqueous medium should cause significant alterations in the pattern of attack. Such changes in exposure could result either from direct contact with the protein or from proteininduced changes in helical parameters of the DNA. Figure 3 presents the hydroxyl radical analysis of the H' binding site for IHF. For both the top (Figure 3a) and bottom (Figure 3c) strands of this site, three distinct areas of strong protection are obvious from inspection of reactions

in the absence or presence of IHF. Densitometry (Figures 3b, and 3d) reveals that the three protected regions are separated by residues at which hydroxyl radical cleavage is even greater in the presence of IHF than that seen in its absence. Alignment of the data on the sequence of the H' site (Figure 4a) shows that each strand has a similar pattern of interspersed protection (marked by dots) and enhancement (marked by asterisks), but that these patterns are offset from each other by two or three nucleotides toward the 3' end of one strand in relation to its Watson-crick partner. The region in which IHF strongly affects backbone reactivity encompasses at least 25 bp, from coordinate +20 to +45, with weaker effects seen in the flanking regions. The identical pattern is observed for the H' site when it is located on a fragment that contains an entire atie i.e., a fragment with IHF bound simultaneously to the Hi and H2 sites as well (data not shown). In

Cell 872

Figure 3. Hydroxyl Radical Protection of the H' Site

b

A 130 bp Ncol to Sphl fragment of pCB21, containing the H' site, was labeled at its Ncol site, incubated with hydrogen peroxide plus ironEDTA in the absence or presence of IHF as described in Experimental Procedures and electrophoresed in a denaturing acrylamide gel. (a) and (c) show autoradiograms for the fragment labeled in the top and bottom strands, respectively. In each case, lane 1 contains DNA exposed to hydroxyl radicals in the absence of IHF, and lane 2 is the corresponding DNA incubated in the presence of saturating IHF (ml.5 ug/ml). (b) and (d), respectively, present densitometry tracings from (a) and (c). In each case, lane 1 is shown in at the bottom left and lane 2 at the top left; at the right, an envelope of lane 1 is superimposed on a tracing of lane 2.

Figure 4 it can also be noted that there is a rough agreement between the extent of hydroxyl radical protection and that afforded by IHF against attack by pancreatic DNAase I (Craig and Nash, 1984). The effect of IHF on hydroxyl radical attack at the Hl and H2 sites is shown in Figure 5. The H2 site is remarkable in that, even in the absence of protein, the DNA pattern is uneven (lane 1 of Figures 5a and 5b). The alternation of weakly and strongly cleaved bands probably reflects the presence of tracts of three or four tandem adenine residues that are interspersed throughout this region (Burkhoff and Tullius, 1987). It is also probable that these tracts are responsible for the unusual electrophoretic mobility of DNA from this region (Thompson et al., 1988). Buperimposed on the pattern of hydroxyl radical reactivity seen in the naked DNA, IHF causes an even more marked alteration (lane 2 of a and b). In the stretch of DNA from coordinate -50 to -20, three strong regions of protection are interspersed with regions of enhanced reactivity. Flanking this 30 bp segment weaker effects of IHF can be seen. Only two regions of strong protection can be seen in the Hl site (Figures 5c and 5d); these encompass coordinates -110 to -130 and are separated by a region of enhancement. Densitometry of the Hl and H2 sites (not

shown) lead to the semiquantitative assignment of protections and enhancements shown in Figure 4. As for the H' site, the pattern of protection and enhancement on one strand of each site is displaced from that of its Watson-crick complement by two or three nucleotides in the 3' direction. In addition, there is also rough agreement between the region in which IHF perturbs hydroxyl radical attack and that reported to show altered DNAase I sensitivity (Craig and Nash, 1984). Stoichiometry of IHF-DNA Complexes IHF protects at least 25 bp of DNA but has a M, of only 20,000. This raised the possibility that more than one protomer of IHF binds to a single site. To investigate this, we used gel electrophoresis to isolate complexes between radioactively labeled IHF and a differentially labeled DNA fragment containing a single IHF site. Accurate calculation of the ratio of protein to DNA in the complex depended on knowledge of the precise specific activities of each species as well as determination of the counting efficiency of the isolated material. As described in Experimental Procedures, radioactive IHF was prepared by growth in the presence of [3H]isoleucine. After purification, the chemical concentration of an aliquot was determined with an

Bmdmg of IHF
873

-1 I. .::. *... ::: t .,.....* ,.... ..I.. : : TTA-GCAAAATcTAAT-TAA~A~A~TGA~ArTrArA~cAr~TTAcGlr~clc~T

::

::

.:

The top middle, and bottom panels present data for the H' HZ, and Hl , sites, respectively. The degree of protection or enhancement caused by IHF is indicated by dots and asterisks placed above the top strand or below the bottom strand. The number of these symbols indicates the degree of the effect at each position in the sequence. The solid bar above and below the sequence marks the extent of IHF protection of this region against attack by pancreatic DNAase I; the hatched bar marks segments of uncertain protection, and the arrows indicate residues within the protected region that are exposed to DNAase I attack (Craig and Nash, 1984). amino acid analyzer. To obtain a DNA fragment of known specific activity, we end-labeled a plasmid with Y-[~~P]ATP and determined its concentration by spectroscopy. Cleavage of the plasmid near one end liberated a fragment with

a single IHF site; the specific activity of this fragment was deduced from the specific activity of the entire plasmid. To assess radioactivity of the two isotopes in the complex, mixtures of the labeled protein and DNA were electrophoresed, and the appropriate region of the resulting gel was dissolved. Controls containing aliquots of either the [3H]IHF or [32P]DNA in a similar volume of polyacrylamide were treated identically. The results of these manipulations are summarized in Table 1. For the two targets we have studied, the Hl and H' sites, the protein-to-DNA ratios cluster around a value of 1.0. The slightly higher values seen in experiments 7 and 8 may reflect some nonspecific binding to this larger fragment or even weak binding of IHF to a partial match of the IHF consensus sequence that is found near coordinate +170. We conclude that a single protomer of IHF binds to each IHF site. Because the stoichiometry of IHF binding has major implications for models of the IHF-DNA interaction (see Discussion), we tested two alternative interpretations of our result We first considered that a single IHF protomer might be shared between IHF binding sites. For example, a single IHF binding site might require two IHF protomers but if the same two protomers could simultaneously participate in a second complex, the average ratio of protein to DNA would be one. To test if IHF can bridge two DNAs, we again used the electrophoretic band shift assay, adapting a procedure used to identify "sandwich" complexes with lac repressor (Krtimer et al., 1987). We studied two

fragments that each contained an IHF site but were of different lengths. Complexes between these fragments
and IHF had identical mobilities regardless of whether the

IHF was incubated with the fragments separately or was incubated with a mixture of the two fragments (data not shown). The absence of a complex with novel mobility in the latter case implies that, under our conditions, IHF binds to only one fragment at a time. Our second concern

a

b

C

Figure 5. Hydroxyl Radical Protection of the Hl and H2 Sites A 400 bp Hindlll to Aval fragment of pYK100, containing a complete atie was labeled at its Hindlll site and treated as described in the legend to Figure 3. The DNA was electrophoresed for different times to optimally display the H2 site (a, b) or the l-l1 site (c, d). (a) and(c) present autoradiograms for DNA labeled in the top strand while(b) and(d) present data for the bottom strand. In each case, lane 1 is the reaction without IHF, and lane 2 is the reaction with saturating IHF; lane R contains A+G sequencing markers

-150'

R

1

2 1 2 1 2

Cell 674

Table 1. Stoichiometry

of IHF-DNA

Complexes Complexes

Experiment

Target Site HI Hl Hl Hl H' H' H' H'

Coordinates -250 -250 -250 -250 -25 -25 -25 -25 to -100 to -100 to -100 to - 100 to +I40 to +140 to +243 to +243

IHF (pmol) 1.08 1.04 1.40 1.27 1.16 1.03 0.95 0.95 + + + + + f f k .02 .02 .02 .02 .02 62 .02 .02

DNA (pmol) 1.03 0.97 1.20 1.19 1.14 0.99 0.75 0.74 + + + f + + + + .03 .03 .04 .04 .03 .03 .Ol .Ol

IHFlDNA 1.05 1.07 1.17 1.07 1.02 1.04 1.27 1.28 2 + + -c f * 2 k .04 .04 .04 .04 .03 .03 .03 .03

Complexes between gel elecytrophoresis. to labeling the Ndel dioactivity recovered Procedures.

3H-labeled IHF and 3zP-labeled DNA fragments containing the indicated IHF binding sites were isolated by polyacrylamide All fragments were derived from plasmid pCS21 by digestion with either Hindlll (- 250). Ncol (+ 140) or EarnHI (+ 243) prior (- 100) or Sphl (- 25) after labeling. The content of protein and DNA in the resulting complexes was calculated from the rafrom the dissolved segment of gel and from the specific activity of each component, determined as described in Experimental

was that complexes isolated from gels were not representative of IHF complexes in solution. For example, we wondered whether some, but not all, IHF protomers might be stripped from the DNA during electrophoresis. To challenge this hypothesis, we compared the size of the footprint from complexes isolated from the gel with those in solution, using the o-phenanthroline-copper reagent described by Kuwabara and Sigman (1987). For the one case we studied carefully, the bottom strand of the H' site, identical patterns were observed (data not shown). These negative experiments convince us that a simple one-toone stoichiometry for IHF and DNA is an accurate reflection of the nature of the complex. Discussion Features of the Protection/Interference Experiments The experiments reported in this paper greatly solidify the view that IHF is an unusual sequence-specific DNA binding protein. A particularly impressive characteristic of the system is that the minor groove of DNA seems to be the primary surface for IHF contact. Our data supporting this contention may best be appreciated when the results of protection experiments are displayed on a planar representation of the double helix (Figure 6). In this figure we have aligned the consensus sequence (Friedman, 1988) WATCAANNNNTTR (W = AT; R = A or G; N = A, G, C, or T), of each target site so that common patterns can be readily compared. Two features indicate that the minor groove is of primary importance. First, alkylation of adenine, a modification that alters the minor groove surface, predominates over alkylation of guanine, a modification that alters the major groove, as an effective means to block IHF binding. Combining the data for all three target sites, about three-quarters of the adenines but only onefifth of the guanines in the target region show strong interference effects. Conversely, alkylation of only 3 of 53 adenines but 9 of 15 guanines in the target region fails to cause any interference (Figures 1 and 2). It should be pointed out that not only is the preponderance of adenine interference effects unusual, but the large number of residues that perturb binding is, to our knowledge, un-

precedented. We do not know to what extent the interference by alkylation reflects direct contact between IHF protein and the altered DNA bases. It is possible that some of the effects of alkylation are indirect consequences of DNA modification on the shape of DNA or its capacity to be bent by IHF. However, as summarized in Figure 6, many residues that show decreased IHF binding after modification are also protected by IHF from alkylation (Craig and Nash, 1984). For these residues, it is simplest to imagine that the affected portion of each base makes close contact with IHF. Combining the data for all three sites, there are 15 adenines and only 1 guanine that fit this criterion. Although the target region is generally rich in AT base pairs and therefore offers fewer guanines for comparison, it is this disparity that leads us to believe that the minor groove is the critical surface for IHF contact. The recombinase that is responsible for phase variation in Salmonella also shows a predominant pattern of adenine interference and protection; it may be a second case where the minor groove encodes DNA binding specificity (Glasgow et al., 1989). An interesting contrast is provided by the recent study of a protein that binds to and bends an AT-rich segment of the SV40 origin (Baur and Knippers, 1988). Here, binding is unperturbed when any of the 17 adenines in the target region are methylated, although methylation of 3 guanines that flank this region depresses binding. It is clear that the unique pattern seen for IHF is not an inescapable consequence of the preponderance of adenine residues in the target region. The second feature seen in Figure 6 that highlights the minor groove is the pattern of hydroxyl radical protection. For each target, IHF protects several clusters of sugar residues from attack. These clusters appear in pairs that lie across the minor groove from one another. In general, one can easily judge which two clusters form a pair because the different clusters have different lengths. For example, in each site there is a long (5 to 7 nucleotides) patch of strongly protected sugars near the WATCAA portion of the consensus sequence; directly across the minor groove from this stretch lies another protected string of comparable length. (The same pattern can be deduced from the data of Stenzel et al. (1987) on the IHF footprint

Binding of IHF
a75

Figure 6. Summary ence Data

of Protectron and Interfer-

a

b

The DNA helrx IS diagrammed In a planar representation (Siebenlist and Gilbert, 1960) in which the positions of residues are projected onto the surface of a cylinder (radius = 6.9 A) which is then unrolled onto a flat surface. To mark the position of the DNA backbone, a continuous ramp connects each phosphate residue. The positron of the plane of each base pair IS indicated by a horrzontal line; although these are drawn only across the minor groove, it should be understood that the base pair projection occupies almost the entire width of the diagram. The strand whose sequence IS indicated has its Send at the bottom ot the diagram, i.e., thisstrand should be read from left to right. The consensus sequence for IHF binding is wrrtten In boldface type. (a), (b), and (c) show the H' , H2, and HI sites, respectively. Positions at which IHF causes moderate to strong protection against attack by hydroxyl radicals are marked with filled crrcles. Positions at which alkylation interferes strongly with the binding of IHF are marked by filled triangles, and positions that are strongly protected by IHF from alkylatton (Craig and Nash, 1964) are marked by empty triangles.

of a site in the replication origin of pSC101.) Parsimony suggests that these two sets of protections are due to a segment of IHF protein lying in the minor groove between them. The same hypothesis would, of course, account for the predominant interference effects of alkylation of adenines that is seen in this region. According to this hypothesis, other patches of protection, e.g., that encompassing the TTR portion of the consensus sequence, would reflect additional minor groove contacts by IHF. We recognize that the pattern of hydroxyl radical protection we observed does not necessarily reflect intimate protein-DNA contact. For example, a similar pattern of alternate protections and enhancements (Figure 4) might be expected if an IHF site simply sits on the surface of a globular protein, much as DNA sits on the surface of the nucleosome or other large structure (Travers and Klug, 1987; Harata et al., 1988). However, it seems hard to reconcile the strong protection of five to seven consecutive residues, as seen at the center of each IHF site (Figure 6), with steric hindrance due to surface contact. The latter should protect a few residues on one face of the helix and not be effective in protecting residues that reach more than half-way around the helical cylinder. The hypothesis that IHF contacts DNA via the minor groove raises interesting questions about the mechanism by which it reads DNA sequence. It must be emphasized that IHF is a sequence-specific binding protein. Virtually every DNA that interacts strongly with IHF contains a close match to the consensus sequence (Gamas, 1987). In the few cases tested, alteration of this sequence by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis causes significant decrease in binding affinity (Gardner and Nash, 1986; Thompson et al., 1986; Stenzel et al., 1987). If IHF detects this sequence by contacting the minor groove, it must do

so despite the following complication. As first pointed out by Seeman et al. (1976) those portions of each nucleotide base that project into the major groove present a distinct set of hydrogen bond donors and acceptors that could be used by a protein to sense the identity of each base pair. In contrast, there are few hydrogen bond donors and acceptors that project into the minor groove; moreover, their pattern is degenerate. For example, in the archetypical S form of DNA, the spatial location of hydrogen bond donors and acceptors are virtually identical for an A-T and a T-A base pair (Seeman et al., 1976). How might IHF solve the problem of DNA specificity? Perhaps it relies on the capacity for DNA sequence to determine either the conformation of the DNA backbone or the precise positioning of the base pairs (Dickerson, 1983). Since IHF can bind to targets such as the H'and Hl sites, which are not grossly curved in the absence of protein (Robertson and Nash, 1988; Thompson et al., 1988) the features of DNA shape that IHF could see must be local. Recently Sigler and colleagues (Otwinowski et al., 1988) have presented evidence that trp repressor reads DNA sequence in the major groove by just such indirect methods. The striking features that are common to each of the three IHF sites we have examined are a long stretch of protection/interference near the WATCAA portion of the consensus sequence and a shorter patch of protectionlinterference that includes the TTR portion of the consensus sequence. In two IHF binding sites, H2 and H' there is a , third strong patch of protection/interference that is barely seen in the Hl site (Figure 6). This finding correlates well with earlier DNAase I protection studies that have shown that the Hl site is smaller than the other two sites in attP and has a lower affinity for IHF (Craig and Nash, 1984; Gardner and Nash, 1986). We do not know what features

Cell 676

of the DNA sequence are responsible for this difference, but it is interesting to note that only the H2 and H' sites have tracts of four to six tandem adenine residues in the additionally protected region. Recently, X-ray crystallography of oligonucleotides containing such tracts has revealed that they adopt an unusual conformation that features propeller twisting of the base pairs (Nelson et al., 1987; Coll et al., 1987); perhaps IHF prefers the deep and narrow minor groove that characterizes this kind of DNA. Possible Relatives of IHF Although IHF seems to contact DNA in an unusual way, it is likely that it is not unique. The capacity of IHF to bind specific sequences within AT-rich DNA through minor groove contacts should be an asset that has been exploited in a variety of biological settings. We have tried to identify other proteins that might share the same binding strategy in two different ways. We first searched for an homologous protein, i.e., one with an amino acid sequence that is evolutionarily related to IHF. To make the search more broad, we searched for homology not simply to the individual subunits of IHF, but to a composite that incorported all known members of the HU family of nonspecific binders along with IHF (Gribskov et al., 1987; Patthy, 1987). Using the Profile Analysis package designed by the University of Wisconsin Genetics Computer Group, we searched over 10,000 entries in a protein data base with either the composite profile of the entire protein or just that part of it that is presumed to be the DNA binding surface (residues 52-77, Greene et al., 1987). In the former case, we found no new protein whose amino acid sequence matched that of the family profile nearly as well as any known family member. However, in the second search a few provocative matches were found to the arm region of the HU-IHFfamily. Among these were a portion of the Rous sarcoma virus pal gene, the nucleocapsid protein of respiratory syncitial virus, the putative transposaseof E. coli insertion element 186, the E2A DNA binding protein of adenovirus, the S. cerevisiae RADlO repair protein, the histone Hl protein of trout, and the human CTFlNFl binding protein. However, in none of these cases is the similarity particularly striking nor does the homology extend substantially beyond the searched region. Furthermore, in no case is there strong reason to believe that the region that matches HU-IHF is directly involved in contacting nucleic acid. Future research will be needed to determine if the similarity between these proteins and the HU-IHF family is significant. The second way in which we have tried to find IHF relatives is via the characteristic features of the IHF footprint. As pointed out, IHF footprints are unusual in that they are dominated by an apparent interaction with the minor groove. DMS interference is a commonly used technique which could reveal such an interaction in other systems. While most DNA binding proteins display a strong bias toward interference by modified guanine, a few share with IHF a preponderance of interference by modified adenine. The a protein, a member of the HMG-I family of chromosomal nonhistone proteins, binds preferentially to DNA containing short runs of AT base pairs. This protein not

only shows a prominent adenine interference pattern, but displays other features indicative of minor groove binding (Solomon et al., 1986). Another instance of prominent adenine interference involves the specific protein-DNA complex that governs immediate early gene expression of herpes simplex virus (Preston et al., 1988). In this case, in contrast to the low sequence specificity of the nonhistone proteins, the immediate early complex (IEC) has a welldefined consensus sequence for binding. TAATGARAT. This is a particularly complicated system since the herpes protein that is needed for complex formation, Vmw65 (also called VP16), is not itself a DNA binding protein but appears to modify at least two host proteins (Gerster and Roeder, 1988). One of these proteins is the octanucleotide binding factor (Gerster and Roeder, 1988; O ' Hare and Goding, 1988) a protein that itself shows much adenine interference (Scheidereit et al., 1987; Sturm et al., 1987; Pruijn et al., 1988) and, like IHF, appears to make contacts around the entire circumference of the double helix. It should be noted that although the two eukaryotic systems that display strong minor groove interference are intriguing, the available amino acid sequence for these systems (Lund et al., 1987; Campbell et al., 1984; Sturm et al., 1988) provides no strong evidence that they are structurally related to the IHWHU family. Because of the great evolutionary separation between E. coli and eukaryotes as well as the tolerance of 8 ribbons for many amino acids, direct structural studies may be required to make a meaningful comparison. A Model for the Interaction of IHF and DNA The similarity in amino acid sequence between the subunits of IHF and those of the HU family (Drlica and Rouviere-Yaniv, 1987; Greene et al., 1987) suggests that the B. stearothermophilus HU structure, determined by X-ray crystallography (Tanaka et al., 1984) can be taken as as reasonable approximation for the structure of IHF. If this assumption is true, then it is a worthwhile exercise to see if the footprinting data that we have collected can be gracefully accommodated in a specific protein-DNA model. As described above, the outstanding feature of the HU protein structure is a pair of 8 sheet arms that can encircle DNA, and the outstanding feature of the IHF footprint is the prominence of the minor groove. Therefore, we are attracted to models in which the arms of IHF occupy the minor groove of its target DNA. (It should be pointed out that other members of the IHWHU family, because of differences in amino acid sequence of the arms or the nucleotide sequence of the binding site, might well position their arms into the major groove.) It should be recalled that each arm of IHWHU can only cover 5 or 6 bp (Tanaka et al., 1984) so the entire IHF footprint can not be reconciled by one pair of arms alone. (In the X-ray structure of HU, only the proximal portion of the arm can be seen, but the estimate of the amount of DNA covered by the arm is based on modeling the distal portion in a maximally extended shape.) We have chosen to place the arms of IHF along that portion of the DNA target that shows the longest continuous patch of protection/ interference, i.e., in the segment that covers the WATCAA

Srnding of IHF a77

Figure 7. Stereo View of Models for the interaction

of IHF and DNA

(a) (top) shows an attempt to fit IHF to straight DNA and (b) (bottom) shows IHF docked with bent DNA. The presumptive a carbon positions for IHF are traced in green and the nonhydrogen atoms of the H' DNA binding site are traced in cyan. The DNA is oriented so that at the left of each view is presented residues from the left of the H' site (see Figure 4). To mark positions of maximal protection against hydroxyl radical attack, yellow spheres are placed around the 03 atom of sugars at residues 20, 30, and 42 (bottom strand) and residues 23, 33, and 44 (top strand). Similarily, to mark positions of maximal enhancement of hydroxyl radical reactivity, red spheres are placed around the 03 atom of sugars at residues 25 and 38 (bottom strand) and residues 28 and 40 (top strand)

portion of the consensus sequence (Figure 6). Figure 7a shows the results of docking IHF with the DNA containing the H' binding site. To reflect the fact that in the absence of protein the H' site shows no intrinsic curvature (Robertson and Nash, 1988; Thompson et al., 1988), the starting DNA is modeled as an approximately straight piece of Blike DNA. Even with this simplification, it is clear that the arms nicely align along the minor groove, a feature pointed out first by Tanaka et al. (1984). We have not attempted to fit the arms precisely into the groove or to study how residues of the arms might contact the DNA. However, specific schemes based on the minor groove interaction of antibiotics or the conformation of 6 ribbons have been proposed (Gursky et al., 1977; Church et al., 1977) and could be used as guides for more detailed models. In Figure 7a, it can be seen that arms (missing only 4 amino acids in this representation) encompass about one turn of the helix. However, two important parts of the footprint pattern, highlighted by yellow spheres, are not covered by the arms. Our first thought was that each of these parts would be covered by additional protomers of IHF. Indeed, Tanaka et al., (1984) specifically proposed that HU protomers would bind in tandem to DNA and that interactions between adjacent protomers would serve to bend the DNA. Our stoichiometry determination eliminates this class of model. Instead, we must conclude that a single protomer of IHF makes all the contacts deduced from the footprint. Thus, in the context of the model of Figure 7a, additional sequence elements of the binding site must come into contact with the protein by bending of the DNA. There are

many ways in which this might happen. Figure 7b presents one way that readily accounts for most of our data; a related model that accommodates many of the experimental facts presented here has been independently proposed (White et al., 1989; see also Friedman, 1988). The DNA is bent smoothly via a graded series of small alterations in roll and tilt (to be described in detail elsewhere). As a result of the bending, the flanking segments of the H' site come into contact with the body of the IHF protomer. One or more segments of the protomer could then make intimate contact with the DNA and account for the remaining protection. Prominent candidates for such segments of the protein are the carboxy-terminal a helix that lies under the arms or the 6 strands that lie just beneath the carboxy-terminal helix. Our ignorance of the side chain conformation for these residues in IHF make a more detailed model inappropriate, but these elements should be promising targets for site-directed mutagenesis One of the attractive features of the model shown in Figure 7b, and one that guided its construction, is that it accounts for the pattern for enhanced hydroxyl radical reactivity (Figure 4). In Figure 7b, the regions of enhanced reactivity (marked by red spheres) appear at places where the DNA is not only facing away from the protein but at places where the minor groove is maximally expanded in conjunction with the bending of the DNA. It should be noted that the exposed regions mostly involve nonconsensus base pairs. It has been reported that some IHF target sites bind the protein poorly although they match the

Cell

a78

consensus sequence well (Leong et al., 1985; Gamas et al., 1987; Prentki et al., 1987). It is easy to imagine that, in some of these cases, weak binding reflects difficulty in deforming the DNA in the exposed regions. The model of Figure 7b is quite symmetrical, i.e., the DNA is bent on both sides of the central WATCAA element. This is needed to accommodate both the patch of protection/interference covering the TTR element and that of the tandem adenines. A similar symmetry would be needed for the H2 binding site because it too shows three patches of protection/interference. In contrast, the Hl site has only two strong patches of protection/interference (Figure 6). This might suggest that Hl DNA is bent only once around IHF. However, from an analysis of the relative degree of retardation of fragments with IHF located centrally or terminally, Thompson et al. (1988) have calculated that the Hl and H'sites curve DNA similarily, approximating a bend of 1409 In the context of the model of Figure 7b, this suggests that the DNA of the Hl site is also draped symmetrically around IHF. Presumably, the replacement of the A-rich stretch found in the H2 and H' sites by a different sequence at the Hl site has made the contacts between IHF and DNA of this region too weak to exclude the footprinting reagents but has not eliminated them altogether. Perhaps, for example, the phosphates of this segment of the Hl target contact the protein while the corresponding segment of H2 and H' permits contacts between sugar and base as well. We do not know what other sequences besides an A-rich stretch might be compatible with tight binding in this region, but it clearly forms a second segment outside of the consensus sequence in which base changes can alter the strength of IHF binding. In summary, we believe the made1 of Figure 7b creates a useful working hypothesis for the way IHF binds to its DNA targets. This model has focused our attention on various segments of the IHF protein that were not previously implicated in DNA binding and has offered clues to the heterogeneity of different IHF binding sites. Future genetic, biochemical, and crystallographic experiments will explore aspects of this model in more detail.
Experimental Procedures

mids with an enzyme that cuts them once, typically 20 to 100 bp from an IHF site. After treatment with alkaline phosphatase (Boehringer Mannheim), phenol extraction and ethanol precipitation, the fragments were labeled either with [Y-~*P]ATP (New England Nuclear, 3000 ClmM) using polynucleotide kinase (Boehringer Mannheim) or with [a-32P] deoxynucleotide triphosphates (New England Nuclear, 3000 ClmM) using the Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase I (Bethesda Research Labs). After ethanol precipitation and treatment with a second restriction enzyme, the desired fragment (60 to 410 bp) was isolated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. After elution from the crushed gel, the fragment was purified by passage over a DE 52 (Whatman) column and ethanol precipitation. When fragments were to be used in stoichiometry experiments. two extra steps had to be taken to remove label that was not associated with the DNA fragment. First, after the phosphatase treatment the DNA was treated with RNAase A (Sigma, 10 pglml) and RNAase Tl (Pharmacia, 1 U/ml) at 50% for 1 hr. The mixtures were then supplemented with SDS (0.5%) and proteinase K (Calbiochem, 500 nglml) and incubated at 37% for 30 min. This procedure removed small RNA fragments that contaminated many of our plasmid preparations and that readily incorporated label. Second, after a 5' end-labeling, plasmids were passed over a Nensorb (DuPont) column before ethanol precipitation to ensure complete removal of unincorporated label. Protection/Interference Experiments Interference with the binding of IHF caused by methylation of target DNA was measured essentially as described (Hendrickson and Schleif. 1985). Briefly, end-labeled DNA, ~10s cpm in 100 nl of a soiution containing 50 m M sodium cacodylate (pH 7.5) 10 m M MgCIa, 0.1 m M EDTA, and 40 m M KCI was treated with 1 ul of a 1:l mixture of dimethylsulfate (Aldrich) and ethanol at room temperature for 3 min. After ethanol precipitation, the fragment (~2 x lo5 cpm) was mixed with IHF (0.15 to 0.40 pglml) in 40 ~1 of a solution containing 50 m M Tris-HCI (pH 8.0) 20 m M KCl, 10% glycerol, 100 pglml of bovine serum albumin, and 25 pg/ml of sonicated salmon sperm DNA. After 10 min at 25%. DNA was electrophoresed (10 V/cm for 2 hr) through an 8% polyacrylamide gel at room temperature (Robertson and Nash, 1988). The free DNA and the IHF-DNA complex were isolated by soaking the appropriate pieces of the gel overnight. After ethanol precipitation, the DNA was cleaved at the positions modified by DMS and electrophoresed as described (Craig and Nash, 1984). We generally compared the cleavage pattern of DNA extracted from the complex with that of the premethylated substrate DNA. Little difference in the interference pattern was noted when free DNA extracted from the gel was used as a control in place of the initial premethylated material. This is because at the low concentrations of IHF needed to make this a sensitive assay, the failure to bind IHF is not simply a consequence of interference by methylation but reflects the limiting amount of protein. The capacity of IHF to protect DNA from attack by hydroxyl radical was measured essentially as described by Tullius and Dombroski (1986). Briefly, end-labeled DNA (*50,000 cpm) was incubated in 167 11 of a mixture containing 50 m M Tris-HCI (pH 7.4) 50 m M KCI. 0.1 m M EDTA. 100 kg/ml bovine serum albumin, 2.5 pg/ml of sonicated salmon sperm DNA, and 0.20 to 1.5 vglml of IHF. After 10 min at 25%, 10 ~1 each of freshly made stocks of 0.2 m M iron-EDNA, 0.6% hydrogen peroxide, and 20 m M sodium ascorbate were added. After 2 min, the reaction was stopped by addition of thiourea, ethanol precipitated, and electrophoresed in a denaturing polyacrylamide gel. Densitometry of autoradiograms was carried out with a Shimadzu model CS-910 densitometer. Stoichiometry of IHF-DNA Complexes To prepare labeled IHF, strain K5746 (Nash et al., 1987) was grown at 32% in 1 I of M9 medium supplemented with 1 W/ml of vitamin Bl, 1 pglml of biotin, and 200 pM of each of the 20 naturally occurring amino acids. At mid-log phase, the medium was replaced by one in which the concentration of isoleucine and valine was dropped to 100 PM. After an additional 15 min at 31% 5 mC of 14.5~sH] isoleucine (ICN, 32 ClmM) was added, and the temperature was shifted to 41%. After 3 hr, the cells were harvested and IHF was purified as described (Nash et al., 1967) to near homogeneity; about 1 mg was recovered. An accurate concentration of this material was determined by amino acid analysis as follows. A portion of the material was dialyzed against

Plasmids and DNA Fragments Plasmid-containing derivatives of E. coli strain 204 were grown, and supercoiled DNA was prepared from them as described previously (Nash and Robertson, 1981). Plasmid pYK100 contains atfP sequences from coordinate -250 (Hindlll) to +242 (BarnHI), cloned between the corresponding sites of pBR322. Two truncated derivatives of this plasmid were obtained from the laboratory of A. Landy. Plasmid pPH54 (Hsu et al., 1980) has replaced lambda sequences from coordinates -250 to -160 with a Hindlll site. Plasmid pWR243 (Ross and Landy, 1983) has replaced lambda sequences from coordinates -250 to -70 with a Hindlll site and also is deleted for lambda sequences from coordinates +4 to +242, as a result of the removal of a Ddel fragment. Plasmid pHN919 (Robertson and Nash, 1988) contains lambda sequences from coordinates +4 to +46 cloned between direct repeats of a 316 bp segment of pBR322. Plasmids pCB19 and pCB21 (described in Kitts and Nash, 1968) were made by C. Bauer, University of Indiana, and contain a segment of lambda (coordinates -353 to +1128) cloned between the EcoRl and Sall sites of pBR322; plasmids pCB19 and pCB21 contain an artificial Sphl site at the positions +25 to +30 and -28 to -23, respectively. End-labeled fragments were prepared by restricting the above plas-

Binding of IHF 879

50 m M potassium phosphate (pH 7.0) containing 200 m M KCI to remove material that interfered with the determination. An aliquot was lyophilized, hydrolyzed in constant boiling HCI (Pierce), dried, and resuspended rn 0.1 ml of 0.2 M sodium citrate (pH 7.2). This material was then assayed in a Beckman system 7300 High Performance Analyzer usmg a Beckman 7000 Data System with the manufacturer' 200 s pmol standards. The content of aspartate. glutamate, proline. alanme. isoleucine, leucine, and phenylalanine was used to calculate the concentration of the protein. Excellent agreement was observed between estimates based on each of these seven stable amino acids. The concentration was independently confirmed by determining the optical density at 210 mn, using the estimate that 1.0 mglml of protein yields an optical density of 20.5 together with a calculated molecular weight for IHF of 21,800. The radioactivity in the dialyzed sample was determined after Incorporating an aliquot into a small plug of 8% polyacrylamrde gel, made by polymerizing 0.35 ml of the standard gel mixture in a test tube under nitrogen. The gel was then cut into pieces, dissolved in 0.5 ml of 21% hydrogen peroxide and 17% HCIO., in a closed scmtillation vial at 60% overnight (Carey, 1988) and counted with 15 ml of Aquasol (New England Nuclear). This specific activity of IHF was 383 cpmlpmol. DNA fragments of known specific activity were prepared as follows. A plasmid was linearized and labeled as described above. Before the second restriction step it was diluted with unlabeled plasmid that had been prepared in the same way. The absorbance at 260 mn of this mixture was determined and used, together with the size of the plasmid and an extinction coefficient of 13,000, to calculate the molar concentration of plasmid. The radioactivity in the sample was determined as described above for IHF; typrcal specific activities were 1500 to 2000 cpmlpmol of plasmid. The equal labeling of the two ends of the plasmid was confirmed by restricting it so as to liberate two pieces of comparable srze followed by electrophoresis on a polyacrylamide gel and quanhtation of label in the two fragments. For stoichiometry determinations, the linear plasmid was cut after its specific activity was measured so as to liberate a small fragment containing one IHF site and a large fragment containing the remainder of the plasmid. In a typical experiment, a 60 ~1 solution containing 50 m M Tris-HCI (pH 8.0) 250 ftglml of bovme serum albumin and 22.5% glycerol was mixed with 80 nl of a solution containing 10 m M Tris-HCI (pti 8.0) 1 m M sodium EDTA, and ~2 pmol of end-labeled restricted plasmid. To this was added 10 nl of a solution containing 50 m M potassium phosphate (pH 7.4) 200 m M KCI. and ~20 pmol of IHF. (In other experiments, the ionic conditions and the amount of IHF were varied modestly with no appreciable change in results.) After IO min at 25% the mixture was electrophoresed on a 3 m m thick 8% polyacrylamide gel for 3 hr at 8 V/cm. The bands representing free DNA and the IHF-DNA complex were located by autoradiography at 4% for 24 hr. These were excised in a volume of -0.35 cm3 and dissolved and counted as described above. Corrections were made for spillover from one isotope channel to another, for trailing of counts from the free DNA band into the regron containing the complex, and for the migration of unbound IHF. The sampling error in counting was calculated from the square root of the absolute number of counts accumulated during a 5 min counting period. Errors were combined in accordance with standard procedures (Chase and Rabinowitz, 1969). Computer Modeling IHF was represented by the a carbon backbone of the B. stearothermophilus HU, using refined coordinates generously provided by S. Whtte. The IHF site was represented by the 28 bp segment from coordinates +19 to +46 of a#' that encompass the H' site. In the initial phase, coordinates for the nucleotide bases of this DNA were calculated from idealized parameters (Dickerson, 1983). providing an approximately straight DNA. Bending of this DNA was achieved by small changes m roll (<loo) and tilt (<So) parameters (defined as described by Sarai et al., 1988). IHF and DNA were then treated as rigid bodies and brought together using an Evans and Sutterland model PS3000 termmal. Acknowledgments We thank Gladys Deibler for help with the ammo acid analysrs and Steven White for provrding the coordinates of HU protein. We are par-

ticularlygrateful to Robert Jernigan and Akinorr Sarai for devoting their expertise and time to the elucidation of models for IHF binding. Carol Robertson is acknowledged for expert technical assistance as well as instruction in the techniques of protein purification and footprinting. We thank Steven Goodman and Robert Weisberg for reading this manuscript and Sandra Means for preparing it. The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked "advertisement" in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to Indicate this fact. Received January References Baur, C.-P, and Kntppers, R. (1988). Protem-Induced bending of the simran virus 40 origin of replication. J. Mol. Bio. 203. 1009-1019. Burkhoff, A. M., and Tullius, T. D. (1987). The unusual conformation adopted by the adenine tracts in kinetoplast DNA. Cell 48, 935-943. Campbell, M. E. M., Palfreyman, J. W., and Preston, C. M. (1984). Identification of herpes simplex virus DNA sequences which encode a transacting polypeptide responsible for stimulation of immediate early transcription. J. Mol. Bio. 180, 1-19. Carey, J. (1988). Gel retardation at low pH resolves trp repressor-DNA complexes for quantitative study. Proc. Natl. Acad Sci. USA 85, 975-979. Chase, G. D., and Rabinowrtz, J L. (1969). Indeterminate errors in measurement (statistics). In Princrples of Radtoisotope Methodology (Minneapolis, Minnesota: Burgress Publishing Co.), pp. 75-108. Church, G. M., Sussman, J. L., and Kim. S.-H. (1977). Secondary structural complementarity between DNA and proteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74, 1458-1462. Coil. M., Frederick, C. A., Wang, A. H.-J., and Rich, A. (1987). A bifurcated hydrogen-bonded conformation in the d(A.T) base pairs of the DNA dodecamer d(CGCAAATTTGCG) and its complex with drstamytin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84, 8385-8389. Crarg, N. L., and Nash, H. A. (1984). E. coli integration host factor binds to specific sites in DNA. Cell 39, 707-716. Dickerson, R. E. (1983). The DNA helix and how it is read. Sci. Am. 249, 94-l 11. Drlica, K., and Rouviere-Yaniv, J. (1987). Histonelike protems of bacteria. Microbial. Rev. 51, 301-319. Friedman, D. I. (1988). Integration host factor- a protein for all reasons. Cell 55, 545-554. Gamas, P., Chandler, M. G.. Prentkr, P, and Galas, D. J. (1987). Escherichia co/i integration host factor binds specifically to the ends of the insertion sequence IS7 and to its major insertion hot-spot in pBR322. J. Mol. Biol. 795, 261-272. Gardner, J. F., and Nash, H. A. (1986). Role of Escherichia co/i IHF protern in lambda site-specific recombination. A mutabonal analysts of bindmg sites. J. Mol. Biol. 791, 181-189. Gerster, T.. and Roeder, R. G. (1988). A herpesvrrus trans-activating protein interacts with transcription factor CTF-1 and other cellular proteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85, 6347-6351. Gilbert, W., Maxam, A., and Mirzabekov, A. (1976). Contacts between the LAC repressor and DNA revealed by methylation. In Control of Ribosome Synthesis, N. C. Kjeldgaard and 0. Maalme, eds. (New York: Academic Press), pp. 139-148. Glasgow, A. C., Bruist, M. F., and Srmon, M. I. (1989). DNA-binding properties of the Hin recombinase. J. Biol. Chem., in press. Greene, J. R., Appelt, K., and Geiduschek, E l? (1987). Prokaryotic chromatin: site-selective and genome-specific DNA-binding by a viruscoded type II DNA-binding protein. In DNA: Protein Interactions and Gene Regulation, E. B. Thompson and J Papconstantinou, eds. (Dallas, Texas: University of Texas Press). Gribskov, M., McLachlan, A. D., and Eisenberg. D. (1987). Profile analysis: detection of distantly related proterns. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84, 4355-4358. Gursky, G. V., Tumanyan, V. G., Zasedatelev, A. S., Zhuze. A. L., Grok25, 1989; revised March 16. 1989

Cell 880

hovsky, S. L.. and Gottikh, 8. P (1977). A code controlling specific binding of proteins to double-helical DNA and RNA. In Nucleic Acid-Protein Recognition, H. J. Vogel, ed. (New York: Academic Press), pp. 189-217. Harata, M., Ouchi, K., Ohata, S., Kikuchi, A., and Mizuno, S. (1988). Purification and characterization of W-protein. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 13952-13961. Hendrickson, W., and Schleif, Ft. (1985). A dimer of AraC protein contacts three adjacent major groove regions of the aral DNA site. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82. 3129-3133. Hsu, P-L., Ross, W., and Landy, A. (1980). The I phage an site: functional limits and interaction with Int protein. Nature 285, 85-91. Kitts, P A., and Nash, H. A. (1988). Bacteriophage lambdasite-specific recombination proceeds with a defined order of strand exchanges. J. Mol. Biol. 204, 95-107. Kramer, H., Niemoller, M., Amouyal, M., Revet, B., von WilckenBergmann, B., and Miiller-Hill, B. (1987). lac repressor forms loops with linear DNA carrying two suitably spaced lac operators. EMBO J. 6, 1481-1491. Kuwabara, M. D., and Sigman, D. S. (1987). Footprinting DNA-protein complexes in situ following gel retardation assays using l,lO-phenanthroline-copper ion: Escherichia co/i RNA polymerase-lac promoter complexes. Biochemistry 26, 7234-7238. Leong, J. M., Nunes-Diiby, S., Lesser, C. F., Youderian. P. Susskind, M. M., and Landy, A. (1985). The $80 and P22 attachment sites. J. Biol. Chem. 260, 4468-4477. Lund, T.. Dahl, K. H., Merk, E., Holtlund, J., and Laland, S. G. (1987). The human chromosomal protein HMG I contains two identical palindrome amino acid sequences. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 746, 725-730. Nash, H. A., and Robertson, C. A. (1981). Purification and properties of the Escherichia co/i protein factor required for h integrative recombination. J. Biol. Chem. 256, 9246-9253. Nash, H. A., Robertson, C. A., Flamm, E., Weisberg, R. A., and Miller, H. I. (1987). Overproduction of Escherichia co/i integration host factor, a protein with nonidentical subunits. J. Bacterial. 769, 4124-4127. Nelson, H. C. M., Finch, J. T., Luisi, B. F., and Klug, A. (1987). The structure of an oligo(dA).oligo(dT) tract and its biological implications. Nature 330, 221-226. O' Hare, P, and Goding, C. R. (1988). Herpes simplex virus regulatory elements and the immunoglobulin octamer domain bind a common factor and are both targets for virion transactivation. Cell 52. 435-445. Otwinowski, Z., Schevitz, R. W., Zhang, R.-G., Lawson, C. L., Joachimiak, A., Marmorstein, R. Q., Luisi, B. F., and Sigler, P B. (1988). Crystal structure of frp repressor/operator complex at atomic resolution. Nature 335, 321-329. Patthy, L. (1987). Detecting homology of distantly related proteins with consensus sequences. J. Mol. Biol. 198, 567-577. Prentki, P. Chandler, M., and Galas, D. J. (1987). Escherichia co/i integration host factor bends the DNA at the ends of IS7 and in an insertion hotspot with multiple IHF binding sites. EMBO J. 6, 2479-2487. Preston, C. M., Frame, M. C., and Campbell, M. E. M. (1988). A complex formed between cell components and an HSV structural polypeptide binds to a viral immediate early gene regulatory DNA sequence. Cell 52. 425-434. Pruijn. G. J. M., van Miltenburg, R. T., Claessens, J. A. J.. and van der Vliet, P C. (1988). interaction between the octamer-binding protein nuclear factor Ill and the adenovirus origin of DNA replication. J. Virol. 62, 3092-3102. Richet, E., Abcarian, P., and Nash, H. A. (1986). The interaction of recombination proteins with supercoiled DNA: defining the role of SUpercoiling in lambda integrative recombination. Cell 46, 1011-1021. Robertson, C. A., and Nash, H. A. (1988). Bending of the bacteriophage ), attachment site by Escherichia co/i integration host factor. J. Biol. Chem. 263, 3554-3557. Ross, W., and Landy, A. (1983). Patterns of ?. int recognition regions of strand exchange. Cell 33, 261-272. Sarai, A., Mazur, J.. Nussinov, R., and Jernigan, in the

of DNA helical structure and its sequence 27, 8498-8502.

dependence.

Biochemistry

Scheidereit, C., Heguy, A.. and Roeder, R. G. (1987). Identification and purification of a human lymphoid-specific octamer binding protein (CITF-2) that activates transcription of an immunoglobulin promoter in vitro. Cell 57, 783-793. Seeman, N. C., Rosenberg, J. M., and Rich, A. (1976). Sequencespecific recognition of double helical nucleic acids by proteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 73, 804-808. Siebenlist, U., and Gilbert, W. (1980). Contacts between Escherichia co/i RNA polymerase and an early promoter of phage T7. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77, 122-126. Solomon, M. J., Strauss, F., and Varshavsky, A. (1986). A mammalian high mobility group protein recognizes any stretch of six A.T base pairs in duplex DNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83, 1276-1280. Stenzel, T. T., Patel, P., and Bastia, D. (1987). The integration host factor of Escherichia coli binds to bent DNA at the origin of replication of the plasmid pSC101. Cell 49, 709-717. Sturm, R., Baumruker, T., Franza, B. R.. Jr., and Herr, W. (1987). A 100. kD HeLa cell octamer binding protein (OBPlOO) interacts differently with two separate octamer-related sequences within the SV40 enhancer. Genes Dev. 7, 1147-1160. Sturm, R. A., Das, G., and Herr, W. (1988). The ubiquitous octamerbinding protein Ott-1 contains a POU domain with a homeo box subdomain. Genes Dev. 2, 1582-1599. TaFaka, I., Appelt, K., Dijk, J., White, S. W., and Wilson, K. S. (1984). 3-Aresolution structure of a protein with histone-like properties in prokaryotes. Nature 370, 376-381. Thompson, J. F., and Landy, A. (1988). Empirical estimation of proteininduced DNA bending angles: applications of h site-specific recombination complexes. Nucl. Acids Res. 16. 9687-9705. Thompson, J. F, Waechter-Brulla, D., Gumport, R. I., Gardner, J. F., Moitoso de Vargas, L., and Landy, A. (1986). Mutations in an integration host factor-binding site: effect on lambda site-specific recombination and regulatory implications. J. Bacterial. 168, 1343-1351. Thompson, J. F., Mark, H. F. L., Franz, B., and Landy, A. (1988). Functional and structural characterization of stable DNA curvature in lambda aftP In DNA Bending & Curvature, W. K. Olson, M. H. Sarma, Ft. H. Sarma, and M. Sundaralingam, eds. (New York: Adenine Press), pp. 119-128. Travers, A., and Klug, A. (1987). DNA wrapping 327, 280-281. and writhing. Nature

Tullius, T. D., and Dombroski, B. A. (1986). Hydroxyl radical "footprinting": high-resolution information about DNA-protein contacts and application to h repressor and Cro protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83, 5469-5473. White, S. W., Appelt. K., Wilson, K. S., and Tanaka, I. (1989). A protein structural motif that bends DNA. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Genetics, in press.

R. L. (1988). Origin

