J. Mol. Biol. (1996) 263, 163­180

Substrate Recognition and Induced DNA Distortion by the PI-Sce I Endonuclease, an Enzyme Generated by Protein Splicing
Frederick S. Gimble* and Jeff Wang
Center for Macromolecular Design, Institute of Biosciences and Technology and Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Texas A&M University Houston TX 77030, USA PI-SceI, a double-stranded DNA endonuclease from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is generated by protein splicing of an intein, which is an internal polypeptide within a larger precursor protein. The enzyme initiates the mobility of the intein by cleaving at inteinless alleles of the VMA1 gene. Genetic and biochemical studies reveal that the enzyme makes numerous base-specific and phosphate backbone contacts with its 31 bp asymmetrical recognition site. This site can be divided into two regions, both of which contain nucleotides that are essential for cleavage by PI-SceI. Region I contains the PI-SceI cleavage site while Region II includes an adjacent sequence that covers two helical turns. Mutational, interference and DNA mobility shift analyses demonstrate that Region II is sufficient for high-affinity PI-SceI binding. Within this region, PI-SceI uses primarily phosphate backbone and some major groove interactions to contact the DNA, while within Region I, protein binding involves predominantly major groove interactions that overlap and lie proximal to the cleavage site. Interestingly, DNA binding by PI-SceI induces DNA conformational changes within Region II that are entirely exclusive of Region I sequences. Furthermore, additional distortion occurs when PI-SceI binds to Region I in conjunction with Region II. The importance of this latter distortion in the cleavage pathway is underscored by substrate mutations at or near the cleavage site that reduce or eliminate both Region I DNA bending and substrate cleavage. Based on these findings, we propose a model in which sequence-specific contacts made by PI-SceI contribute to its localization to the cleavage site and to its stabilization of a DNA conformation that is required for catalysis. Finally, we discuss how the recognition characteristics of PI-SceI may have allowed the evolution of other endonucleases with altered, but similar, specificities.
7 1996 Academic Press Limited

*Corresponding author

Keywords: PI-SceI; double-stranded DNA endonuclease; protein-DNA interaction; DNA bending; intein mobility

Introduction
Inteins are polypeptides that excise themselves from precursor proteins by protein splicing (for nomenclature see Perler et al., 1994), and have been described in organisms from each of the three phylogenetic kingdoms (reviewed by Mueller et al., 1993; Neff, 1993; Wallace, 1993; Colston & Davis, 1994; Belfort et al., 1995; Cooper & Stevens, 1995). In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the vacuolar ATPase (VMA1) intein is a mobile genetic element (Gimble & Thorner, 1992). Mobility of this intein, or ``intein homing'', begins when the excised PI-SceI protein
Abbreviation used: BSA, bovine serum albumin.
0022­2836/96/420163­18 $25.00/0

acts as a site-specific DNA endonuclease and creates a double-stranded break at a VMA1 allele that lacks the intein. Subsequent repair of the break in the chromosome using a donor allele leads to the eventual incorporation of the intein at the site. The PI-SceI endonuclease belongs to a family of endonucleases that occur in a variety of contexts, as part of self-splicing introns, as free-standing genes, or, in the case of PI-SceI, as in-frame inteins situated in host proteins (reviewed by Lambowitz & Belfort, 1993; Mueller et al., 1993). These enzymes cleave DNA within their recognition sequences to leave 4 bp 3'-hydroxyl overhangs, and require Mg2+ as a co-factor. Although the substrates for these enzymes differ, the recognition sequences are
7 1996 Academic Press Limited

164 typically asymmetrical and longer than 18 basepairs. A distinguishing characteristic of these enzymes are two conserved 12 amino acid residue sequence motifs (LAGLIDADG motifs) that are spaced approximately 100 amino acid residues apart (Michel et al., 1982; Waring et al., 1982; Hensgens et al., 1983). In the case of PI-SceI, these motifs are part of a single catalytic center that cleaves both DNA strands (Gimble & Stephens, 1995). Here, the interaction of PI-SceI and its recognition site is examined using a combination of genetic and biochemical strategies. Based on a characterization of deletion and point mutants, the PI-SceI recognition sequence is determined to be 31 bp long. Substantial evidence indicates that this sequence can be subdivided into two regions, where Region I includes the cleavage site, and Region II includes an adjacent region that encompasses nearly two helical turns. The term ``Region'' is used here to refer to subsequences of the PI-SceI recognition site that exhibit distinguishable interactions with PI-SceI based on biochemical and genetic experiments. Hydroxyl radical protection, and ethylation and methylation interference experiments indicate that PI-SceI makes important contacts in Region II, both in the major groove and along the phosphate backbone. Region II is sufficient for binding to PI-SceI as the protein binds with high affinity to a synthetic oligomer that includes only this region. In gel shift experiments, PI-SceI forms two protein-DNA complexes with its substrate, one that is exclusively due to Region II binding and the other that is due to binding to both regions. Furthermore, circular permutation analysis reveals that in these complexes, PI-SceI stabilizes distinct DNA distortions of differing degree. Point mutations in Region I have little effect on overall binding, but they significantly reduce the magnitude of the DNA distortion within Region I and the degree of substrate cleavage. Surprisingly, mutations at one position in Region I render the substrate hypersensitive to PI-SceI-mediated cleavage. Our data support a model where sequence determinants play important roles both for the localization of PI-SceI to the cleavage site and for the stabilization of distorted DNA conformations.

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

(positions -12 to +18 on the top and bottom strands) as a minimal recognition sequence for cleavage (Gimble & Thorner, 1993), but we have since found that this sequence is inefficiently cleaved when it is cloned into plasmids (data not shown). We have now demonstrated that a synthetic 36 bp duplex (positions -12 to +24, top and bottom strands) contains all of the sequence information required for optimal cleavage activity since it is cleaved as efficiently in vitro as a longer 67 bp substrate (Gimble & Stephens, 1995) that includes extensive flanking yeast sequences surrounding the PI-SceI cleavage site (data not shown). Taken together, these findings indicate that the borders of the actual recognition site lie somewhere between the 30 bp sequence defined previously and the 36 bp sequence that is sufficient for cleavage. To define the endpoints of an optimal substrate, we constructed a set of variant substrates with deletions of increasing length at either end of the 36 bp recognition sequence. The extent of PI-SceImediated cleavage was assayed for each of these variants and compared to that of a plasmid containing the 36 bp substrate and to that of a plasmid (pBSVDEX; Gimble & Thorner, 1993) that includes several hundred bases surrounding the homing site (Figure 1A). At one end of the substrate, deletion of nucleotides T-12 and C-11 does not affect the extent of PI-SceI-mediated cleavage, but removal of T-10 dramatically reduces cleavage. Similarly, the extent of cleavage is unaffected by deletion of nucleotides G+24 , G+23 and T+22 but is reduced by removal of nucleotide A+21 . Thus, within the foreign context of the Bluescript plasmid, a 31 bp sequence is sufficient to yield optimal cleavage activity by the enzyme. Interactions of PI-Sce I with the phosphate backbone To examine the interaction of PI-SceI with its substrate in more detail, ethylation interference analysis was used to define the phosphate contacts. In this procedure, the backbone phosphate groups of a 5'-end-labeled DNA are ethylated by treatment with ethylnitrosourea (Siebenlist & Gilbert, 1980) and incubated with PI-SceI protein. Bound DNA is separated from unbound DNA by gel electrophoresis, followed by cleavage at the modified positions with alkali. If modification of a phosphate group interferes with PI-SceI binding, the DNA will be enriched in the unbound fraction relative to the bound fraction. It should be noted that DNA fragments result which terminate with 3'-OH, 3'-ethylated phosphate or 3'-phosphate. When these species are not resolved, they appear as a single broad band that migrates slightly slower than the corresponding band cleaved in a Maxam-Gilbert sequencing reaction. In our experiments, all three products of alkali cleavage are observed for very short fragments (Figure 2). The results of an ethylation interference experiment using the 67-mer that contains the entire

Results
The PI-Sce I recognition site In the VMA1 gene, the homing site for the PI-SceI intein coincides exactly with the site of PI-SceI-mediated cleavage on one of the two DNA strands (Figure 1). DNaseI protection analysis indicates that PI-SceI contacts 35 bp regions on each DNA strand that are offset by four base-pairs (Figure 1A, positions -9 through +26 on the top strand and -13 through +22 on the bottom strand) and are asymmetrically situated about the cleavage site (Gimble & Stephens, 1995). In an earlier report, a primer extension experiment defined a 30 bp region

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

165

Figure 1. Determination of the minimal sequence required for optimal PI-SceI-mediated DNA cleavage. A, Cleavage analysis of plasmids with sequential deletions from either end of the PI-SceI recognition site. A schematic representation of the double-stranded PI-SceI recognition site is shown. The limits of PI-SceI-mediated DNaseI protection are indicated by filled arrowheads (as defined in Gimble & Stephens, 1995), the PI-SceI intein homing site is indicated by an open arrowhead, and the PI-SceI cleavage site is indicated by a bold line. Base-pairs are numbers from -1 and +1 extending from the center of the cleavage site. The boxed sequence represents the minimal sequence required for optimal PI-SceI-mediated cleavage as determined by this analysis. Shown below (denoted -12/24) is the top strand of the recognition site in pBS-PI-SceI in which the boxed sequences are plasmid derived. Underneath this sequence are shown the sequences of seven plasmid derivatives with different extents of deletion from one or the other ends of the 36 bp sequence. The numbered labels indicate, respectively, the upstream and downstream endpoints of the recognition sequences within each derivative. A + symbol indicates a level of cleavage activity similar to that of the full-length 36 bp substrate and a +/- indicates partial activity. B, Cleavage time course study of intact and deleted PI-SceI recognition sites. The percentage of the plasmid substrate converted to product is plotted as a function of time. The graph on the left shows the time course of cleavage for deletion derivative -9/24 (w), -10/24 (q) and -11/24 (r) and the graph on the right shows the results for derivatives -12/20 (w), -12/21 (q) and -12/22 (r), and -12/23 (r). Both graphs show the cleavage time course for pBSVDEX (W; Gimble & Thorner, 1993), where the PI-SceI recognition site is situated in a 758 bp segment of the VMA1 gene, and for pBS-PISce36 (-12/24; Q).

recognition sequence are shown in Figure 2. The most notable feature of the interaction is that ethylation of several phosphate groups lying in a region of the substrate adjacent to the cleavage site (positions +6 through +21) strongly interferes with PI-SceI binding. These contacts occur on both DNA strands. It is also evident that a region of weak interaction occurs on the other side of the cleavage site since ethylation of two phosphate groups at positions -7 and -8 interferes with protein binding. By contrast, binding enhancement is observed on

the top strand when the phosphate groups that border the cleavage site (positions +2 and +3) are ethylated. The regions of the substrate that strongly or weakly interfere with binding closely parallel the regions that are protected from hydroxyl radical attack (Gimble & Stephens, 1995). Those experiments also suggested that strong interactions occurred between positions +6 and +21. Moreover, the bases that neighbor the cleavage sites on either strand display enhanced sensitivity to attack by hydroxyl radicals. Taken together, the interference

166

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

Figure 2. Ethylation interference analysis. A, Interference of PI-SceI binding by DNA ethylation. Lanes: AG, products from a Maxam-Gilbert DNA sequencing reaction; F, free (untreated with PI-SceI) ethylated DNA; B, bound complex; UB, unbound DNA. CS indicates the position of the cleavage site on each strand. The brackets indicate ethylated phosphate groups that interfere with PI-SceI binding. Ethylation of phosphate groups marked with an asterisk promotes PI-SceI binding. The numbering of the nucleotides is as shown for Figure 1. B, Quantification of interference by PI-SceI on the top and bottom strands. The peak heights from individual nucleotides were determined using a PhosphorImager and expressed as the ratio of counts in the unbound DNA to those in the bound DNA. C, Representation of the complex. Ethylated phosphate groups that weakly (r, peak height ratio e1.7) or strongly (R, peak height ratio e2.0) interfere with PI-SceI binding are indicated. Other labels are as for Figure 1 and panel A.

and protection experiments point to a region that strongly contacts PI-SceI, and suggest the existence of an altered interaction at the cleavage site itself. Definition of a minimal binding region with the PI-Sce I substrate The phosphate groups that make strong contacts with PI-SceI occur in the cleavage product that binds tightly to the enzyme (Gimble & Stephens, 1995). To determine whether the contacted region of the substrate is sufficient to account for this tight binding, a series of duplex oligonucleotides were synthesized and assayed for binding by gel shift analysis. Preliminary studies indicated that PI-SceI binds to a 20-mer spanning positions +3 through +22 (data not shown). To define the endpoints of the minimal binding region in more detail, an 18-mer (+5/22), a 17-mer (+5/21), and three 16-mers (+7/22, +6/21 and +5/20) were synthesized and assayed. Figure 3A shows the locations of these duplexes relative to the entire recognition sequence, and Figure 3B shows a

representative gel shift experiment using the 17-mer duplex. The measured equilibrium dissociation constants for the 18-mer and the 17-mer duplexes are 1 nM and 3.6 nM, respectively (Figure 3A). Both of these values are similar to the value of 3.7 nM that we reported previously for the binding of PI-SceI to a 67-mer duplex that contains the entire PI-SceI target (Gimble & Stephens, 1995). In contrast to these results, the binding of two 16-mer duplexes (+7/22 and +5/20) resembles that of a non-specific DNA fragment that lacks the recognition sequence (data not shown). The third 16-mer tested (+6/21) binds to PI-SceI specifically, but with an equilibrium dissociation constant in excess of 200 nM. We conclude that the 17 bp sequence extending from position +5 through +21 constitutes a minimal binding region required for tight binding of PI-SceI. Binding of PI-Sce I to its substrate stabilizes multiple DNA distortions DNA endonucleases often stabilize substrate distortions upon binding (Kim et al., 1990; Winkler

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

167

Figure 3. Definition of a PI-SceI minimal binding region. A, Apparent equilibrium dissociation constants for the interaction of PI-SceI with the 16-, 17- and 18-mer duplex oligonucleotides. A schematic representation of the PI-SceI recognition site is shown and is labeled as for Figure 1. The duplex oligonucleotides used in the binding studies are represented as lines above the recognition site, and their lengths and Kd values are indicated. PI-SceI forms a specific complex with the +6/21 oligonucleotide but an accurate Kd value could not be determined due to the weak binding. Non-specific binding corresponds to a Kde1 mM. The binding experiments were performed in triplicate and standard deviations are given. B, Representative binding experiment of PI-SceI to the +5/21 17-mer duplex oligonucleotide. F, free 17-mer DNA; C, PI-SceI-DNA complex. Lane 1 contains no PI-SceI protein, the concentrations in lanes 2 to 16 are 5 × 10-11 M, 2 × 10-10 M, 5 × 10-10 M, 1 × 10-9 M, 1.5 × 10-9 M, 2 × 10-9 M, 3 × 10-9 M, 4 × 10-9 M, 6 × 10-9 M, 8 × 10-9 M, 1 × 10-8 M, 2 × 10-8 M, 4 × 10-8 M, 1 × 10-7 M, and 5 × 10-7 M, respectively.

et al., 1993). Previously, we demonstrated that the PI-SceI cleavage site becomes hypersensitive to hydroxyl radical attack when bound to the enzyme, and we speculated that DNA distortion occurs in this region (Gimble & Stephens, 1995). To detect conformational differences within the PI-SceI target sequence, we generated a set of circularly permuted fragments of identical length where the PI-SceI recognition site occurs at different positions relative to the ends. The relative electrophoretic mobilities of protein:DNA complexes containing these fragments were compared, and PI-SceI-medicated DNA bending was inferred if fragments containing the target site located near the center were more retarded in the gel than fragments containing the site near one end or the other (Wu & Crothers, 1984). This effect occurs because a bend in the middle of a fragment causes a decreased electrophoretic mobility relative to fragments with a bend near one end. The fragments used for the circular permutation

experiment were generated from pBEND-WT, which is a pBEND2 (Kim et al., 1989) derivative that contains the PI-SceI recognition site, and are shown in Figure 4A. When purified PI-SceI is incubated with these fragments and subjected to electrophoresis on non-denaturing polyacrylamide gels, three bands are apparent (Figure 4B). The fastest migrating band (labeled UB in Figure 4B) contains unbound DNA, since it co-migrates with DNA that has not been incubated with PI-SceI, while the other two bands represent PI-SceI:DNA complexes. For both sets of complexes, the DNA fragments with the PI-SceI site near the center migrate significantly slower in the gel than DNA fragments in which the site is nearer one end, indicating that PI-SceI induces a distortion in each complex. By contrast, the migration of the unbound DNA is independent of the position of the PI-SceI site within the fragment, which suggests that no intrinsic distortions occur in the DNA in the absence of the PI-SceI protein. Prior experiments that used a 67 bp probe

168

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

that contains the PI-SceI site produced only a single protein:DNA complex (Gimble & Stephens, 1995), and the shorter length of this DNA fragment may have prevented the detection of multiple complexes. The extent of DNA distortion within the upper complex is clearly greater than that within the lower complex, as evidenced by the greater difference in mobility between fragments containing the PI-SceI site in the middle and end (Figure 4C). The magnitude of the distortion can be estimated form the data in Figure 4C by using an empirical relationship (Thompson & Landy, 1988; see Materials and Methods) and is approximately 60° within the upper complex and approximately 40° within the lower complex. It should be borne in mind that the determination of the distortion angles using this relationship is very dependent on the assumptions used in its formulation. Nevertheless, we conclude from a comparison of the electrophoretic mobilities of the PI-SceI complexes that there is a significant difference in the magnitude of the distortion within each complex. An estimation of the center of the distortion within each PISceI:DNA complex can be made by replotting the data shown in Figure 4C, and by extrapolating the linear portions of the curve to find the position at which the curve reaches a minimum. This analysis indicates that the distortion center for the upper complex is nearer the cleavage site within the target sequence and the center of the lower complex is nearer the minimal binding region (data not shown). A plausible explanation for these results is that PI-SceI binds to its substrate to yield two species; in one, the protein contacts the minimal binding region and induces a 040° distortion, and in the other, it contacts the cleavage site as well and induces further bending that results in a cumulative distortion of 060°. Binding of PI-Sce I to the minimal binding region generates a single distorted complex If the lower complex represents PI-SceI binding to the minimal binding region within the context of the entire recognition sequence, then the same

Figure 4. Circular permutation analysis of PI-SceI bound to the wild-type substrate. A, Circular permutation fragments derived from pBEND2-WT. Boxes represent a 36 bp fragment (shown above) that contains the PI-SceI recognition sequence and is cloned into the pBEND2 vector. Within each box, the vertical line depicts the position of the PI-SceI cleavage site. Fragments (169 bp) were generated by cleavage with the following restriction enzymes: M, MluI; N, NheI; X, XhoI; E, EcoRV; P, PvuII; S, SmaI; St, StuI; K, KpnI; B, BamHI.

B, DNA mobility shift assay. The restriction enzyme used to generate each fragment is indicated above the lane; the -PI-SceI lane contains the MluI fragment without PI-SceI. UB indicates unbound fragment. The bracket indicates the positions of the lower complex (LC) and the upper complex (UC). C, DNA bending in the lower and upper complexes. The relative electrophoretic mobilities for each fragment present in the lower complex (W) or upper complex (Q) are plotted as a function of the number of base-pairs from the middle of the PI-SceI cleavage site to the left-hand end of the fragment. The data were curve-fitted to a polynomial function (see Materials and Methods). The values for the relative electrophoretic mobilities are averages from three or more separate experiments, and the error bars indicate the standard deviations from the repeat experiments.

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

169 (Figure 5A). Furthermore, binding to the sequence stabilizes a DNA distortion, since the extent of migration of the various complexes is dependent on the position of the minimal binding region within the fragment (Figure 5B). We estimate that the magnitude of the distortion is approximately 40°, which is comparable to the distortion observed in the lower complex produced by the full-length substrate. Moreover, the distortion center is located within the minimal binding region (data not shown). Thus, these findings suggest that binding of PI-SceI to the minimal binding region stabilizes one of the distortions in the DNA molecule. Identification of PI-Sce I contacts within the upper and lower complexes To provide more detailed information about the specific contacts between PI-SceI and its substrate in the upper and lower complexes, a methylation interference study was performed using the fulllength recognition sequence. For this, end-labeled DNA is first methylated with dimethylsulfate approximately once per molecule at the N7 position of guanine residues in the major groove and at the N3 position of adenine residues in the minor groove (Siebenlist & Gilbert, 1980). Following incubation with PI-SceI, DNA present in the lower and upper complexes is separated from unbound DNA by non-denaturing electrophoresis, strand scission is effected at the position of each DNA modification, and the cleaved fragments are analyzed by electrophoresis on a denaturing polyacrylamide gel. When modification of a base interferes with formation of the upper but not the lower complex, it is over-represented in the DNA isolated from the lower complex. Similarly, when modification of a base prevents either complex from forming, it is over-represented in the DNA isolated from the unbound fraction. We observe that methylation of bases within the minimal binding region interferes with formation of both complexes (compare the UC and LC lanes with the UB lane in Figure 6A). In particular, methylation of bases G+13 and G+18 on the top strand significantly interferes with complex formation while methylation of A+16 on the top strand and A+17 on the bottom strand partially interferes. Conversely, modification of bases in the vicinity of the cleavage site interfere only with formation of the upper complex, but have little or no effect on lower complex formation (compare the UC lane with the LC lane in Figure 6A). Methylation of positions G-7 , G+1 and G+3 on the top strand and A-10 on the bottom strand strongly interfere with the formation of the upper complex; weak interference is observed when positions G-2 and G+4 on the top strand and G-11 , G+2 , and A-8 on the bottom strand are modified. Of the six more strongly interfering nucleotides, five are G residues, with two Gs in the minimal binding region, two Gs in the cleavage site overhang region, and one G and one A in a sequence flanking the cleavage site (Figure 6B).

Figure 5. Circular permutation analysis of PI-SceI bound to an 18 bp minimal binding region. A, DNA mobility shift assay. An 18 bp sequence (+5/22, numbering as for Figure 1) that contains the minimal binding region was incorporated into a 29 bp synthetic duplex oligonucleotide and inserted into pBEND2 to generate pBEND-18 (see Materials and Methods). Generation of circular permutation fragments and gel shift analysis were performed as for the wild-type substrate (Figure 4). Lanes are labeled as for Figure 4. B, DNA bending in the lower complex. The relative electrophoretic mobilities are plotted as a function of the number of base-pairs between the left-hand end of the fragment and a position that corresponds to the PI-SceI cleavage site in the wild-type substrate relative to the minimal binding region. Error bars are as for Figure 4.

complex should be observed when the minimal binding region is used by itself as a binding substrate. This idea was tested by performing a circular permutation analysis using a set of fragments that contain the minimal binding region, but lack the PI-SceI cleavage site. In contrast to the results obtained with the full-length PI-SceI substrate, PI-SceI binding to these DNA fragments generates only a single protein:DNA complex

170

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

Figure 6. Methylation interference analysis. A, Interference of PI-SceI binding by DNA methylation. Lanes: F, free methylated DNA; LC, lower complex; UC, upper complex; UB, unbound DNA. CS indicates the position of the cleavage site on each strand. Numbering of the nucleotides as for Figure 1. The number of counts for individual nucleotides were determined using a PhosphorImager (Molecular Dynamics). Strong interference against the upper complex (Q) was assigned to a nucleotide if the ratio of counts in the upper complex to the lower complex was E0.25 for the top strand and E0.15 for the bottom strands; weak interference (q) was indicated by ratios of E0.3 and E0.45, respectively. Strong interference against both the upper and lower complexes (W) was assigned to a nucleotide if the count ratio in the upper complex to the unbound DNA was E0.25 for the top strand; weak interference (w) was indicated if the ratios were E0.3 and E0.5 for the top and bottom strands, respectively. B, Schematic representation depicting the methylation interference patterns of the upper and lower complexes. Methylated purine residues that strongly (filled symbols) or weakly (open symbols) interfere with PI-SceI binding are indicated. Other labels are as for Figure 1 and panel A.

Thus, PI-SceI makes predominantly major groove interactions with its substrate in several different regions of the recognition sequence. Identification of critical positions within the PI-Sce I substrate that are required for double-stranded cleavage The DNA binding and methylation interference experiments demonstrate the importance of the cleavage site and minimal binding regions for the PI-SceI:DNA binding interaction, but provide limited information about the role of each nucleotide in the overall cleavage pathway. To identify critical bases in an unbiased manner, a set of variant substrates with single base-pair substitutions was assembled using a random mutagene-

sis strategy. Mutagenesis was performed by annealing a strand containing the wild-type recognition sequence to a complementary strand that had been mutagenized by ``doping'' a section of the oligonucleotide during the synthesis reactions with a small percentage of each of the three non-wild-type bases. These annealed cassettes were cloned into pBluescript for screening of single-basepair mutations by sequence analysis (see Materials and Methods). A total of 42 single-base-pair variants occurring at 33 different positions and a single variant with two base-pair changes were chosen for further analysis. Each of the variant substrates was incubated with purified PI-SceI enzyme to assay their cleavage activities. The extents of cleavage for the wild-type substrate and the variants after one hour are shown

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

171

Figure 7. Cleavage activity of variant PI-SceI recognition site substrates. A, Schematic diagram showing the positions of point mutations in PI-SceI variant substrates and their cleavage activities. The sequence shown beneath the graph corresponds to the nucleotide sequence of the 36 bp oligonucleotide in which point mutations were introduced. The numbering scheme is as for Figure 1, and the staggered line indicates the PI-SceI cleavage site. The height of each column indicates the percentage of cleavage product generated for the variant substrates after incubation with PI-SceI for one hour. Above each column are shown the base substitutions on the upper strand (no mutations were obtained for position T-12 ). For those positions where multiple substitutions were obtained the columns have been superimposed. The broken line indicates the extent of cleavage of the wild-type substrate after one hour (68%). The two variants denoted by an asterisk are cleaved >80% after ten minutes and are completely cleaved after 30 minutes. B, Time course of cleavage of wild-type and mutant substrates. The percentage of product formed by digestion of the wild-type (w), C-5 G (R), A+15 C (×), C+2 A (Q) and T-1 G (W) substrates were plotted as a function of time. C, PI-SceI endonuclease assays with wild-type and mutant substrates. Linearized substrates were incubated with PI-SceI as described in Materials and Methods. Aliquots were removed at 0, 10, 30 and 60 minute time points, and cleavage products were analyzed on a 0.9% agarose gel. Cleavage efficiencies were determined by densitometry scanning (Molecular Dynamics) and formed the basis for the plots shown in panel B.

in Figure 7A. Under the conditions used for the assay, approximately 70% of the wild-type substrate is cleaved after one hour of incubation with the enzyme. The cleavage activities of the variant

substrates cover a broad spectrum ranging from no detectable cleavage to cleavage that is higher than that of the wild-type substrate. Figure 7B and C show the course of the cleavage reaction over one

172 hour for the wild-type and representative variant substrates with different levels of cleavage activity. Mutations at several positions have little effect on the extent of cleavage, suggesting that many of the bases within the 36 base-pair region are of minor importance in the cleavage reaction. One of the variants has substitutions at two positions (T-8 A and T+14 G) and is cleaved like the wild-type substrate, and we presume that neither substitution by itself affects cleavage. There are nine variants (A-9 C, G-3 A, T-1 G, G+1 A, G+3 T, G+4 A, A+16 G, G+18 T and A+19 C) that are of primary interest since they are severely defective for PI-SceI-mediated cleavage. The mutations in this class occur primarily in two regions of the substrate; they overlap the cleavage site and occur in the minimal binding region. These substrates are not completely resistant to cleavage since barely detectable levels of reaction products are observed after prolonged incubation. Furthermore, when Mn2+, which relaxes the specificity of PI-SceI (Gimble & Thorner, 1992; Gimble & Stephens, 1995), is substituted for Mg2+ in the reaction buffer, nearly complete cleavage of the variant substrates occurs. Finally, and most surprisingly, we isolated two hypercleavable variants. For these variants, approximately 80% of the substrate is cleaved after ten minutes (as compared to 35% cleavage of the wild-type substrate), and complete cleavage occurs by 30 minutes. The two substrates in this class both have substitutions at position C-5 . Mutations in the minimal binding region eliminate substrate binding The three nucleotides within the minimal binding region (at positions +16, +18 and +19) where loss-of-function mutations occur may be important for PI-SceI binding. To test this possibility, DNA fragments containing the variant substrate sequences were prepared by PCR and assayed for PI-SceI binding by gel shift analysis. We found that each of the three substrates with mutations in the minimal binding region only bound to PI-SceI non-specifically. No specific complexes were observed with these substrates in the presence of competitor DNA (poly (dI·dC)) at concentrations where a specific complex is formed with a wild-type substrate. However, at very high enzyme concentrations (>1.5 × 10-7 M), a ladder of complexes forms, which is indicative of non-specific protein:DNA interactions (data not shown). Mutations in the cleavage site region can alter PI-Sce I-induced DNA distortion The PI-SceI binding profiles of the remaining loss-of-function substrates and one of the hypercleavable substrates were assayed by gel shift analysis to determine whether changes in binding accounted for the differences in their cleavage efficiency. Under the conditions of our assay, the wild-type substrate binds to PI-SceI and yields two

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

Figure 8. DNA mobility shift analysis of wild-type and variant substrates. Radiolabeled 219 bp fragments containing the wild-type or variant PI-SceI recognition sites were incubated with purified PI-SceI as described in Materials and Methods. The following concentrations of PI-SceI were used to generate the complexes: wild-type substrate, 6 × 10-9 M; G-3 A, 3 × 10-9 M; C-5 G, 1.5 × 10-9 M; G+1 A, 1.5 × 10-8 M; T-1 G, 1.5 × 10-8 M; G+3 T, 1.5 × 10-8 M; A-9 C, 1.5 × 10-8 M; and G+4 A, 8 × 10-8 M. Labels above each lane identify the nucleotide substitutions present in the variant substrates. UB, unbound DNA; LC, lower complex; UC, upper complex.

complexes; an upper complex that is significantly distorted and involves contacts to the entire substrate, and a lower complex that is less distorted and involves contacts only to the minimal binding region (Figure 8). At similar protein concentrations, bands corresponding to the lower complex are present for each of the remaining cleavage-defective variant substrates and for the hypercleavable substrate (Figure 8). This indicates that formation of this complex for these variants is not substantially impaired by mutation at several positions. Conversely, we only observed a band that co-migrates with the wild-type upper complex for the hypercleavable variant (C-5 G) and one of the cleavage-defective variants (G-3 A). For the remaining variant substrates, either no upper complex is evident or there is a complex that migrates significantly faster than that of the wild-type substrate (T-1 G). When only one band is present, it is impossible to determine whether the upper and lower complexes co-migrate or whether the upper complex does not form. Differences in substrate distortion may account for the migration anomalies that are apparent for the complexes of the variant substrates. To examine this possibility, the bending characteristics of two defective variants, one that produces complexes similar to the wild-type substrate (G-3 A), and one that generates a faster-migrating upper complex (T-1 G), were analyzed in more detail using the circular permutation assay (Figure 9). The bending profiles of the upper and lower complexes for the G-3 A variant are similar to the wild-type substrate and indicate bend angles of about 60° for the upper

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

173

Figure 9. Circular permutation analysis of PI-SceI bound to the G-3 A and T-1 G substrates. Plasmids pBEND-G-3 A and pBEND-T-1 G (described in Materials and Methods) are pBEND2 derivatives that contain the G-3 A and T-1 G variant substrates. The generation of circular permutation fragments and gel shift analysis were performed as for the wild-type substrate (Figure 4). A, DNA mobility shift assay for G-3 A. Lanes are labeled as for Figure 4. B, DNA distortion in the G-3 A lower and upper complexes. The relative electrophoretic mobilities for each fragment present in the lower complex (W) or upper complex (Q) are plotted as a function of the number of base-pairs from the middle of the PI-SceI cleavage site to the left-hand end of the fragment. C, DNA mobility shift assay for T-1 G; labels as for Figure 4. D, DNA distortion in the T-1 G lower and upper complexes; plotted as in A. Error bars as for Figure 4.

complex and about 40° for the lower complex. Conversely, the upper and lower complexes for the T-1 G variant are spaced much closer together than in the wild-type case, and are both bent approximately 40°. We conclude that the distortion of the lower complex is roughly the same for the variants and the wild-type substrate. For each of the non-cleavable mutants except G-3 A, the magnitude of the upper complex distortion is markedly reduced compared to the wild-type substrate.

Discussion
The PI-Sce I recognition sequence To effect cleavage of its DNA substrate, PI-SceI, like the other members of the dodecapeptide

endonuclease family, recognizes a lengthy and asymmetrical sequence that includes its homing site (Figure 1). We show here that the protein establishes primarily major groove and phosphate backbone contacts that cover three turns of the DNA helix. A set of substrate deletion variants was used to examine the extent of the minimal sequence required for optimal cleavage activity, and establish it to be 31 bp long. This sequence corresponds exactly to that defined by a characterization of a set of point mutants (Figure 7). The level of activity gradually decreases as nucleotides are deleted from the ends of the recognition sequence, rather than there being an all or none effect. Previously, a primer extension approach defined a 30 bp sequence as the minimal sequence required for cleavage (Gimble & Thorner, 1993). In this strategy,

174

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

Figure 10. Summary of physical and genetic analyses of the PI-SceI-recognition site interaction. The lightly shaded area indicates Region I and the heavily shaded region represents Region II. The W and w symbols represent strong and weak ethylation interference positions, respectively, corresponding to the diamond symbols in Figure 2. The arrows represent methylation interference with filled and open symbols corresponding to positions of strong and weak interference, respectively. Methylated A and G residues have arrows pointing to the minor or major groove, respectively. CS and nucleotide numbering is as in Figure 2. Base-pairs that are shown in outline form represent positions where mutation reduces the cleavage efficiency of the substrate to 0 to 10% of the wild-type level.

a modification of the dideoxy sequencing technique was used to generate a set of partially doublestranded substrates, which were digested with PI-SceI. It is assumed that only those substrates that have a completely duplex recognition sequence are cleaved by the enzyme, and the limits of the recognition sequence are inferred from inspection of which substrates are resistant or sensitive to cleavage. However, single-stranded sequences that lie adjacent to the duplex portions of the substrate may be interacting with the enzyme, resulting in an underestimation of the sequence required for optimal cleavage. In yeast, PI-SceI cleaves the genome at a single locus (Bremer et al., 1992), which represents one site in approximately 1 × 107 bp. There are unlikely to be any PI-SceI sites in Escherichia coli since overproduction of the enzyme has no deleterious effects on growth. Consistent with these findings, the PI-SceI recognition site is one of the longest of any of the dodecapeptide endonucleases. Among the dodecapeptide endonucleases, the yeast mitochondrial and nuclear enzymes HO, I-SceI, I-SceII, I-SceIII and Endo.SceI require sequences of 18 to 26 bp in length to effect cleavage, the chloroplast enzymes I-CeuI and I-CreI recognize sequences of 19 to 24 bp and the archaebacterial enzymes I-PorI and I-DmoI recognize sequences of 14 to 20 bp (Colleaux et al., 1986; Nickoloff et al., 1986; Kawasaki et al., 1991; Marshall & Lemieux, 1992; Thompson et al., 1992; Wernette et al., 1992; Durrenberger & Rochaix, 1993; Schapira et al., 1993; Dalgaard et al., 1994; Lykke-Andersen et al., 1994). The interaction of PI-SceI with its extended sequence may be facilitated by its ability to stabilize significant distortions upon binding to two very distant regions of the DNA substrate. Analysis of

substrate point mutants reveals that alteration of nine nucleotides severely reduces the PI-SceI cleavage activity. This number of critical positions identified by mutational analysis is larger than that for I-SceII and for I-PorI, which are less specific enzymes (Sargueil et al., 1991; Wernette et al., 1992) and is comparable to that of the highly selective) I-SceI (Colleaux et al., 1988), I-CeuI (Marshall & Lemieux, 1992), I-SceIII (Schapira et al., 1993) and HO endonucleases (Nickoloff et al., 1990). However, mutations that influence cleavage do not necessarily identify base-specific contacts since they may exert their effects by affecting a sequence-dependent DNA conformation instead (Jen-Jacobson et al., 1991). Given that the dodecapeptide endonucleases create double-stranded breaks at single loci, the extreme specificity of PI-SceI may have evolved as a result of its localization in the eukaryotic nucleus, where the genome is significantly larger and more complex than in mitochondria or chloroplasts. Architecture of the PI-Sce I recognition site Biochemical and genetic evidence suggests that the PI-SceI recognition site can be divided into two regions (Figure 10), where each region interacts differently with the enzyme. Both regions are required in the overall cleavage pathway, as evidenced by the isolation of the point mutants that severely reduce the cleavage efficiency. The existence of two regions was initially suggested by the finding that PI-SceI cleavage product containing Region II binds tightly to the enzyme following cleavage (Gimble & Stephens, 1995). Within this cleavage product, a 17 bp sequence comprises a minimal binding region that is sufficient to account

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

175

Figure 11. Comparison of the PI-SceI and HO recognition sites. Depicted are the PI-SceI and HO recognition sequences derived from the VMA1 gene and the MATa and MATa genes, respectively. Shaded nucleotides are those that are critical for nuclease activity as shown in Figure 7 for PI-SceI and by Nickoloff et al. (1990) for HO. Identity between the sequence is indicated by a vertical line. The two dashes indicate the 2 bp insertion introduced into the MAT sequences required for optimal alignment. Underlined nucleotides are those present in the cleavage site overhang. The black arrowhead represents the PI-SceI intein homing site, and the white arrowheads indicate the limits of the recognition sequences for PI-SceI (Figure 1) and HO (Nickoloff et al., 1986). The numbering of nucleotides is as shown in Figure 1.

for this high affinity interaction (Figure 3B). We cannot rule out that the minimal binding region is smaller than 17 bp and that any oligonucleotide duplex of 16 bp or less is too short to interact effectively with the protein. Hydroxyl radical protection and ethylation interference experiments indicate that the majority of the phosphate backbone contacts occur within Region II (Figure 10 and Gimble & Stephens, 1995). A key piece of evidence in support of the two-region structure is our finding that PI-SceI interacts with Region II exclusive of Region I to generate a distinct protein-DNA complex (Figure 4B). In addition, variant substrates that are cleavage-defective and contain mutations in Region II display significantly reduced PI-SceI binding while those with mutations in Region I still bind to the enzyme (Figure 8). Most of the mutations that cause a cleavage-defective phenotype occur within Region I, suggesting that this region contains many of the sequence-specific contacts or positions that directly influence the DNA conformation. Taken together, these data indicate that PI-SceI makes specific contacts in both Regions I and II, and that a large number of phosphate backbone interactions within Region II account for its higher affinity for the enzyme. Recognition sequences comprising two regions may be a common feature of the dodecapeptide endonuclease substrates. This was originally proposed for I-SceI, an enzyme that occurs in the yeast mitochondria and is involved in intron homing (Perrin et al., 1993), where it was suggested that two recognition regions lie on opposite sides of a catalytic domain that consists of the four base-pair cleavage sequence (Perrin et al., 1993). As in the case of PI-SceI, I-SceI binds tightly to one of the two regions (termed Domain II), and the presence of the

cleavage site is unnecessary for binding (Perrin et al., 1993). Evidence for similar binding regions exists for other dodecapeptide endonucleases, including Endo.SceI and for I-SceIII (Kawasaki et al., 1991; Schapira et al., 1993). The results of biochemical experiments indicate that PI-SceI contacts its substrate primarily in the major groove, with other interactions occurring along the minor groove. Within Region I, methylation of three guanine residues strongly interferes with PI-SceI binding, whereas methylation of only one adenine has a similar effect. Two of these guanine residues occur adjacent to the site of strand scission, and mutations at these same positions severely reduce the extent of PI-SceI-mediated cleavage (Figure 10). Either these guanine residues make base-specific contacts or they are involved in the establishment of the DNA distortion required for cleavage. At the cleavage site, the dodecapeptide endonucleases may also contact the minor groove side of the DNA since strand scission occurs to leave 4 bp 3' extensions (Perrin et al., 1993). Previously, the cleavage site nucleotides were observed to be protected from hydroxyl radical attack using a cleavage-defective PI-SceI mutant, suggesting that the protein contacts the minor groove in this region (Gimble & Stephens, 1995). Within Region II, there is no evidence of major groove contacts between positions +5 through +12; instead, there are extensive backbone contacts in this region (Figure 2 and Gimble & Stephens, 1995). Further removed from the cleavage site, methylation interference indicates the presence of other major groove interactions at positions +13 and +18. This conclusion is consistent with the isolation of substrate mutations at position +16, +18 and +19 that severely reduce the extent of cleavage.

176 A model for the interaction of PI-Sce I with its homing site The PI-SceI recognition site is distorted to different degrees depending on the extent of PI-SceI binding. Binding of PI-SceI to Region II only stabilizes a distortion of about 40°, but an approximately 60° distortion centered closer to the cleavage site is observed when the protein is bound to both regions. It is unknown whether this latter distortion results from the additive effect of individual distortions in each region or whether it represents a single distortion. The 060° distortion is absent or significantly reduced in five of six of the cleavage-defective substrates with mutations in Region I (Figure 8). Thus, alterations in the degree of distortion of the substrates correlate with effects on the cleavage activity of the DNA. One cleavage-defective variant, G-3 A, is distorted to the same extent as the wild-type substrate, and the mutation may interfere with a later step in the cleavage pathway. Conversely, mutations at position C-5 significantly increase the cleavage rate, perhaps by facilitating DNA distortion. Our results support a model where sequence determinants play crucial roles both for localization of the protein to the cleavage site and for stabilization of a distorted DNA structure that may be a prerequisite of the eventual transition state. According to this model, binding of PI-SceI to the minimal binding region recruits the protein to the cleavage site. The binding energy resulting from base-specific and phosphate backbone interactions between Region I and PI-SceI may stabilize an energetically unfavorable DNA conformation that positions the hydrolyzed phosphodiester bonds into the active site. Essential features of the above model have precedents in other endonucleases. Formation of a tight recognition interface between the EcoRV endonuclease and its cognate substrate stabilizes a strained DNA conformation containing a central 55° kink (Winkler et al., 1993). The crystal structure reveals that this interaction positions the scissile group into the active site (Winkler et al., 1993), and a similar function may underlie the PI-SceI stabilized distortion. The homing site architecture of another homing endonuclease, I-TevI, resembles that of PI-SceI in that it contains multiple regions, and it has been proposed that an I-TevI monomer contacts its recognition sequence using two protein domains joined by a flexible hinge, with one binding a minimal binding region and the other interacting with a cleavage site region (Bryk et al., 1993, 1995; Mueller et al., 1995). Moreover, like PI-SceI, I-TevI induces a bend near the cleavage site, and mutations at positions that flank the cleavage site decrease the magnitude of the I-TevI-induced distortion relative to wild-type (Mueller et al., 1995). PI-SceI further resembles another phage-encoded endonuclease, I-TevII, which stabilizes two distinct conformational changes following binding (Loizos et al., 1996). However, there are important differences between the phage-encoded enzymes

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

and PI-SceI, namely, (1) I-TevI and I-TevII are sequence-tolerant enzymes that contact their DNA targets predominantly across the minor groove, (2) the I-TevI and I-TevII cleavage sites are positioned differently in the target sequence, (3) I-TevI and I-TevII generate a 2 bp extension following cleavage, and (4) I-TevI and I-TevII contain different conserved motifs (Bell-Pedersen et al., 1990; Bryk et al., 1993; Loizos et al., 1996). In addition, formation of the I-TevI and I-TevII distortions involves the nicking of one strand of the recognition sequence (Mueller et al., 1995; Loizos et al., 1996), but this is not the case for PI-SceI (data not shown). Evolutionary implications of the PI-Sce I-target interaction Among the dodecapeptide endonucleases, PISceI is most related (34% identity) to the HO endonuclease (Hirata et al., 1990) which initiates mating type switching in yeast. Although HO is not generated by protein splicing, it shares numerous common sequence motifs that occur in inteins (Pietrokovski, 1994). The genes that encode these endonucleases are separated by 80 kb on chromosome IV (C. Jacq et al., unpublished results), and it is possible that HO resulted from a gene duplication of the PI-SceI intein, whereupon it evolved a new specificity, namely, the ability to cleave at the MAT locus on chromosome III. Genetic evidence indicates that HO no longer recognizes the PI-SceI site (Weiffenbach & Haber, 1981), nor does PI-SceI bind or cleave the HO sites (data not shown). Given the relatedness of the HO and PI-SceI proteins, we predicted that the HO and PI-SceI recognition sites should be similar and indeed, a comparison reveals that the MATa and PI-SceI sites share 9/14 positions in Region I and 10/17 positions in Regions II (Figure 11). Less similarity exists between the PI-SceI and MATa sites in Region II. Methylation interference results suggest similar major groove contacts near the cleavage site for both proteins at positions G+1 and G+3 on the top strand and G+2 on the bottom strand (Figure 10 and Nickoloff et al., 1990). Moreover, two of these contacted nucleotides (G+1 and G+3 ) as well as two others in Region I (G-3 and T-1 ) are required for cleavage by both enzymes (Figure 11). Maximum sequence alignment was achieved by the introduction of a 2 bp insertion in the HO sites as the Region I/Region II junction (Figure 11). Using the alignment, the distances between Region II and the conserved contacts in Region I differ, but the distances between Region II and the cleavage sites are the same. This suggests that distance rather than sequence determinants plays a more important role in cut-site selection. It also suggests that during its evolution, the enzyme succeeds in contacting non-cognate recognition sites with different distances between Regions I and II by ``stretching'' or ``contracting'' using a flexible hinge

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

177
nucleotide and its position, based on the top strand in Figure 1, and then the substituted nucleotide. Plasmid construction To construct a set of plasmids containing sequential deletions from either end of the PI-SceI recognition site, 42 bp duplex cassettes containing the deleted sites were synthesized by PCR amplification with Taq polymerase (Perkin Elmer) using XmnI-linearized pBS-PISce36 plasmid as template, a mutagenic primer and either the T3 or M13 -20 primers. The oligonucleotides (01 mM for each) and pBS-PISce36 template (01 nM) were incubated with the four dNTPs (200 mM each; Boehringer-Mannheim) and 2.5 units of Taq DNA polymerase (Perkin Elmer) in a Perkin-Elmer Cetus DNA Thermocycler. The PCR products were digested with EcoRI and HindIII prior to being ligated into EcoRI/HindIII-linearized pBluescript SK+ (Stratagene). The sequences of the resulting deletion substrates are shown in Figure 1. The plasmids used in the circular permutation analyses were derived from pBEND2 (Kim et al., 1989). pBEND-WT was constructed by ligating a EcoRI-HindIII 42-mer fragment (see Random mutagenesis) containing the wild-type PI-SceI recognition site into XbaI-linearized pBEND2 after creating blunt ends with Klenow fragment. For plasmids pBEND-G-3 A and pBEND-T-1 G, PCR amplification was used to generate XbaI-compatible fragments that contain the G-3 A and T-1 G mutations within the PI-SceI recognition site. Two primers, 5'-GCGTCTAGAAATTCTCTATGTCGAGTG-3' (for the G-3 A mutant) and 5'-GCGTCTAGAAATTCTCTATGTCGGGGGCG-3' (for the T-1 G mutant) were used in separate PCR experiments in conjunction with a third primer, 5'-CCAGTCTAGAGCTTCCATTTCATTACC-3', and linearized pBEND-WT as template to generate two 64 bp fragments. The 64 bp duplexes were digested with XbaI and inserted into XbaI-linearized pBEND2. DNA sequence analysis identified two plasmids, designated pBEND-G-3 A and pBEND-T-1 G, in which the insert contained the variant PI-SceI recognition sequence in the same orientation as in pBEND-WT. In order to generate pBEND-18, a plasmid that contains an 18 bp section of the PI-SceI recognition sequence, two synthetic oligonucleotides (5'-CTAGTAACTATTAGAAAGAGGTAATGAAA-3' and 5'-TCGATTTCATTACCTCTTTCTAATAGTTA-3') were annealed and inserted into XbaI/SalIdigested pBEND2. DNA mobility shift analysis DNA mobility shift analyses and determinations of apparent dissociation constants (Kd values) were performed essentially as described (Gimble & Stephens, 1995). Various amounts of purified PI-SceI protein were incubated for 15 minutes at 25°C with DNA substrate in a total volume of 20 ml of gel binding buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 100 mM KCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 50 ug/ml bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 2.5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol) containing 1 mg (050 nM) of poly(dI·dC) (Sigma). Protein:DNA complexes were separated from unbound DNA by electrophoresis on non-denaturing polyacrylamide gels (acrylamide to bis-acrylamide, 19:1, w/w) in 0.5 × TBE buffer (Sambrook et al., 1989) at 350 V for five minutes and then at 220 V for two to four hours at 4°C. The protein concentrations were varied over at least four orders of magnitude such that <5% and >85% of the substrate was bound at the low and high

as proposed for I-TevI (Bryk et al., 1995). PI-SceI makes contacts in the minimal binding region that are significantly further from the cleavage site than contacts made by HO. Thus, these enzymes may evolve new specificities by maintaining some interactions in Region I required for formation of a competent DNA conformation, and establishing new contacts within Region II. Whether the substrate specificities can be interchanged at this point in evolutionary time remains unknown.

Materials and Methods
Protein purification Recombinant PI-SceI was purified from E. coli strain BL21 (DE3) containing plasmid pT7PI-Sce ESARC as described previously (Gimble & Stephens, 1995). Random mutagenesis Restriction and modifying enzymes were obtained from New England Biolabs, Inc. Oligonucleotides were obtained from the Texas A&M University Gene Technology Laboratory or from Genosys, Inc. Most of the PI-SceI recognition site variants were made by a ``doped'' oligonucleotide strategy. The 36 bp sequence that was chosen for randomization includes the region that is protected from DNaseI treatment by binding of the PI-SceI protein (Gimble & Stephens, 1995) and is sufficient for PI-SceI-mediated cleavage (Figure 1). An automated DNA synthesizer was used to make two oligonucleotides in which substitutions were introduced at random from either positions 6 to 23 or from positions 24 to 41 within the 42-mer oligonucleotide (5'-AGCTTCCATTTCATTACCTCTTTCTCCGCACCCGACATAGAG-3') by contaminating each of the four phosphoramidites with 3.7% (v/v) of each of the three others (Hill, 1989). In separate experiments, these oligonucleotides were phosphorylated using T4 polynucleotide kinase and annealed to a complementary 42-mer oligonucleotide (5'-AATTCTCTATGTCGGGTGCGGAGAAAGAGGTAATGAAATGGA-3') by heating at 90°C for two minutes and cooling to room temperature. The annealed products were ligated with T4 DNA ligase into pBluescript SK+ that had been linearized with EcoRI and HindIII. The ligation mixture was used to transform E. coli TG2 cells by electroporation. Transformants were selected on LB plates containing ampicillin (100 mg/ml), 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-b,D-galactopyranoside (Xgal; 40 mg/ml) and isopropyl-b,D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG; 40 mg/ml), and white, ampicillin-resistant colonies were chosen for sequence analysis. This protocol should introduce, on average, two substitutions per molecule, but for unknown reasons, we found that most of the sequenced substrates had either one or no substitutions. Additional 42-mer oligonucleotides containing single base-pair substitutions were synthesized in order to isolate several variants that were not isolated by the randomization approach. All of the plasmid DNAs generated were sequenced by the dideoxy chain termination method (Sanger et al., 1977) using the Sequenase version 2.0 kit (Amersham Life Sciences) and the M13 -20 sequencing primer. Individual plasmids generated by this strategy are designated as derivatives of pBS-PISce36. Here, the identity and position of the mutations are designated by first listing the wild-type

178
ends of the binding curve, respectively. The amounts of radioactivity in the unbound and bound species were quantified using a PhosphorImager system (Molecular Dynamics). Apparent dissociation constants were determined by fitting these amounts to the equation f = Kd /(Kd + [P]) using the program KALEIDAGRAPH (Synergy Software) where f is the fractional saturation of the DNA substrate and [P] is the protein concentration. Each binding assay was performed in triplicate for each of the DNA samples. Determination of a minimal binding region A set of oligonucleotides were synthesized and annealed to form the 16 bp, 17 bp and 18 bp DNA duplexes that are shown below. The oligonucleotide labels indicate the first and last positions within the sequence following the numbering scheme in Figure 1. The top strand was end-labeled with [g-32P]ATP and T4 polynucleotide kinase prior to the annealing. A twofold molar excess of the complementary strand was used during the annealing procedure. +7/22 AAAGAGGTAATGAAAT TTTCTCCATTACTTTA +6/21 GAAAGAGGTAATGAAA CTTTCTCCATTACTTT +5/20 AGAAAGAGGTAATGAA TCTTTCTCCATTACTT +5/21 AGAAAGAGGTAATGAAA TCTTTCTCCATTACTTT +5/22 AGAAAGAGGTAATGAAAT TCTTTCTCCATTACTTTA DNA mobility experiments and determinations of equilibrium dissociation constants were performed as described above. Reaction mixtures contained various amounts of PI-SceI and 5 fmol (05000 cpm) of the radiolabeled duplex DNAs. Protein:DNA complexes were separated from unbound DNA by electrophoresis on 15% non-denaturing polyacrylamide gels. Each experiment was performed in triplicate. Circular permutation analysis Circular permutation substrates containing the wildtype PI-SceI recognition site (169 bp fragments), the G-3 A and T-1 G variant sites (172 bp) or an 18 bp sequence minimal recognition sequence (144 bp) were obtained by digestion of the pBEND-WT, pBEND-G-3 A, pBENDT-1 G, and pBEND-18 plasmids, respectively. These were used to estimate the extent of the DNA distortion and the center of the DNA bends. PI-SceI (5 × 10-8 M) was incubated with each of the bending fragments (100 ng) under the conditions described above (see DNA mobility shift analysis). The samples were subjected to electrophoresis through an 8% polyacrylamide gel and stained with ethidium bromide. Measurements were made of the distances migrated through the gel by the unbound DNA and the lower and upper complexes. The relative electrophoretic mobility of a protein:DNA complex was calculated as the mobility of the complex divided by the mobility of the unbound substrate. Curves were plotted using polynomial curve-fitting KALEIDAGRAPH software (Synergy Software), and bend centers were estimated by extrapolating the linear portions of the curve to find the position at which the curve reached a

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

minimum. The degree of distortion (a) was estimated from the data by using the empirical relationship of Thompson & Landy (1988), mM /mE = cos(a/2) where mM and mE are the mobilities for the protein:DNA complexes with the protein located at either the middle or the end of the DNA, respectively. PI-Sce I binding to variant target sequences Duplex DNA fragments (219 bp) containing either a wild-type or a variant PI-SceI recognition site were generated by PCR with PfuI polymerase (Stratagene) using an XmnI-linearized pBS-PISce36 plasmid template and the T3 and M13 -20 primers. The fragments were purified by electrophoresis on non-denaturing 2% (w/v) agarose gels and by electroelution of the DNAs. An aliquot (2.5 pmol) of each DNA was end-labeled using T4 polynucleotide kinase and [g-32P]ATP and further purified by electroelution from 5% non-denaturing polyacrylamide gels. The PI-SceI-mediated cleavage phenotype of each variant substrate was confirmed by digestion with the enzyme. DNA mobility shift assays were performed as described above with the reaction mixture containing 01 to 5 fmol (05000 cpm) of the radiolabeled duplex DNAs. Electrophoresis of these samples was performed on 7% non-denaturing polyacrylamide gels. PI-Sce I cleavage analysis The extents of cleavage of the variant PI-SceI target sequences within the pBS-PISce36 plasmids was assayed as described (Gimble & Thorner, 1993). Plasmid substrate (100 ng) that had been linearized with XmnI was incubated at 37°C with 2.5 units (where one unit cleaves 100 ng DNA in one hour at 37°C) of purified recombinant PI-SceI enzyme in 15 ml of cleavage buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 100 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2 , 2.5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol and 100 mg/ml BSA). The reactions were stopped by the addition of 5 ml of stop buffer (5 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM EDTA, 0.2% (w/v) SDS, 2.5% (w/v) Ficoll). The extent of cleavage was quantified after 0, 10, 30 and 60 minutes by electrophoresis in 1 × TBE on a 0.9% agarose gel, which was stained with ethidium bromide and photographed. The amounts of the uncut plasmid and the two cleavage products were determined using a scanning densitometer (Molecular Dynamics). Ethylation interference The binding substrate used for ethylation interference analysis was made by synthesizing two complementary 67 bp oligonucleotides containing the entire PI-SceI recognition sequence (Gimble & Stephens, 1995). These were purified and end-labeled with [g-32P]ATP and T4 polynucleotide kinase. Each labeled strand was annealed to a five fold molar excess of its unlabeled complement by heating to 90°C for two minutes and by slow cooling to create identical duplexes that are labeled at different ends. These were modified by treatment with ethylnitrosourea as described (Siebenlist & Gilbert, 1980). Modified DNA (1 pmol) was incubated for one minute at 23°C in the presence or absence of 05 units of PI-SceI in 1 × gel binding buffer supplemented with 1 mg of sonicated salmon sperm DNA (Sigma). A single PI-SceI complex, unbound DNA and free untreated DNA were separated by electrophoresis as described above (see DNA mobility shift analysis), electroeluted from the gel and cleaved at

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

179
Colleaux, L., D'Auriol, L., Betermier, M., Cottarel, G., Jacquier, A., Galibert, F. & Dujon, B. (1986). Universal code equivalent of a yeast mitochondrial intron reading frame is expressed into E. coli as a specific double strand endonuclease. Cell, 44, 521­533. Colleaux, L., D'Auriol, L., Galibert, F. & Dujon, B. (1988). Recognition and cleavage site of the intron-encoded omega transposase. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 85, 6022­6026. Colston, M. J. & Davis, E. O. (1994). The ins and outs of protein splicing elements. Mol. Microbiol. 12, 359­363. Cooper, A. A. & Stevens, T. H. (1995). Protein splicing: self-splicing of genetically mobile elements at the protein level. Trends Biochem. Sci. 20, 351­356. Dalgaard, J. Z., Garrett, R. A. & Belfort, M. (1994). Purification and characterization of two forms of I-DmoI, a thermophilic site-specific endonuclease encoded by an archaeal intron. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 28885­28892. Durrenberger, F. & Rochaix, J.-D. (1993). Characterization of the cleavage site and the recognition sequence of the I-CreI DNA endonuclease encoded by the chloroplast ribosomal intron of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Mol. Gen. Genet. 236, 409­414. Gimble, F. S. & Stephens, B. W. (1995). Substitutions in conserved dodecapeptide motifs that uncouple the DNA binding and DNA cleavage activities of PI-SceI endonuclease. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 5849­5856. Gimble, F. S. & Thorner, J. (1992). Homing of a DNA endonuclease gene by meiotic gene conversion in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature, 357, 301­306. Gimble, F. S. & Thorner, J. (1993). Purification and characterization of VDE, a site-specific endonuclease from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae J. Biol. Chem. 268, 21844­21853. Hendrickson, W. & Schleif, R. (1985). A dimer of AraC protein contacts three adjacent major groove regions of the araI DNA site. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 82, 3129­3133. Hensgens, L. A. M., Bonen, L., de Haan, M., van der Horst, G. & Grivell, L. (1983). Two intron sequences in yeast mitochondrial COX1 gene: homology among URF-containing introns and strain-dependent variation in flanking exons. Cell, 32, 379­389. Hill, D. E. (1989). Mutagenesis with degenerate oligonucleotides: creating numerous mutations in a small DNA sequence. In Current Protocols in Molecular Biology (Ausubel, F. M., Brent, R., Kingston, R. E., Moore, D. D., Seidman, J. G., Smith, J. A. & Struhl, K., eds), pp. 8.2.1­8.2.7, Wiley-Interscience, New York. Hirata, R., Ohsumi, Y., Nakano, A., Kawasaki, H., Suzuki, K. & Anraku, Y. (1990). Molecular structure of a gene, VMA1, encoding the catalytic subunit of H+-translocating adenosine triphosphatase from vacuolar membranes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Biol. Chem. 265, 6726­6733. Jen-Jacobson, L., Lesser, D. R. & Kurpiewski, M. R. (1991). DNA sequence discrimination by EcoRI endonuclease. In Nucleic Acids and Molecular Biology (Eckstein, F. & Lilley, D. M. J., eds), pp. 141­170, SpringerVerlag, Berlin. Kawasaki, K., Takahashi, M., Natori, M. & Shibata, T. (1991). DNA sequence recognition by a eukaryotic sequence-specific endonuclease, Endo.SceI, from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Biol. Chem. 266, 5342­5347. Kim, J., Zwieb, C., Wu, C. & Adhya, S. (1989). Bending of DNA by gene-regulatory proteins: construction and use of a DNA bending vector. Gene (Amst.), 85, 15­23.

modified position with KOH. Cleavage products were separated on 12% denaturing gels. These were dried, and the amount of radioactivity in each band was quantified using a PhosphorImager (Molecular Dynamics). Methylation interference The 219 bp PCR-generated duplex substrate containing the wild-type PI-SceI recognition sequence (see PI-SceI binding to variant target sequences) was used to perform the methylation interference analysis. To produce substrates that were labeled on either the top or the bottom strands, PCR was performed using either T3 or m13 -20 primers that had been labeled using T4 polynucleotide kinase and [g-32P]ATP. Following purification of the DNAs by electroelution, the fragments (05 pmols) were modified by treatment with dimethylsulfate as described (Siebenlist & Gilbert, 1980). The modified DNA was incubated for ten minutes at 23°C in the presence of 00.2 units of PI-SceI in 1 × gel binding buffer supplemented with 1 mg of poly dI·dC DNA (Sigma). Unbound DNA was separated from two protein-DNA complexes of high and low mobility by electrophoresis on a 7% non-denaturing polyacrylamide gel (see DNA mobility shift analysis). The DNA in these species was recovered by electroelution, cleaved at modified positions with NaOH (Hendrickson & Schleif, 1985) and separated on 6% denaturing gels. These were dried, and the amount of radioactivity in each band was quantified using a PhosphorImager (Molecular Dynamics).

Acknowledgements
We thank Amy Davidson, Cynthia Dupureur, Jim Hu, Tim Palzkill and Richard Sinden for discussions and comments on this manuscript. We appreciate the excellent technical assistance of Eric Greene and Brian Stephens. This work is supported by NIH grant GM50815 and by funds from the Institute of Biosciences and Technology.

References
Belfort, M., Reaban, M. E., Coetzee, T. & Dalgaard, J. Z. (1995). Prokaryotic introns and inteins: a panoply of form and function. J. Bacteriol. 177, 3897­3903. Bell-Pedersen, D., Quirk, S., Clyman, J. & Belfort, M. (1990). Intron mobility in phage T4 is dependent upon a distinctive class of endonucleases and independent of DNA sequences encoding the intron core: mechanistic and evolutionary implications. Nucl. Acids Res. 18, 3763­3770. Bremer, M. C. D., Gimble, F. S., Thorner, J. & Smith, C. L. (1992). VDE endonuclease cleaves Saccharomyces cerevisiae genomic DNA at a single site: physical mapping of the VMA1 gene. Nucl. Acids Res. 20, 5484. Bryk, M., Quirk, S. M., Mueller, J. E., Loizos, N., Lawrence, C. & Belfort, M. (1993). The td intron endonuclease I-TevI makes extensive sequence-tolerant contacts across the minor groove of its DNA target. EMBO J. 12, 2141­2149. Bryk, M., Belishe, M., Mueller, J. E. & Belfort, M. (1995). Selection of a remote cleavage site by I-TevI, the td intron-encoded endonuclease. J. Mol. Biol. 247, 197­210.

180
Kim, Y., Grable, J. G., Love, R., Greene, P. J. & Rosenberg, J. M. (1990). Refinement of EcoRI endonuclease crystal structure: a revised protein chain tracing. Science, 249, 1307-1309. Lambowitz, A. M. & Belfort, M. (1993). Introns as mobile genetic elements. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 62, 587­622. Loizos, N., Silva, G. H. & Belfort, M. (1996). Intron-encoded endonuclease I-TevII binds across the minor groove and induces two distinct conformation changes in its DNA substrate. J. Mol. Biol. 255, 412­424. Lykke-Andersen, J., Thi-Ngoc, H. P. & Garrett, R. A. (1994). DNA substrate specificity and cleavage kinetics of an archaeal homing-type endonuclease from Pyrobaculum organotrophum. Nucl. Acids Res. 22, 4583­4590. Marshall, P. & Lemieux, C. (1992). The I-CeuI endonuclease recognizes a sequence of 19 base pairs and preferentially cleaves the coding strand of the Chlamydomonas moewusii chloroplast large subunit rRNA gene. Nucl. Acids Res. 20, 6401-6407. Michel, F., Jacquier, A. & Dujon, B. (1982). Comparison of fungal mitochondrial introns reveals extensive homologies in RNA secondary structure. Biochimie, 64, 867­881. Mueller, J. E., Bryk, M., Loizos, N. & Belfort, M. (1993). Homing endonucleases. In Nucleases (Linn, S. M., Lloyd, R. S. & Roberts, R. J., eds), pp. 111­143, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY. Mueller, J. E., Smith, D., Bryk, M. & Belfort, M. (1995). Intron-encoded endonuclease I-TevI binds as a monomer to effect sequential cleavage via conformation changes in the td homing site. EMBO J. 14, 5724­5735. Neff, N. F. (1993). Protein-splicing: selfish genes invade cellular proteins. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 5, 971­976. Nickoloff, J. A., Chen, E. Y. & Heffron, F. (1986). A 24-base-pair DNA sequence from the MAT locus stimulates intragenic recombination in yeast. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 83, 7831­7835. Nickoloff. J. A., Singer, J. D. & Heffron, F. (1990). In vivo analysis of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae HO nuclease recognition site by site-directed mutagenesis. Mol. Cell. Biol. 10, 1174­1179. Perler, F. B., Davis, E. O., Dean, G. E., Gimble, F. S., Jack, W. E., Neff, N., Noren, C. J., Thorner, J. & Belfort, M. (1994). Protein splicing elements: inteins and exteins--a definition of terms and recommended nomenclature. Nucl. Acids Res. 22, 1125­1127. Perrin, A., Buckle, M. & Dujon, B. (1993). Asymmetical recognition and activity of the I-SceI endonuclease on its site and on intron-exon junctions. EMBO J. 12, 2939­2947. Pietrokovski, S. (1994). Conserved sequence features of inteins (protein introns) and their use in identifying

Interactions of PI- SceI with its DNA Target

new inteins and related proteins. Protein Sci. 3, 2340­2350. Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F. & Maniatis, T. (1989). Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY. Sanger, F., Nicklen, S. & Coulson, A. R. (1977). DNA sequence with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 74, 5463­5467. Sargueil, B., Hatat, D., Delahodde, A. & Jacq, C. (1991). In vivo and in vitro analyses of an intron-encoded DNA endonuclease from yeast mitrochondria. Recognition site by site-directed mutagensis. Nucl. Acids Res. 19, 5659­5665. Schapira, M., Desdouets, C., Jacq, C. & Perea, J. (1993). I-SceIII an intron-encoded DNA endonuclease from yeast mitochondria. Asymmetrical DNA binding properties and cleavage reaction. Nucl. Acids Res. 21 3683­3689. Siebenlist, U. & Gilbert, W. (1980). Contacts between Escherichia coli RNA polymerase and an early promoter of phage T7. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 77, 122­126. Thompson, A. J., Yuan, X., Kudlicki, W. & Herrin, D. L. (1992). Cleavage and recognition pattern of a double-strand-specific endonuclease (I-CreI) encoded by the chloroplast 23S rRNA intron of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Gene (Amst.), 119, 247­ 251. Thompson, J. F. & Landy, A. (1988). Empirical estimation of protein-induced DNA bending angles: applications to l site-specific recombination complexes. Nucl. Acids Res. 16, 9687­9705. Wallace, C. J. A. (1993). The curious case of protein splicing: mechanistic insights suggested by protein semisynthesis. Protein Sci. 2, 697­705. Waring, R. B., Davies, R. W., Scazzocchio, C. & Brown, T. A. (1982). Internal structure of a mitochondrial intron of Aspergillus nidulans. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 79, 6332­6336. Weiffenbach, B. & Haber, J. E. (1981). Homothallic mating type switching generates lethal chromosome breaks in rad52 strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol. Cell. Biol. 1, 522­534. Wernette, C., Saldanha, R., Smith, D., Ming, D., Perlman, P. S. & Butow, R. A. (1992). Complex recognition site for the group I intron-enconded endonuclease I-SceII. Mol. Cell. Biol. 12, 716­723. Winkler, F. K., Banner, D. W., Oefner, C., Tsernoglou, D., Brown, R. S., Heathman, S. P., Bryan, R. K., Martin, P. D., Petratros, K. & Wilson, K. S. (1993). The crystal structure of EcoRV endonuclease and of its complexes with cognate and non-cognate DNA fragments. EMBO J. 12, 1781­1795. Wu, H.-M. & Crothers, D. M. (1984). The locus of sequence-directed and protein-induced DNA bending. Nature, 308, 509­513.

Edited by R. Schleif (Received 26 March 1996; received in revised form 16 July 1996; accepted 1 August 1996)

