TIBS 23 ­ MAY 1998

REVIEWS
domain binds to the phosphorylated Cterminal tail in the same manner as that seen for other SH2­ligand complexes10; the SH3 domain binds to the linker peptide between the SH2 domain and the N-terminal lobe of the catalytic domain in a similar manner to that seen in previous SH3­peptide complexes11; the kinase domain is bilobal like those of serine/ threonine protein kinases12 and other tyrosine kinases13,14. The novelty of the new structures4­6 is that they reveal means by which the SH2 and SH3 domains regulate kinase activity. The regulatory domains bind to the back of the kinase domain, leaving the catalytic cleft unfettered (Fig. 1). The main intramolecular contacts that stabilize the inactive conformation are those between the SH2­kinase linker and the SH3 domain, and the linker and N-terminal kinase lobe. The other important contact is made by the phosphorylated C-terminal tail, which binds to the phosphotyrosine pocket in SH2. The structures reveal that two different elements regulate kinase activity16: the first, which is well established, is a group of phosphorylation sites in the activation loop that can directly or indirectly control the active site13­16; the second comprises a multitude of intramolecular contacts between the kinase domain, and the SH3 and SH2 domains. Although far from the active site, the latter can regulate and fine-tune the kinase activity of the molecule (see, for example, Ref. 17). These contacts also mask the SH2 and SH3 domains and might compete with the intermolecular interactions between these domains and their cellular targets.

Insights into Src kinase functions: structural comparisons
John C. Williams, Rik K. Wierenga and Matti Saraste
Recent structures of Src tyrosine kinases reveal complex mechanisms for regulation of enzymatic activity. The regulatory SH3 and SH2 domains bind to the back of the catalytic kinase domain via a linker region that joins the SH2 domain to the catalytic domain. Members of a subgroup of the Src kinase family show distinct features in this linker and in the loops that interact with it. Hydrophobicity of key residues in this region is important for intramolecular regulation. The kinases Abl, Btk and Csk seem to have the same molecular architecture as Src. Structural comparisons between serine/ threonine and tyrosine kinases indicate a specific twisting mechanism involving the N- and C-terminal lobes of the catalytic domain. This motion could provide insights into the various mechanisms used to regulate kinase activity.
AN ELABORATE NETWORK of kinases, phosphatases and regulatory factors carry out and control much of signal transduction in eukaryotic cells. Tyrosine phosphorylation is peculiar to metazoan cells and distinguishes them from unicellular organisms such as yeast1. The number of human genes encoding tyrosine kinases is estimated to be more than 1000, and therefore could account for as much as 1% of the genome2. Because of the enormous number of tyrosine kinases and complementary phosphatases that are involved in a multitude of pathways, regulation of the molecular activity of these enzymes is of central importance in signal transduction. Non-receptor tyrosine kinases belonging to the Src family are key players in signal transduction and much effort has gone into understanding their physiological role as well as their regulation3. The recent solving of the crystal structures of human Src4, human Hck5 and chicken Src6 has confirmed many previous results and cleared up some outstanding questions. It has also provided important clues, which will guide further studies. Here, we try to provide additional insight into this class of signal transduction
J. C. Williams is at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Dept of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA; and R. K. Wierenga and M. Saraste are at the EMBL, Postfach 102209, D-69012 Heidelberg, Germany. Email: williams@hhmi.convex.columbia.edu

enzymes, by combining information derived from these three-dimensional structures with sequence alignments. The Src family consists of nine members ­ Src, Yes, Fgr, Yrk, Fyn, Lyn, Hck, Lck and Blk7 ­ which share the same domain structure. The N-terminal, unique domain contains a myristylation site and frequently a palmitoylation site8. It is followed by the regulatory SH3 and SH2 domains, a catalytic domain that is bilobal and has its active site wedged between the two lobes, and a C-terminal regulatory tail that contains the hallmark regulatory tyrosine residue (Tyr527 in Src). Kinase activity is reduced when the latter is phosphorylated and bound to the SH2 domain3 (Fig. 1). The SH2 and SH3 domains bind phosphotyrosyl and prolinerich peptides, respectively; through these interactions, they participate in intraand intermolecular regulation of kinase activity, as well as localization and substrate recognition2,3. The three recently published structures do not include the N-terminal unique domains, but do show the rest of the molecule in the inactive state ­ as a result of phosphorylation of the C-terminal tail. Elegant studies using C-terminal Src kinase (Csk) to rescue the lethal phenotype of Src expressed in yeast have indicated that a similar truncated form of Csk is sufficient for regulation of Src kinase activity by phosphorylation of Tyr527 (Ref. 9). Individually, there is little new about the SH3, SH2 and kinase domains in the recent crystal structures: the SH2

The SH2­kinase linker
The intercalation of the SH2­kinase linker between the SH3 domain and the N-terminal kinase lobe is a surprising finding. Mutagenesis studies by several laboratories had indicated that the SH3 domain is critical for regulation of kinase activity9. By contrast, experiments using phage-display libraries and the yeast twohybrid system, in combination with structural work on isolated SH3 domains, had suggested that SH3 domains bind prolinerich sequences that adopt the dihedral angles of a polyproline type II (PPII) helix. Searches for such conserved proline-rich stretches within Src kinase sequences have, however, been unsuccessful. The crystal structures4­6 show that the linkers contact the SH3 domains in the PPII conformation, even though most linker regions only contain a single proline residue and have little sequence similarity.

Copyright © 1998, Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. 0968 ­ 0004/98/$19.00

PII: S0968-0004(98)01202-X

179

REVIEWS

TIBS 23 ­ MAY 1998 observed on a phylogenetic tree (Fig. 2b). Group A Src kinases (Fyn, Yrk, Fgr, Yes and Src) each possess an arginine and a threonine residue in the RT loop, a leucine at the position corresponding to Leu255 of the Src linker, and an additional residue (glycine or aspartate) inserted into the linker. They also possess an arginine or a lysine residue at the position corresponding to Arg318 of Src and a glutamine residue at the position corresponding to Gln324 in the Src C­ 4 loop of the Nterminal kinase lobe. By contrast, the Group B Src kinases (Lyn, Hck, Lck and Blk) generally have isoleucine and histidine residues in the RT loop, and their shorter linker contains two proline residues and a tryptophan residue in place of the conserved leucine residue found in Group A kinases. Another difference between Group A and Group B kinases is that the positions of the arginine and glutamine residues in the C­ 4 loop are reversed (Fig. 2). These differences in primary structure are apparent in and can be explained by the crystal structures of these proteins. In Src, the arginine residue in the RT loop points towards Thr252 and Gly254, and forms a hydrogen bond with the carbonyl group of Leu255, while Gln324 in the C­ 4 loop of the kinase makes a backbone hydrogen bond to Gly254 ­ stabilizing the bulge in the linker. This explains the failure of Csk to regulate the activities of various chimeras in which the SH2 and SH3 domains of Lck have been swapped with the corresponding domains of Src18,19. Although Csk can phosphorylate Tyr527 and thus potentially stimulate the formation of a complex between the tail and the SH2 domain, there is no arginine residue in the RT loop or glutamine residue in the C­ 4 loop of Lck that would stabilize the bulged Src linker. The reason for these differences in the linker region and their correlation with the other features that differ between the subgroups of Src kinases is unclear. One possibility is that the dissociation rate of the SH3 domain from the N-terminal lobe is different, reflecting fine-tuning of activation or inhibition mechanisms in the two subgroups. Other possibilities are the need for similar substrate specificities in terms of kinase action, but different targeting/localization (which may be carried out in part by the SH3 domain) and/or the need for conformational freedom in the activated state.

Figure 1 Src Structure. Top (above) and side views (below) are shown. The SH2­kinase linker (red) intercalates between the SH3 domain (green) and the N-terminal kinase lobe (light blue). The SH2 domain (yellow) lies next to the C-terminal kinase lobe (dark blue). The C-terminal tail (orange) reaches across the interface between the kinase and SH2 domains to bind to the SH2 phosphotyrosine-binding pocket. The figure was made using GRASP23 and is adapted, with permission, from Ref. 6.

In fact, the linker regions of Src, Yes, Fgr, Fyn and Yrk each contain an inserted residue, relative to the `minimal length' linkers of Lck, Blk, Hck and Lyn (Fig. 2). The hydrophobicity of the linker region is, however, conserved. Superposition of the Hck and Src kinase domains demonstrates that a hydrophobic group in the linker (Leu255 in Src and Trp254 in Hck) occupies a structurally conserved position and lies in a hydrophobic pocket formed by the 2­ 3 and C­ 4 loops of the N-terminal lobes of the kinase domain (Figs 1 and 3). Superposition of the SH3 domains shows that the linkers bind in a similar manner to the hydrophobic surfaces of the SH3 domains (see below). Superposition of the N-terminal

kinase lobes of Src and Hck does, however, reveal a small displacement of the SH3 domains relative to the back of the kinase domain6. This difference is due to the presence of the extra residue in the Src linker ­ which leads to a bulge in the linker (see Fig. 2d) ­ as well as to the substitution of leucine residue with a, more bulky, tryptophan residue. Figure 2a shows the aligned linker sequences of the nine members of the Src family, together with key residues in the RT loop of the SH3 domain and the C­ 4 region of the kinase domain that interact with the linker. The differences found in this region correlate with the grouping seen when these sequences are aligned, and with the evolutionary distances

The hydrophobic pocket
Figure 3 shows a surface representation of the back of the Src kinase domain. A

180

TIBS 23 ­ MAY 1998

REVIEWS

Figure 2 The SH2­kinase linker. (a) Sequence alignments of the SH2­kinase linkers, RT loops and C­ 4 loops of Src family members. The different members of the Src family show little sequence similarity in this region; however, hydrophobicity at key positions is conserved. Sequences shown are those of the human protein, except in the case of Yrk, where the chicken sequence is shown. (b) Phylogenetic tree for Src kinases, made with the program Clustal W24, using the complete sequence of each kinase. The tree shows two major subclasses within the family ­ which correlates well with the alignments shown in (a). (c) Structures of the SH2­kinase linkers of Hck and Src. Residues involved in hydrophobic interactions are labeled. Pro250 and Thr252 in Src, and the equivalent residues in Hck (Pro250 and Pro253), bind to the hydrophobic surface of the SH3 domains of these kinases, whereas Leu255 in Src and Trp254 in Hck bind to the hydrophobic pocket in the N-terminal kinase lobe. (d) The linkers of Group A Src kinases possess an insert between the residues corresponding to Pro250 and Leu255 of Src. This insert causes a bulge in the linker region (indicated by the blue arrow) that is stabilized in part by the residue corresponding to Gln324 of Src, which forms a hydrogen bond with the backbone of the residue corresponding to Leu255. The positions of the conserved arginine (Arg318 in Src) and glutamine residues (Gln324 in Src) in the C­ 4 loop of Group A kinases are switched around in Group B. Also, the SH3 domain RT loops of Group A kinases have the Arg-Thr sequence in the RT loop, whereas those of Group B do not; the conserved arginine residue makes contacts with residues in the linker region (Thr252, Gly254 and Leu255 in Src), which also stabilizes the latter.

deep, hydrophobic pocket, found in the N-terminal kinase lobe, is distinct from the pockets found in serine/threonine kinases, such as cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (Ref. 20). The presence of this pocket correlates with conservation of a hydrophobic residue in the SH2­kinase linker at the position corresponding to

Leu255. This pocket and the hydrophobic surface of the SH3 domain probably provide much of the binding energy necessary for maintaining the inactive conformational state. Many residues that are widely separated in the primary sequence contribute to this pocket (for example, Ile262,

Trp286, Tyr326, Ala327 and Val337 in Src). The hydrophobicity of these residues is conserved in all tyrosine kinases, including members of the Src, Abl, Btk and Csk families and most receptor kinases2,6. Further sequence comparisons indicate that this hydrophobic pocket is not a conserved feature of serine/threonine

Figure 3 Surface representations of Src. (a) Surface of the N-terminal lobe of Src (in stereo) showing the deep hydrophobic pocket where Leu255 in Src (or Trp254 in Hck) intercalates. The figure was made using ICM25. (b) Electrostatic potential of the back of the kinase domain, and the binding surface of the SH3 and SH2 domains. Note that the N-terminal lobe of the kinase contains a long narrow hydrophobic patch along which the SH2­kinase linker runs. Also note the large area of negative potential (red) on the C-terminal lobe. This is, in part, compensated by Arg156 and Arg160 of the A-helix in the SH2 domain. The figure was made using GRASP23.

181

REVIEWS

TIBS 23 ­ MAY 1998 residue in the extended 2­ 3 loop points into the hydrophobic pocket6, as in Src and Hck.

Regulation by conformational restriction
Superpositions of kinase structures in the active and inactive conformations show how the N-terminal lobe fans over the C-terminal lobe21 (see Fig. 4). The superposition is illuminating in a number of respects. First, the relative orientation of the N- and C-terminal lobes does not directly correlate with kinase activity. The inactive conformation of the insulin receptor kinase13 has the most `open' form and human Src has the most `closed' form4 (Fig. 4b); however, the latter is also catalytically inactive. Second, the C­ 4 loops superimpose well when the C-terminal lobe is used for structural alignment, but not when the N-terminal lobe is used for this purpose6. The C­ 4 loop (the anchor loop) and the peptide strand connecting the two lobes (the NC strand, Fig. 4) act as a pivot point or hinge, and contact the 7­ 8 loop of the C-terminal lobe on opposite sides. The 7­ 8 loop is a rigid part of the C-terminal lobe, even though the activation loop, which follows the 8 strand, adopts variable conformations in different structures. Apparently, this architecture, which is conserved both in serine/ threonine and tyrosine kinases, dictates the relative movement of the N-terminal lobe with respect to the C-terminal lobe. Third, this comparison also demonstrates that the C helix is rather randomly disposed, forming a cone with an apex at the C­ 4 loop6. Hydrophobic contacts with the N-terminal lobe, the activation loop and the C-terminal lobe at the beginning, middle and end of the C helix, respectively, account for this variability. It is particularly interesting to note that these structural elements all meet at a single point ­ the hinge (Fig. 4a). The twisting motion affects the relative positions of the N-terminal lobe and the C helix, which are important for catalysis. They affect the location of Lys295 and Glu310 in the active site ­ with respect to the remaining catalytic residues in the C-terminal lobe. The different orientations of these structural elements suggest that their position is characterized by a shallow potential (for an analysis of domain movements in proteins, see Ref. 22). This means that small perturbations could therefore influence the protein conformation significantly, which would allow for variation in the molecular mechanisms that regulate kinase activity. In the case of Src, the interaction

Figure 4 Conformational freedom in Src kinases (a) Superposition of a number of kinases indicates three distinct structural elements necessary for formation of an active site [relative to the C-terminal lobe (dark blue)]: the -strands of the N-terminal lobe (light blue); the C helix (red) of the N-terminal lobe; and the activation loop (red), which is found in the C-terminal lobe but is wedged between the two lobes near the active site. The rear view is shown. (b) Superposition of serine/threonine and tyrosine kinases. The rotation matrices that are needed to position the N-terminal lobes of a number of kinase domains on that of chicken Src, following the structural alignment of C-terminal lobes, were calculated and applied to a reference vector. The end points of the rotated vectors are shown by dots. The purple dot (insulin receptor kinase) and the brown dot (human Src) are at the extreme ends of the path. Adapted, with permission, from Ref. 6. (c) Side view of superpositions of the kinase domains of Src4 (red), and the insulin receptor in the active15 (yellow) and inactive conformations13 (blue). Colored triangles, squares and circles represent equivalent points within each structure. The inactive insulin receptor and Src constitute the extremes of the `twisting' motion. (d) Rear view of the three structures shown in (a). The structures have been rotated counterclockwise, affording a view from the back of the kinase domain. Three points that show substantial change in dihedral angles (Pt 1, before the anchor loop; Pt 2, after the anchor loop; Pt 3, the NC strand) are indicated in the figure. The figure was made using GRASP23.

kinases. Another common feature of many receptor tyrosine kinases is the length of the 2­ 3 loop ­ which is longer than those of members of the Src, Abl, Btk and Csk families. The importance

of these common features in receptor tyrosine kinases is not clear, but it is interesting to note that, in the known structures of fibroblast growth factor and insulin receptor kinases, a hydrophobic

182

TIBS 23 ­ MAY 1998 between the SH3 and SH2 domains, and the kinase domain reduces conformational freedom, leaving the enzyme in the inhibited state. In the case of Cdk2, the binding of cyclin reduces the flexibility of the C helix and the orientation of the kinase lobes, but results in the active state17.

REVIEWS

Insights into the SH3 domain
The structures of tyrosine kinases in the inactive conformation also yield structural information on a truly physiological SH3­ligand interaction. The paradigm for SH3 domain function has been binding to proline-rich peptides that adopt an extended conformation (PPII helix); however, the specificity and regulation of such interactions have been more ambiguous than, for instance, the binding of ligands to SH2 domains. Several points have emerged from the new kinase structures. The first is the importance of non-specific interactions between hydrophobic side chains. For instance, comparison of the region around the linker peptide in the Src and Hck structures shows that the methyl group of Thr252 (in Src) replaces the side chain of Pro253 (in Hck) in the interaction with the P0 pocket (as defined by Lim et al.11). In an analogous manner, Leu255 in the Src linker and Trp254 in the Hck linker both bind to the same point in the kinase N-terminal lobe. These non-specific hydrophobic interactions are distinct from the ionic interactions ­ such as the binding of phosphate groups to SH2 domains ­ where acidic, basic and alcohol groups make specific salt bridges and hydrogen bonds. The new structures also show that the binding of the linker peptide to the SH3 domain creates a specific surface for further interaction with the kinase domain. By binding one face of the PPII fold, one or two residues per turn necessarily point towards the solvent. Comparison of the Hck and Src structures shows that Gln251 (the residue following Pro250, which initially interacts with the SH3 domain) makes a hydrogen bond to Tyr326 in Src and to His326 in Hck. The binding surface is also used to position Leu255 (in Src) or Trp254 (in Hck) close to the hydrophobic pocket formed by the N-terminal kinase lobe. The interactions that the linker makes with both binding surfaces (the SH3 domain and the back of the kinase domain) together probably result in binding of a high affinity and specificity. Thus, the SH3 domains may coordinate their ligands, in order to form a further tripartite interaction with

Figure 5 Structures of the SH3 and SH2 domains of Src kinases. (a) Superposition of ligand-bound SH3 domains determined by X-ray crystallography indicates that there is a binding region and a specificity region. The binding region is centred at one turn of a PPII helix. In the terms of Lim and coworkers11, the P 3 and P0 pockets form this region. The specificity pocket is located towards the C-terminus of the binding region and is formed by the P 3 pocket and surrounded by the RT and the n-Src loops. (b) Superposition of ligand-bound SH2 domains determined by X-ray crystallography also indicates a binding region and a specificity region, defined by the EF and BG loops10,26. Loss of the phosphate on the tyrosine residue or mutation of the binding pocket abolishes peptide binding, whereas changes C-terminal to the phosphotyrosine result in subtle but significant changes in binding affinity. The figure was made using ICM25.

additional proteins, in an in vivo situation. This is distinctly different from the interactions involving SH2 domains observed thus far. A series of structural superpositions indicates that there are distinct binding and specificity regions in SH3 domains as well as in SH2 domains (Fig. 5). The binding region in SH3 domains recognizes one turn of a PPII fold (residues 249­253 in the Src linker) and consists of the first two pockets, P 3 and P0. Conserved tyrosine and asparagine residues in the P 3 pocket (Fig. 5) make hydrogen bonds to the carbonyl oxygen atoms of the linker, ideally supporting the dihedral angles of the extended peptide. The P0 pocket binds to the second hydrophobic side chain, after one turn of the PPII helix. The conserved tryptophan residue

(Trp118 in Src) that straddles the P0 and P 3 pockets makes the last hydrogen bond to the linker backbone. The third pocket (P 3 ), following Trp118, is oriented perpendicular to the binding surface and effectively prohibits the continuation of a PPII fold. The surface that constitutes the PPII-binding motif is exposed to solvent and free of surrounding loops. A similar situation is found for the phosphotyrosine-binding pocket of the SH2 domain. Conversely, the P 3 pocket of the SH3 domain is surrounded by the RT and n-Src loops, and behaves like the specificity region. This is also the case for the EF and BG loops of the SH2 domain (Fig. 5). The relevance of this separation is unclear. It is, however, evident that a mutation in either the binding motif of the ligand or the binding pocket

183

REVIEWS

TIBS 23 ­ MAY 1998 a new wave of experiments (see, for example, Gonfloni et al.18) that will surely build upon the structural information and helpful constraints provided by the three new structures.
An extensive compilation of data pertaining to Src and the Src family, including structural work, mutants (and their position on the structure), alignments, substrate targets, and links to abstracts can be found at http://convex.hhmi.columbia.edu/hendw/ williams/src.html. A number of references that we were forced to omit for the sake of brevity can also be found at this site.

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge Albert Weijland, Giulio Superti-Furga, Stephania Gonfloni, Toby Gibson and Luis Serrano. We also thank Benjamin Hitz and Barry Honig for their help. J. C. W. gratefully acknowledges support from the Alexander von Humboldt Stiftung and the EMBL.

Figure 6 Src kinase sequence similarity. The nine different Src family members were aligned using the program Clustal W24. Similarity values were extracted from the program and mapped onto the C trace. Two different stereo views are shown. Regions of high similarity are shown in orange, whereas white indicates no similarity. Note that the residues following the SH2 domain and preceding the lys-pro sequence of the linker (a) are highly variable. The B helix (b), the B­ C region (c) of the SH2 domain, the kinase insert loop (d), the G­ H loop (e) and the 7­ 8 loop (f) of the kinase domain also show low sequence similarity.

References
1 Shenk, M. A. and Steele, R. E. (1993) Trends Biochem. Sci. 18, 459­463 2 Hanks, S. K. and Hunter, T. (1995) in The Protein Kinase FactsBook (Hardie, G. and Hanks, S. K., eds), Academic Press 3 Brown, M. T. and Cooper, J. A. (1996) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1287, 121­149 4 Xu, W., Harrison, S. C. and Eck, M. J. (1997) Nature 385, 595­602 5 Sicheri, F., Moarefi, I. and Kuriyan, J. (1997) Nature 385, 602­609 6 Williams, J. C. et al. (1997) J. Mol. Biol. 274, 757­775. 7 Courtneidge, S. A. (1994) Non-receptor Protein Tyrosine Kinases, Oxford University Press 8 Resh, M. D. (1994) Cell 76, 411­413 9 Superti-Furga, G. and Courtneidge, S. A. (1995) Bioessays 4, 321­330 10 Lee, C-H. et al. (1994) Structure 2, 423­438 11 Lim, W. A., Richards, F. M. and Fox, R. O. (1994) Nature 372, 375­379 12 Taylor, S. S. et al. (1993) Trends Biochem. Sci. 18, 84­89 13 Hubbard, S. R. et al. (1994) Nature 372, 746­754 14 Yamaguchi, H. and Hendrickson, W. A. (1996) Nature 384, 484­489 15 Hubbard, S. R. (1997) EMBO J. 16, 5572­5581 16 Johnson, L. N. and O'Reilly, M. (1996) Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 6, 762­769 17 Jeffrey, P. D. et al. (1995) Nature 376, 313­320 18 Gonfloni, S. et al. (1997) EMBO J. 16, 7261­7271, and references therein 19 Kashishian, A. M. and Cooper J. A. (1990) Oncogene 5, 1463­1470 20 Veron, M. et al. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 90, 10618­10622 21 Karlsson, R. et al. (1993) Acta Crystallogr. D49, 381­388 22 Gerstein, M., Lesk, A. and Chothia, C. (1994) Biochemistry 33, 6739­6749 23 Nicholls, A. et al. (1991) Proteins 11, 281­296 24 Thompson, J. D. et al. (1995) Nucleic Acids Res. 22, 4673­4680 25 Abagyan, R. et al. (1994) J. Computat. Chem. 15, 488­506 26 Eck, M. J. et al. (1993) Nature 362, 87­91

completely abrogates binding, whereas mutations in the specificity region will only modify the binding constant.

The future
The Abl, Btk and Csk kinase families are made up of SH3, SH2 and kinase domains that have the same topology as, and show high sequence similarity to, Src9. They also maintain a hydrophobic pocket at the back of the kinase domain and have short 2­ 3 loops. The SH2­ kinase linker regions of these kinases are the same length and show a similar conservation of hydrophobic residues to that of Src kinases6. Consequently, it is reasonable to propose that these Src-related kinases share a similar three-dimensional structure and similar mechanisms of intramolecular regulation ­ this is something we hope to learn in the future. Although the nine Src family members are very similar in terms of sequence identity, they can be divided into two subgroups by constructing a pattern from key structural elements (Fig. 2). This division might reflect distinct functional features of the subgroups. In Fig. 6, the sequence similarity between the nine Src family kinases has been mapped onto the -carbon trace of Src and is colored from high similarity (orange) to no

similarity (white). The figure illustrates the strong conservation of the SH3 binding surface and of the cores of the kinase domain, as well as high sequence variability in the SH2­kinase linker peptide. In terms of sequence variability, another interesting region consists of the three to four amino acid residues after the SH2 domain that precede the residue corresponding to Pro250 of Src ­ the first residue that makes contact with the SH3 domain. In the Hck and Src structures, these residues make no contact with any other region of the protein and are solvent exposed. There is much to learn about the functional mechanisms and regulation of this important class of signal-transducing enzymes. Although the recent structures explain many in vitro and in vivo observations, they do not provide information on how different activation states are achieved. How does the SH2­kinase linker dissociate when the SH2 and SH3 domains are challenged by external ligands? What is the position of the SH3 domain when the kinase is challenged by an activation signal? What is the role of the unique N-terminal domain? What surfaces are used by kinase-specific activators or inhibitors? These and other questions remain to be addressed by

184

