Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics Vol. 392, No. 1, August 1, pp. 110 ­116, 2001 doi:10.1006/abbi.2001.2396, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

Flavin Specificity and Subunit Interaction of Vibrio fischeri General NAD(P)H-Flavin Oxidoreductase FRG/FRase I 1
Chih-Kwang Tang,* Christopher E. Jeffers,* Jeffry C. Nichols, and Shiao-Chun Tu* , ,2
*Department of Biology and Biochemistry, and Department of Chemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204-5001; and Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005

Received February 20, 2001, and in revised form April 9, 2001; published online July 9, 2001

Apoenzyme of the major NAD(P)H-utilizing flavin reductase FRG/FRase I from Vibrio fischeri was prepared. The apoenzyme bound one FMN cofactor per enzyme monomer to yield fully active holoenzyme. The FMN cofactor binding resulted in substantial quenching of both the flavin and the protein fluorescence intensities without any significant shifts in the emission peaks. In addition to FMN binding (K d 0.5 M at 23°C), the apoenzyme also bound 2-thioFMN, FAD and riboflavin as a cofactor with K d values of 1, 12, and 37 M, respectively, at 23°C. The 2-thioFMN containing holoenzyme was about 40% active in specific activity as compared to the FMN-containing holoenzyme. The FAD- and riboflavin-reconstituted holoenzymes were also catalytically active but their specific activities were not determined. FRG/FRase I followed a ping-pong kinetic mechanism. It is proposed that the enzyme-bound FMN cofactor shuttles between the oxidized and the reduced form during catalysis. For both the FMN- and 2-thioFMN-containing holoenzymes, 2-thioFMN was about 30% active as compared to FMN as a substrate. FAD and riboflavin were also active substrates. FRG/FRase I was shown by ultracentrifugation at 4°C to undergo a monomer-dimer equilibrium, with K d values of 18.0 and 13.4 M for the apoand holoenzymes, respectively. All the spectral, ligand equilibrium binding, and kinetic properties described above are most likely associated with the monomeric species of FRG/FRase I. Many aspects of these properties are compared with a structurally and functionally

related Vibrio harveyi NADPH-specific flavin reductase FRP. © 2001 Academic Press Key Words: NAD(P)H-flavin oxidoreductases; flavin reductase; Vibrio fischeri; Vibrio harveyi; flavin binding; protein monomer­ dimer equilibrium; apoenzyme; holoenzyme.

The luciferase from luminous bacteria catalyzes a bioluminescent reaction in which reduced FMN (FMNH 2) 3 and a long-chain aliphatic aldehyde are oxidized by molecular oxygen to generate FMN, fatty acid, water, and light. Since luciferase is unable to catalyze the reduction of flavin, the required FMNH 2 substrate is believed to be supplied in vivo by NAD(P)H:flavin oxidoreductases (flavin reductases) that catalyze the reduction of flavin, such as FMN, by NADH and/or NADPH (Eq. [1]). FMN NAD(P)H H 3 FMNH2 NAD(P) [1]

1 This work was supported by Grant GM25953 from the National Institutes of Health and Grant E-1030 from The Robert A. Welch Foundation to S.C.T. and by a National Institutes of Health Predoctoral Traineeship through the Houston Area Molecular Biophysics Training Program (GM08280-11) to C.E.J. 2 To whom correspondence should be addressed at Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204-5001. Fax: (713) 743-8351. E-mail: dtu@uh.edu.

Since FMNH 2 is highly sensitive to autooxidation, with a half-life of 50 ms at 23°C in neutral phosphate buffer containing 0.125 mM O 2 (1), free diffusion would not be an efficient way for the transfer of FMNH 2 from reductases to luciferase. In this connection, earlier kinetic studies suggest a direct transfer of FMNH 2 from flavin reductases to luciferase in the coupled bioluminescence reaction (2, 3). The Vibrio harveyi cells contain an NADPH:flavin oxidoreductase (flavin reductase P or FRP) that has one bound FMN cofactor per monomer (4), exists as a
3 Abbreviations used: FMNH 2, reduced riboflavin 5 -phosphate; FRP, NADPH-preferring flavin reductase; FRG/FRase I, general flavin reductase that utilizes NADH and NADPH with similar efficiencies; (FRG/FRase I) S, reconstituted FRG/FRase I that contains 2-thioFMN as a cofactor.

110

0003-9861/01 $35.00 Copyright © 2001 by Academic Press All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

PROPERTIES OF Vibrio fischeri NAD(P)H-FLAVIN OXIDOREDUCTASE

111

SCHEME 1

homodimer in crystalline form (5), and exhibits a monomer-dimer equilibrium in aqueous solution (6). Using V. harveyi FRP and luciferase, a direct channeling of FMNH 2 from the former to the latter enzyme has been confirmed by a recent detailed kinetic study (7). Moreover, several lines of evidence show that the V. harveyi FRP directly transfers its reduced flavin cofactor to luciferase from V. harveyi or Vibrio fischeri for the coupled luminescence reaction (7, 8) as shown in Scheme 1A. In Scheme 1 (A and B), E is the flavin reductase apoenzyme; L is luciferase; F and FH 2 are, respectively, oxidized and reduced flavin cofactor of reductase; f and fH 2 are, respectively, oxidized flavin substrate and reduced flavin product of reductase; NH and N are, respectively, NAD(P)H and NAD(P) . Following Scheme 1A, once the flavin cofactor of FRP is reduced by NADPH, the reduced cofactor (FH 2) is directly transferred to luciferase, leaving FRP in the apoenzyme form. The exogenously added flavin subsequently binds to the cofactor site to regenerate the oxidized holoenzyme EF. A major NAD(P)H:flavin oxidoreductase from V. fischeri, referred to as FRG (4, 7) or FRase I (9, 10), can utilize both NADH and NADPH with similar efficiencies. FRG/FRase I is structurally similar to FRP with respect to FMN cofactor (4, 11) and general protein folding (5, 10). Our kinetic results show that FRG/FRase I also directly transfers its reduced flavin cofactor to V. fischeri luciferase (8) following the Scheme 1A. However, in the FRG/FRase I and V. harveyi luciferase coupled reaction, a distinct patter of direct transfer of reduced flavin product from reductase to luciferase was observed (7, 8). As shown in Scheme 1B, the reduced flavin cofactor (FH 2) stays bound to FRG/FRase I, and is active in reducing the oxidized flavin substrate f. The reduced flavin product (fH 2) so generated is then directly transferred to V. harveyi luciferase, and the oxidized reductase holoenzyme is regenerated.

We have previously characterized the structural and flavin binding properties of FRP (5, 6). Intrigued by the different modes of flavin transfer by FRP and FRG/ FRase I to V. harveyi luciferase, this work was undertaken for a parallel study on the flavin (cofactor and substrate) specificity and subunit interaction of FRG/ FRase I. Apoenzyme of FRG/FRase I was prepared and the bindings of various flavins to the cofactor site of the apoenzyme were characterized. Flavin substrate specificities were also determined for the reconstituted enzymes. Moreover, the subunit interactions of the FRG/ FRase I apo- and holoenzymes were characterized by ultracentrifugation. Both similarities and differences between FRG/FRase I and FRP were revealed by these studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials. DEAE-Sepharose (fast flow) and phenyl-Sepharose 6 fast flow were purchased from Pharmacia. Dithiothreitol, EDTA and ultrapure urea were obtained from Fisher. Guanidine hydrochloride was from Eastman Kodak. FMN, riboflavin, FAD, and NADH were from Sigma. DC Protein Assay Reagent Package was obtained from Bio-Rad. All phosphate (Pi) buffers were at pH 7.0. FAD was purified (12) and 2-thioFMN was synthesized and purified (13) as described previously. FRG/FRase I was expressed in and purified (to 90% purity) from Escherichia coli JM109 cells harboring pFRG following procedures detailed previously (7). Reductase activity assay. The activities of the native FRG/FRase I and all reconstituted reductases were determined at 23°C by monitoring the decrease of A 340 associated with the oxidation of NADH. Unless stated otherwise, the reactions were initiated by adding enzyme into 1 ml of 50 mM Pi buffer containing designated levels of NADH and a flavin species as specified. One unit of enzyme activity was defined as 1 mol of NADH oxidized per minute. NADH concentrations were determined from A 340 measurements using 340 6.22 10 3 M 1 cm 1. Preparation of FRG/FRase I apoenzyme. The bound FMN was dissociated from FRG/FRase I under denaturing conditions. Guanidine hydrochloride was added to a final concentration of 5 M to 3 ml of FRG/FRase I solution (3 mg/ml) containing 1 mM dithiothreitol to denature the enzyme. The sample was then loaded onto a Sephadex

112

TANG ET AL.

FIG. 1. Effects of FMN binding by FRG/FRase I apoenzyme on the flavin and protein fluorescence. All measurements were carried out in 0.1 M phosphate, pH 7.0, at 23°C. (A) Protein fluorescence emissions were measured using 280 nm excitation and 3 M apoenzyme with (F) and without (E) the addition of 3 M FMN. (B) Flavin fluorescence emissions of 1 M FMN (E) and 1 M FRG/FRase I holoenzyme (F) under excitation at 450 nm. G-25 column (2 35 cm) preequilibrated with fresh 6 M urea in 50 mM Pi buffer containing 1 mM dithiothreitol. The apoenzyme was separated from dissociated FMN by elution with the same buffer. Four ml of the denatured apo-FRP solution so obtained was immediately mixed with 150 ml of ice-cold 50 mM Pi buffer containing 1 mM dithiothreitol in a beaker and the solution was gently stirred for 20 min. The sample solution was loaded onto a DEAE-Sepharose column (0.5 5 cm) preequilibrated with 50 mM P i buffer and eluted with 50 ml of the same buffer to remove the residual urea. The apoenzyme was then recovered by elution with 450 mM P i buffer. The apoenzyme so obtained contained no detectable flavin. Reconstitution of reductase holoenzyme. Reconstitution of FRG/ FRase I holoenzyme was carried out by incubating apo-FRG/FRase I with 10-fold excess FMN or other flavins for 10 min. The excess free flavins were removed from the reconstituted enzyme by application of the sample onto a Sephadex G-25 column (1 30 cm) preequilibrated and subsequently eluted with 50 mM P i buffer. The reconstituted holoenzyme containing 2-thioFMN as a cofactor is referred to as (FRG/FRase I) S. Fluorescence measurements. Fluorescence emissions were scanned or measured at selected wavelengths at 23°C using a Perkin­Elmer MPF-44 fluorescence spectrophotometer. Technical emission spectra were recorded without any corrections. Equilibrium ultracentrifugation. The monomer-dimer equilibria of FRG/FRase I apo- and holoenzymes were examined by equilibrium analytical ultracentrifugation following the methods described earlier (6). Ultracentrifugations were performed at 30,000 rpm and 4°C in a Beckman XL-A analytical ultracentrifuge using a six-channel equilibrium cell, and absorbance was monitored at 220 or 280 nm. Data were analyzed (6) using the software package supplied by the Beckman Corp.

RESULTS

Binding of flavin cofactor by apo-FRG/FRase I. The effects of FMN cofactor binding on the fluorescence

properties of both the apoenzyme and the flavin are shown in Fig. 1. The fluorescence emission of the FRG/ FRase I apoenzyme showed a maximum at 330 nm with excitation at 280 nm (Fig. 1A). Using a sample containing 3 M apo-FRG/FRase I and 3 M FMN, the protein fluorescence was quenched 83% with no detectable shift in the emission maximum (Fig. 1A). The flavin fluorescence of 1 M holoenzyme (based on flavin content) was only 16% of that of free FMN at the same concentration, both showing the same emission maximum at 525 nm (Fig. 1B). The quenching of the protein fluorescence by FMN was used to determine the stoichiometry and the dissociation constant of the flavin cofactor binding by apo-FRG/FRase I. In one experiment, 4 M apo-FRG/FRase I was titrated with varying amounts of FMN and the quenching of the protein fluorescence emission at 330 nm was monitored (Fig. 2A). At FMN/apoenzyme molar ratios of 1.0, higher degrees of quenching were observed at higher concentrations of FMN. Very little further decreases of the protein fluorescence were detected at FMN/apoenzyme molar ratios 1.0. The extrapolated break point of such a fluorescence titration curve corresponds to a binding of 0.95 FMN per apo-FRG/FRase I monomer (Fig. 2A). The single FMN cofactor site per FRG/FRase I monomer shown for the soluble FRG/FRase I is fully consistent with the earlier reports (10, 11). Using a limiting amount of apo-FRG/FRase I at 40 nM, changes of the protein fluorescence at 330 nm (i.e., Fluorescence defined as the fluorescence intensity of the

PROPERTIES OF Vibrio fischeri NAD(P)H-FLAVIN OXIDOREDUCTASE TABLE I

113

Equilibrium Constants for Flavin Cofactor Binding and Subunit Dimerization by FRG/FRase I and FRP
K d ( M) for cofactor binding a Enzyme Apo-FRG/FRase I Holo-FRG/FRase I Apo-FRP c Holo-FRPc
a b

K d ( M) for FMN 2-ThioFMN FAD Riboflavin dimerization b 0.5 0.2 1.0 0.3 12 ND d 37 ND d 18.0 13.4 3.3 1.8

Determined at 23°C. Determined at 4°C. c Data taken from Reference (6). d Not detectable at 30 M flavin.

FIG. 2. Fluorometric titrations of FRG/FRase I apoenzyme with FMN. (A) Apo-FRG/FRase I, at 4 M, was titrated with varying concentrations of FMN as indicated. Protein fluorescence emissions at 330 nm were measured using 280 nm excitation. The arrow points to the extrapolated break point of maximal fluorescence quenching. (B) A sample containing a constant and limiting amount of apo-FRG/ FRase I at 40 nM was titration with 0.14 to 0.67 M FMN, and protein fluorescence emissions at 330 nm were measured using 280 nm excitation. Reciprocals of Fluorescence (defined as the fluorescence in the absence of FMN minus that in the presence of FMN) were plotted against the reciprocals of FMN concentrations. All measurements were carried out in 0.15 M phosphate, pH 7.0, at 23°C.

apoenzyme in the absence of any flavin minus that in the presence of a designated amount of FMN) were also measured after the addition of FMN ranging from 0.14 to 0.67 M. The reciprocal of Fluorescence was plotted against the reciprocal of the FMN concentration (Fig. 2B), and the intercept at the abscissa allows the calculation of a dissociation constant (K d) of 0.5 M for the FMN cofactor binding by apo-FRG/FRase I. Similar fluorescence titration experiments were also carried out using other flavins in place of FMN. The dissociation constants for the binding of 2-thioFMN, FAD, and riboflavin by apo-FRG/FRase I were determined to be 1, 12, and 37 M, respectively. These results are summarized in Table I along with the K d values of FMN and 2-thioFMN binding by the apo-FRP reported previously (6) for comparisons. Up to 30 M of FAD or riboflavin, no significant binding of these two flavins by apo-FRP was observed (6). General kinetic properties of FRG/FRase I and reconstituted holoenzymes using various flavins. Activities of the native FRG/FRase I enzyme were determined at five constant levels of NADH (15, 30, 40, 45, and 80 M) and FMN concentrations at 10, 20, 30, 40, 60, and 80 M. Reciprocals of the observed initial activities were first plotted against the reciprocals of the FMN concentrations at each constant level of NADH. A series of parallel lines were obtained consistent with a ping-pong mechanism. The intercepts on the ordinate

were subsequently plotted against the reciprocals of the NADH concentrations (Fig. 3, F). This new plot allows the determination of a V max (as reciprocal of the ordinate intercept) of 206 unit/mg and a K m, NADH (as reciprocal of the abscissa intercept) of 133 M (Fig. 3, Table II). Similarly, the reciprocals of FRG/FRase I activities were also plotted against reciprocals of varying NADH concentrations at each of 6 constant levels of FMN. A series of parallel lines were again obtained confirming the ping-pong mechanism. Intercepts on the ordinate were plotted against reciprocals of the corresponding FMN concentrations (Fig. 3, s), provid-

FIG. 3. Graphical determinations of the K m and V max. Activities of a constant level of native FRG/FRase I were determined in 50 mM phosphate, pH 7.0, containing varying levels of NADH and FMN. Double reciprocal plots of activity versus substrate concentration were constructed first at several constant levels of NADH and varying amounts of FMN and then at several constant levels of FMN and varying amounts of NADH. On the basis of the former plot, intercepts on the ordinate are replotted against the reciprocals of NADH concentrations (F). From the latter plot, intercepts on the ordinate are re-plotted against the reciprocals of FMN concentrations (s). Experimental conditions are detailed in the text, and values of V max, K m, FMN and K m, NADH determined from the plot shown herein are summarized in Table II.

114

TANG ET AL. TABLE II

Kinetic Parameters of FRG/FRase I Containing FMN or 2-ThioFMN as Cofactor a
NADH K m ( M) 133 129 30 c FMN K m ( M) 76 57 34 b NADH/FMN V max (unit/mg) 206 212 78 2-ThioFMN K m ( M) 31 b 76 b NADH/2-ThioFMN V max (unit/mg) 64 b 28 b

Enzyme Native FRG/FRase I Reconstituted FRG/FRase I Reconstituted (FRG/FRase I) S
a b c

Determined in 50 mM P i, pH 7.0, at 23°C. Determined using 0.25 mM NADH. Determined using 0.75 mM 2-thioFMN.

ing a basis for the determination of the V max and K m, FMN (76 M) as shown in Table II. The catalytic activity of the FRG/FRase I holoenzyme reconstituted from apo-FRG/FRase I and FMN was evaluated by similar substrate titration experiments. The K m values for NADH and FMN and the V max are included in Table II. Using the reconstituted FRG/ FRase I and NADH, it was found that the reductase efficiently utilized, in addition to FMN, 2-thioFMN as a flavin substrate, exhibiting a K m of 31 M for 2-thioFMN and a V max of 64 unit/mg, which is 31% of that observed using FMN and NADH as substrates (Table II). The reconstituted (FRG/FRase I) S was also quite active as a reductase. Using FMN and NADH as substrates, (FRG/FRase I) S showed a V max ( 78 unit/mg) 38% of that for the native FRG/FRase I and values of K m, FMN (34 M) and K m, NADH (30 M) somewhat lower that those of the native FRG/FRase I (Table II). The (FRG/FRase I) S utilized 2-thioFMN as well as an active flavin substrate. With NADH as a cosubstrate, (FRG/ FRase I) S exhibited a K m of 76 M for 2-thioFMN and a V max of 28 unit/mg that was 36 and 44% of those for (FRG/FRase I) S using NADH/FMN and FRG/FRase I using NADH/2-thioFMN as substrates, respectively (Table II). The apo-FRG/FRase I was able to bind FAD and riboflavin in addition to FMN and 2-thioFMN at the cofactor site (Table I). Detailed kinetic characterization of the FRG/FRase I holoenzymes containing FAD or riboflavin as a cofactor was not carried out. However, in a simple diagnostic test, 0.5 M apo-FRG/FRase I was mixed with 0.1 mM FMN, 2-thioFMN, FAD, or riboflavin at 23°C for 3 min, and 0.1 mM NADH was subsequently added to initiate the spectrophotometric assay. It was found that the samples containing 2-thioFMN, FAD, and riboflavin exhibited activities that were 66, 78, and 83%, respectively, of that of the FMNcontaining sample. These results indicated that, in addition to FMN and 2-thioFMN, FAD, and riboflavin were also catalytically active as a cofactor and as a substrate.

Subunit interactions of FRG/FRase I holo- and apoenzymes. The crystalline FRG/FRase I holoenzyme was shown to be a homodimer (10). It is important to examine the quaternary structure of FRG/ FRase I in solution in order to correlate the spectral, kinetic, and flavin-binding properties described above to the actual enzyme form(s) existing under our experimental conditions. Therefore, both the FRG/FRase I apo- and holoenzymes were subjected to equilibrium ultracentrifugations at 4°C. Sedimentation equilibria were reached within 24 h. In both Figs. 4 and 5, the solid lines are the theoretical fits using a monomer­ dimer equilibrium model and K d values of 13.4 and 18.0 M for the holo- and apoenzymes, respectively.
DISCUSSION

For the preparation of the FRG/FRase I apoenzyme, the FMN cofactor was dissociated from the holoenzyme by partial denaturation with guanidine hydrochloride and separated from the denatured apoenzyme by molecular sieve chromatography in the presence of urea. The use of urea instead of guanidine hydrochloride in the chromatographic step usually gave much better yields of active apoenzyme. In addition, we found that the removal of the denaturant by a slow dialysis resulted in substantial precipitation of the protein. In contrast, apoenzyme can be efficiently renatured and kept in a soluble form by a rapid single-step 37.5-fold dilution with cold Pi buffer. The removal of the diluted denaturant and the concentration of the apoenzyme sample were achieved by loading the sample onto and elution from a small DEAE-Sephadex column. Following such a procedure, 80% yield of the apoenzyme can be obtained in just a few hours. Upon addition of FMN to FRG/FRase I apoenzyme and subsequent removal of excess free FMN, reconstituted holoenzyme was found catalytically active with K m values for the substrates FMN and NADH and the V max (in term of specific activity) essentially identical to those of the native FRG/FRase I (Table II). These findings clearly testify to the high quality of the apo-FRG/FRase I so obtained.

PROPERTIES OF Vibrio fischeri NAD(P)H-FLAVIN OXIDOREDUCTASE

115

AMP moiety whereas the even weaker binding of riboflavin is believed to be a consequence of the lack of the negatively charged phosphate end group. It should also be noted that, as described in Results, the holoenzymes reconstituted from the apo-FRG/FRase I and FMN, 2-thioFMN, FAD, and riboflavin were all catalytically active. Using the same substrate pairs of NADH/FMN and NADH/2-thioFMN, (FRG/FRase I) S was 38 and 44%, respectively, active as FRG/FRase I (Table II), indicating an approximately 40% cofactor activity of 2-thioFMN in comparison with FMN. In addition to the bound FMN cofactor, FRG/FRase I also has a separate flavin substrate site. The flavin substrate specificity of FRG/FRase I containing FMN or 2-thioFMN as a cofactor was examined using FMN and 2-thioFMN as the flavin substrate. As shown in Table II, both the reconstituted FRG/FRase I and (FRG/FRase I) S were able to use either FMN or 2-thioFMN as a substrate. Using NADH as a cosubstrate, the specific activities of FRG/FRase I and (FRG/FRase I) S for the 2-thioFMN substrate were 31 and 36%, respectively, of that for the FMN substrate. Such substrate activities of 2-thioFMN were similar to those exhibited by FRP (6). It is interesting that, in comparison with
FIG. 4. Equilibrium ultracentrifugation of FRG/FRase I holoenzyme. FRG/FRase I holoenzyme (initial A 280 0.5) was subjected to ultracentrifugation at 30,000 rpm and 4°C until reaching equilibrium. Open circles are experimental A 280 readings and the solid line is the theoretical fit using a monomer-dimer equilibrium model with a K d of 13.4 M.

The binding of FMN to the FRG/FRase I cofactor site resulted in substantial quenching of both the protein and the flavin fluorescence without any significant shift in their fluorescence emission maxima (Fig. 1). Clearly, the microenvironments of the two tryptophan residues (Trp48 and Trp138) of FRG/FRase I were altered by the FMN binding. Since the structure of the monomeric FRG/FRase I is not known, the bases for the flavin and protein quenching upon FMN cofactor binding to apo-FRG/FRase I cannot be interpreted on a detailed molecular level at the present. In this work, we capitalized on the protein fluorescence quenching to quantify the stoichiometry and K d of flavin cofactor binding. The apo-FRG/FRase I was found to bind one flavin cofactor per reductase monomer with K d values of 0.5, 1.0, 12, and 37 M for FMN, 2-thioFMN, FAD, and riboflavin, respectively (Fig. 2, Table I). The FRP apoenzyme also binds FMN and 2-thioFMN as a cofactor with slightly tighter affinities than those exhibited by apo-FRG/FRase I (Table I). However, unlike FRG/ FRase I, no binding of FAD or riboflavin by apo-FRP was detected at flavin levels up to 30 M (6). FRG/ FRase I was apparently less discriminating than FRP in flavin cofactor binding. The weaker binding of FAD is likely attributable to the bulkiness of the additional

FIG. 5. Equilibrium ultracentrifugation of FRG/FRase I apoenzyme. FRG/FRase I apoenzyme (initial A 220 0.7) was subjected to ultracentrifugation at 30,000 rpm and 4°C until reaching equilibrium. Open circles are experimental A 220 readings and the solid line is the theoretical fit using a monomer-dimer equilibrium model with a K d of 18.0 M.

116

TANG ET AL.

FRG/FRase I, (FRG/FRase I) S displayed a slightly larger K m for 2-thioFMN but somewhat smaller K m values for NADH and FMN. As mentioned earlier, FAD and riboflavin were each also active as a substrate but no detailed quantification of their substrate activities was carried out. The kinetic mechanism of the Photobacterium fischeri (reclassified as Vibrio fischeri) FRG/FRase I was first investigated more than two decades ago (14). The ping-pong kinetic mechanism first reported at that time has been confirmed by others (15) and by us in this work. The K m values for FMN and NADH reported earlier are about 60% higher than those specified in this report. Due to the low cellular content and unavailability of any procedure for obtaining high quality FRG/FRase I at that time, our earlier study (14) utilized a small quantity of a rather impure enzyme preparation. Hence, the existence of an FMN cofactor escaped our detection. Moreover, it was found that the resting state FRG/FRase I was not sensitive to inactivation by N-ethylmaleimide modification but became so when the reductase was first treated with NADH (14). Therefore, the ping-pong mechanism was proposed to involve the enzyme shuttling between a disulfide form and a di-thiol form during catalysis. FRG/ FRase I has now been shown to contain an FMN cofactor per monomer, and the X-ray structure shows that no cysteine residues are sufficiently close to form a disulfide linkage (10). Accordingly, the ping-pong mechanism has been proposed (7, 8, 15) to involve step-wise the binding of NAD(P)H to the FRG/FRase I holoenzyme, reduction of the bound FMN cofactor, release of NAD(P) as the first product, binding of an oxidized flavin substrate to the reduced holoenzyme, release of the reduced flavin product and the regeneration of the oxidized holoenzyme. Moreover, the fact that FRG/FRase I can only be inactivated by N-ethylmaleimide when the enzyme was reduced by NADH (14) suggests that reduction of the FMN cofactor results in a conformational change of the enzyme making critical cysteinyl residues, shown to be Cys80 and Cys185 (15), accessible to chemical modification. Both V. harveyi FRP (5) and V. fischeri FRG/FRase I (10) have been shown by crystallographic studies to be homodimers. These two reductases have a low primary sequence identity, sharing 21 identical residues between the 240-residue FRP (4) and the 218-residue FRG/FRase I (9). However, the two reductases show substantial similarities as well as some differences in their crystal structures. The FRP is known to undergo a monomer-dimer equilibrium with K d values of 3.3 and 1.8 M for the apo- and holoenzymes, respectively (6). In this work, a monomer­ dimer equilibrium was also shown for FRG/FRase apo- and holoenzymes with

respective K d values of 18.0 and 13.4 M (Figs. 4 and 5; Table I). Therefore, FRG/FRase I has a weaker intersubunit binding than that of FRP. These ultracentrifugation studies were performed at 4°C, whereas the FRG/FRase I apoenzyme, native holoenzyme, and reconstituted holoenzyme were subjected to a number of spectral, equilibrium binding, and kinetic characterizations at 23°C. Considering the high probability of weaker subunit interactions at 23 than at 4°C and the low enzyme concentrations used for the spectral, ligand binding, and kinetic studies, it should be emphasized that results of these studies, and similar results obtained with FRP (6 ­ 8), were obtained under conditions most likely with the monomeric form of the reductase as the predominant species. While the dimeric structures of FRG/FRase I and FRP are known and provide invaluable structure­function information, the monomer structure has not been determined for either of these two reductases and should not be simply taken as the same as that within the dimeric enzyme. Caution should be taken in rationalizing any results obtained from studies using the monomeric form of FRP or FRG/FRase I on the basis of the crystal structure of the dimeric reductase.
REFERENCES
1. Xi, L., Cho, K. W., Herndon, M. E., and Tu, S.-C. (1990) J. Biol. Chem. 265, 4200 ­ 4203. 2. Duane, W., and Hastings, J. W. (1975) Mol. Cell. Biochem. 6, 53­ 64. 3. Jablonski, E., and DeLuca, M. (1978) Biochemistry 17, 672­ 678. 4. Lei, B., Liu, M., Huang, S., and Tu, S.-C. (1994) J. Bacteriol. 176, 3552­3558. 5. Tanner, J. J., Lei, B., Tu, S.-C., and Krause, K. L. (1996) Biochemistry 35, 13531­13539. 6. Liu, M., Lei, B., Ding, Q., Lee, J. C., and Tu, S.-C. (1997) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 337, 89 ­95. 7. Lei, B., and Tu, S.-C. (1998) Biochemistry 37, 14623­14629. 8. Jeffers, C. E., and Tu, S.-C. (2001) Biochemistry 40, 1749 ­1754. 9. Zenno, S., Saigo, K., Kanoh, H., and Inouye, S. (1994) J. Bacteriol. 176, 3536 ­3543. 10. Koike, H., Sasaki, H., Kobori, T., Zenno, S., Saigo, K., Murphy, M. E., Adman, E. T., and Tanokura, M. (1998) J. Mol. Biol. 280, 259 ­273. 11. Inouye, S. (1994) FEBS Lett. 347, 163­168. 12. Massey, V., and Swoboda, B. E. P. (1963) Biochem. Z. 338, 474 ­ 484. 13. Fory, W., and Hemmerich, P. (1967) Helv. Chim. Acta 50, 1766 ­ ¨ 1774. 14. Tu, S.-C., Becvar, J. E., and Hastings, J. W. (1979) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 193, 110 ­116. 15. Lee, W. C., Hirai, T., Kobori, T., Sasaki, H., Koike, H., Tanokura, M., Zenno, S., Saigo, K., Nishino, T., Murphy, W. E. P., and Adman, E. T. (1999) in Flavins and Flavoproteins (Ghisla, S., Kroneck, P., Macheroux, P., and Sund, H., Eds.), pp. 709 ­718, Agency for Scientific Publications, Berlin.

