754

Signal sequence recognition and protein targeting Robert M Stroud* and Peter Walter
Intracellular traffic is often controlled not by highways, but by handshakes and partner introductions within a cellular network. Recently determined structures suggest how signal sequences are recognized and how the GTP affinities of the signal recognition particle and its receptor are coupled to the targeting of ribosomes to translocational membrane pores. The structure of signal peptidase suggests how it releases functional proteins.
Addresses *S-960 Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143-0448, USA; e-mail: stroud@msg.ucsf.edu  The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143-0448, USA; e-mail: pwalter@biochem.ucsf.edu Current Opinion in Structural Biology 1999, 9:754­759 0959-440X/99/$ -- see front matter © 1999 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. Abbreviations ER endoplasmic reticulum IBD insertion box domain NAC nascent-polypeptide-associated complex SR SRP receptor SRP signal recognition particle

cytoplasmic proteins, the M-site is thought to be protected by a nascent-polypeptide-associated complex (NAC) [5]. SRP binding to a signal sequence of the ribosome­nascent chain complex displaces the NAC from the M-site, replacing it with a complex that also blocks further ribosomal translation. Subsequent binding of the SRP­nascent chain­ribosome complex to the SRP receptor (SR) uncovers the M-site in a manner that allows attachment of the ribosome to the translocon pore complex. It facilitates transmembrane threading of the signal sequence, followed by co-translational threading of the protein chain [3] (Figure 1). These functions depend on a fascinating series of structural associations, substitutions, switches and seals -- a first glimpse of which is emerging from structures of the components.

The code for translocation
The SRP-dependent mechanism is highly conserved from prokaryotes to mammalian cells, although there are as many as six protein subunits bound to a 7S RNA in mammalian SRP and as few as one 48 kDa protein, called Ffh, bound to a 4.5S RNA in bacteria (Figure 2). In Escherichia coli, Ffh, 4.5S RNA and the membrane-associated SRP receptor (FtsY) share 33% conservation with their eukaryotic counterparts -- SRP54, SRP RNA and the SRP receptor (SR) (Figure 2). An alignment of all known sequences of SRP subunits and their RNAs, maintained at http://psyche.uthct.edu/dbs/SRPDB/SRPDB [6], helped to identify conserved features. Surprisingly, signal sequences show no conservation of sequence. How, then, are they correctly recognized with the fidelity necessary for an essential function in cellular traffic control? Signal sequences generally begin within 10 amino acids of the N terminus. They are between 20 and 30 residues in length, characterized by a central hydrophobic core of approximately 10 to 15 (but no less than 6) residues, with a marked preference for leucines or alanines. They are flanked on the N-terminal side by a positively charged stretch of polar residues [7] and by a neutral, but polar, C-terminal region. They are remarkably tolerant of amino acid substitutions, as long as their central hydrophobic character is retained [8­10]. Hydrophobicity is not sufficient to access the SRPdependent pathway, however, as single mutations, even those that increase hydrophobicity, within a signal sequence can abrogate use of the SRP-dependent pathway. Other as yet unknown structural or dynamic features must be key to functional signal sequence binding by the SRP [11·,12·].

Introduction
When ribosomes translate proteins destined for either secretion or integration into the plasma membrane, they are directed to translocational pores in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (or the plasma membrane in prokaryotes) by an RNA­multiprotein complex, the signal recognition particle (SRP) [1]. The SRP serves a multitude of functions that challenge current structural principles [2]. It correctly identifies a wide variety of `signal sequences' found at the N terminus of targeted proteins that display little conservation of sequence per se. It causes a pause in translation, which is maintained until, in its primed state, SRP binds to a specific SRP receptor on the target membrane. There, it facilitates formation of a complex of the ribosome with a translocating transmembrane pore. The SRP then releases the signal sequence, restarting translation and translocation of the nascent chain. Three-dimensional structures of the protein and nucleic acid components of this cellular targeting system reported over the past year have begun to define how the components function together and some of the dynamic aspects of signaling among components. The attachment of the ribosome­nascent protein­SRP complex to the translocation apparatus in the ER membrane is mediated by a specific interaction of a membrane-attachment site on ribosomes, the `M-site', which forms a tight seal with the translocon pore complex of the translocation apparatus [3,4·]. When translating

A mutually stimulating union
Ffh from the thermophile T. aquaticus [13] and FtsY from E. coli [14] presented the first opportunities to define

Signal sequence recognition and protein targeting Stroud and Walter

755

Figure 1 A schematic of the process of the signaltargeted insertion of signal-sequencecontaining secretory or membrane proteins, as currently determined. The ribosome, shown at the top, is normally protected from association with the translocating complex in the target membrane by the attachment of an NAC (not shown). SRP can bind to signal sequences and competes with NAC, protecting the translocon-attachment site (`Msite') until SRP meets its receptor. SRP binding leads to a pause in translation. Binding of the ribosome­SRP complex to the SR uncovers the translocon-binding site on the ribosome and initiates threading of the signal sequence and the following protein. It also activates the GTPase activity of both SRP and SR. T represents bound GTP. It is not known, however, when GTP binding takes place. It may occur upon SRP binding to the ribosome­signal sequence complex, upon attachment of the SRP to the SR or upon formation of the seal between the ribosome and the translocon. Hydrolysis of GTP to GDP releases the SRP­SR affinity. A membrane-bound signal peptidase cleaves the signal sequence to release the N terminus of the mature protein.

features at the level of molecular structure. Ffh is composed of three domains -- an N-terminal domain (N domain), a ras-like GTPase domain (G domain) and a methionine-rich domain (M domain). The N domain, of as yet unknown function, is a four-helix bundle that is closely associated with the G domain. The G domain is a ras-like GTPase that contains an additional subdomain (the inserted or I domain) unique to the SRP family of GTPases [13,14] and may be involved in the coupling of GTPase activity to other protein­protein interactions. The N and G domains of Ffh mediate the interaction of the SRP with homologous N and G domains of FtsY. The G domains of both Ffh and FtsY are capable of GTPase activity. As they form a complex together, they activate both GTPases [15].

19 amino acid hydrophobic loop that could close around the bound hydrophobic signal sequence within the groove, as a finger around a hand-held rope end. The short stretches of polar residues that flank the core of the signal sequence could readily be accommodated outside the hydrophobic groove. The unusually high content of methionine in the M domain, phylogenetically conserved from mesophilic bacteria to mammalian SRPs, led to the proposal that the methionine sidechains provide flexible `bristles' that could interact with a variety of hydrophobic sidechains [17]. Of the 14 fairly conserved methionine sites in the signal binding domain, 11 line the hydrophobic groove, with the majority mapping onto the hydrophobic faces of  helices, as predicted. The hydrophobic methionine sidechain is flexible. Similar to the binding of signal sequences by Ffh, calmodulin (CaM) binds to short peptide sequences (even to certain signal sequences that leak back into the cell [18 ·]) that share no obvious amino acid sequence homology using a methionine-rich `tunnel' that closes around the peptide sequence. Thus, methionines are a prime mesophilic choice for adaptation to binding multiple hydrophobic signal sequences.

Cause for a pause
The binding site on Ffh for signal sequences is contained within the methionine-rich `M domain', which is formed from four helices framed around a conserved hydrophobic core. A deep hydrophobic groove, 25 Å long, 15 Å wide and 12 Å deep, and lined by 21 hydrophobic sidechains from helices M1, M2 and M4, seems most suited to form this binding site [16··] (Figure 3). The hydrophobic surface area (1487 Å2) and the dimensions of the hydrophobic groove are sufficient to accommodate 17 amino acids if they are in an -helical conformation or 14 amino acids if they adopt a fully extended -hairpin conformation. In either mode, the central hydrophobic core of the signal sequence would be exposed on one surface. Adjacent to the groove lies a

SRP RNA -- the means to pause
110-nucleotide (4.5S) RNA forms the backbone of the bacterial SRP [19]. In the absence of RNA, the linker between the M domain and the GTPase (G domain) is flexible [16··]; however, the RNA enhances the interaction of Ffh

756

Proteins

Figure 2

The M domain mediates the highly specific interaction of SRP54/Ffh with the SRP RNA. Mutagenesis and structural studies indicate that a conserved, positively charged motif, 383SRRKRIAKGSG393 [22], participates in binding SRP RNA [23]. These binding determinants lie opposite the hydrophobic groove of the M domain (Figure 3). They are displayed on a helix-turn-helix motif that has remarkable similarity to the well-known DNA-binding motif and this suggests the general mode of interaction. The structure of the M domain and chemical protection experiments on SRP RNA in association with Ffh suggest that M domain­RNA interactions involve structural changes as the tight (Kd ~ 20 nM) complex is formed [21··]. The eagerly awaited structure of the M domain in complex with the stem­loop of SRP RNA holds the key to the consequences of this unique assembly at the next level of function.

Molecular matchmakers
The GTPase activities of SRP (Ffh) and the SRP receptor (FtsY) are coupled to the targeting cycle. As GTPases, both proteins have a very low affinity for GTP until they conjugate [24,25·,26]. In E. coli, FtsY is located both on the inner membrane and in the cytoplasm. FtsY may associate with the translocon and thus form a mate for Ffh, which protects the `M-site' on the ribosome. In this view, FtsY and Ffh are molecular matchmakers that marry the ribosome to the translocon. Remarkably, the crystal structure of the C-terminal domains of FtsY (residues 197­497, at 2.2 Å resolution, without bound nucleotide) shows that FtsY also contains domains that are closely similar to the N-terminal four-helix N domain and the GTPase domain of Ffh [14]. At the structural level, reciprocal activation of Ffh (SRP) and FtsY (SR) requires an understanding of how associations couple the GTPase active sites. In the presence of GTP, SRP binds tightly to membrane-bound SR in eukaryotic systems. GTP hydrolysis is required for the subsequent dissociation of the SRP from SR [27]. An initial insight into structural determinants therefore derives from the structural analysis of nucleotide-bound complexes of Ffh. A critical conformational change is accompanied by the ordering of parts of the structure [28], as indicated by the proteolytic susceptibility of the GTPase domain and, now, by crystal structures. The X-ray structures at 2 Å resolution of the N and G domains of Ffh [29··], determined without ligand and in complex with Mg2+­GDP or GDP alone, hint at possible coupling interaction areas (Figure 5). The G domains of both Ffh and FtsY are based on a ras-like fold -- five strands of a central all-parallel  sheet and four  helices. Both Ffh and FtsY have an extension of the central  sheet that comprises two additional strands and two  helices (2a-1a-2b-1b), forming an `insertion box domain' (IBD) that is unique to the SRP GTPases [13,14]. Unlike many other GTPases that require a separate

The protein and nucleic acid components of (a) SRP and (b) its receptor SR in mammals (left) and prokaryotes (right) are schematized. The mammalian SRP is an approximately 240 Å long rod-like complex, with the left-hand `small domain' responsible for translational control and the right-hand `large domain' responsible for signal recognition and protein translocation. The mammalian SRP contains six proteins, designated by molecular weight in kiloDaltons, and a 7S RNA. The prokaryotic SRP contains the most conserved components of the SRP: a 48 kDa protein called Ffh and a 4.5S RNA. The mammalian SRP receptor contains two GTPases, SR and SR, whereas the prokaryotic SRP receptor consists only of the homologue of SR, termed FtsY.

with FtsY and so probably orders the SRP complex. Mammalian and bacterial SRP RNAs share a conserved hairpin sequence that contains the binding site for SRP54 (or Ffh). This binding segment of RNA (termed domain IV) is 43 bases in length. It contains one highly conserved symmetric internal loop consisting of three mismatched bases opposite each other and one asymmetric internal loop that apposes four bases of one strand with one base of the other. The structure of a hairpin fragment of 24 nucleotides that includes only the highly conserved symmetric bulge was determined by NMR spectroscopy [20··]. It forms a compact A-form geometry stabilized by Mg2+, with unusual cross-strand interactions, including a cross-strand A/A stack, two guanines that form hydrogen bonds with opposite strand phosphates and no looped-out nucleotides [21··]. This highly conserved, uniquely base paired structure maintains the overall helicity of the stem­loop, while providing new interactions. The NMR structure of the entire 43-base domain (Figure 4) shows that the conserved asymmetric bulge forms a flexible hinge that extends the major groove, generating a ledge in the RNA molecule. This presents unique interaction prospects for each of the five unpaired bases in the hinge region [21··]. These interactions may alter the solution conformation of the RNA.

Signal sequence recognition and protein targeting Stroud and Walter

757

Figure 3

Figure 4

Tetraloop

G G C C U G G A C U G G A C C A U U U G C G 32 G
A surface representation of the Ffh M domain colored according to local electrostatic surface potential; blue is positive and red is negative. The positively charged surface provides the binding surface for RNA. Three amino acids at the helix-turn-helix junction of helices 3 and 4, R387, G391 and G393, can not be mutated without a large loss of RNA binding. The generally positively charged surface and several positive residues that generate the surface, including R386 and R387, are conserved in SRPs. The location of the hydrophobic groove, the most probable site for binding the hydrophobic portion of the signal sequence, and the site of interaction with RNA are indicated.

A A G G A A G C A G C C A A G G C G C C 74
Major groove of asymmetric internal loop Minor groove of symmetric internal loop

5'3'-

Ledge with flexible residues

Current Opinion in Structural Biology

nucleotide exchange factor, the SRP GTPases have a low affinity for GDP in vitro and therefore are postulated to possess an `intrinsic nucleotide exchange activity'. The IBD, unique to the SRP GTPases, has been proposed to play this role [26]; however, the structure of the GDP-bound forms of Ffh suggests a number of additional structural determinants within the GDP-binding site that are likely to facilitate GDP release [29··]. The IBD domain contains a highly conserved sequence motif, motif II, that interacts with bound GTP. Sidechains of this motif and those of two other conserved sequence motifs, I and III, that surround the GTP-binding site form a network of hydrogen bond and salt bridge interactions among themselves. These serve to stabilize the nucleotide-free state and thus can explain the unusual stability of the unliganded form of these GTPases [13]. GTP binding closes the G domain active site by 2.5 Å [14,29··], which may constitute the driving force for a GTPase `switch' [30]. Binding of GDP is accomplished by four conserved GTPase motifs. Motif I, the `P loop', provides mainchain NH donors to the  and  phosphates, whereas motifs II and III provide binding and catalytic sidechains around the -phosphate site. Motif IV (T245­D248) provides conserved residue K246 and D248, which moves in by 1.5 Å to form two hydrogen bonds to N1 and N2 of the guanine base. This motif

The NMR structure of the 43-nucleotide, most highly conserved domain IV of 4.5S RNA [21··] shows that a symmetric pair of three mismatched bases makes unusual cross-strand hydrogen bonds, but does not break the overall helical structure, near the top of the image. An asymmetric mismatched pair of four bases (ACCA) near the 5 end are opposite one base (A67), leading to the formation of a unique, flexibly hinged structure. The hinge structure presents a ledge with access to the unpaired bases in the loop. The results of chemical protection from modification by Ffh binding are indicated in red for strongly protected and green for less-strongly protected. Protection from hydroxyl radicals (blue) or double-stranded RNAse at phosphates shown in red indicates regions of RNA that are involved in the interface with Ffh.

attracts some focus as it is immediately followed by a highly conserved G domain `DARGG' region, residues 250­254, that interfaces with a highly conserved `ALLEADV' motif within the N domain. On binding Mg2+­GDP, the N domain structure moves by 2.5 Å relative to its position in the apo structure [29··] (Figure 5). Thus, one proposal is that the conserved 4 `DARGG' sequence in the G domain acts as a hinge, around whose axis the domains rotate upon binding nucleotide. Thus, the N and G domain interface may function to regulate nucleotide exchange by prying open the active site, leaving the stabilized empty state. Movement of the N domain via the hinged interface provides a favored means by which the occupation of the active site by GTP is coupled to interaction with FtsY. The structural change, in turn, may trigger the release of the signal peptide to the translocon and, upon GTP hydrolysis, lead to the separation of the tight complex of FtsY and Ffh. It might couple the GTP site to the occupation state of the M domain, assisted by the SRP RNA.

Across the membrane ­ the only way to go
The pore complex (translocon) responsible for translocating the newly synthesized protein is composed of at least

758

Proteins

Figure 5

Nucleotide binding evokes hinged movement of the N and G domains of Ffh, which interact through a conserved interface. The interface is formed between a loop (consensus sequence ALLEADV at residues 37­43) at the end of the second helix in the N domain (left of the figure) and a loop in the G domain (consensus sequence DARGG at residues 250­254). This loop immediately follows D248, which forms two hydrogen bonds with the guanine base of the nucleotide, and leads into the hinge helix 4. Upon binding GDP and then Mg2+ ­GDP, D248 and loop residues 270­279 move in to capture the nucleotide. The N domain follows, progressively hinging downwards in the figure. The magnitude of the structural shifts is indicated using color gradients that range from blue (< 0.01 Å) to yellow (2.5 Å). The core G domain remains relatively unchanged. This seems to be especially true of the IBD domain, to the right side of the figure, suggesting that the N domain, rather than the IBD domain, may provide the route for signaling between nucleotide binding and affector or effector functions.

membrane protein attached by a two-membrane-crossing anchor, with a large, four-stranded  sheet hydrophobic region located near the active site (Figure 1). This unique region suggests that the peptidase is set up to cleave within the bilayer, positioning the active site near the level of the phosphatidyl head groups. The active site uses a serine as the nucleophile and appears to use a lysine as general base. To act as the base, the lysine would need to be unprotonated and thus would have a much reduced pKa. In a lactam-inhibited complex, the lysine is completely buried in a hydrophobic cleft, leading to the proposal that the burial of the lysine amino group could maintain the lysine in the neutral state. The substrate-binding site, located alongside the active site, suggests that the N-terminal hydrophobic region of the signal sequence is bound in a helical configuration. The peptidase structure explains the specificity for cleavage, whereby residues at ­1 and ­3 relative to the cleavage site of signal sequences must be small and neutral (alanine, valine, glycine or serine) for correct cleavage to occur [34]. The C-terminal side of the substrate-binding site is only consistent with a bound extended chain conformation. With exposed hydrogen-bonding groups, this is an extremely unlikely form for any peptide chain in a hydrophobic milieu. Perhaps the key is that the substrate signal peptide is held by the pore complex in an at least partially extended form. The specificity is therefore overlaid by a constraint on precise time, namely the moment when a signal sequence emerges, and place, namely at the membrane surface opposite the ribosome.

Conclusions
three proteins -- SecA, SecY and SecG -- in prokaryotes [31]. The yeast translocon has been visualized by singleparticle averaging electron microscopy while associated with the ribosome. At 26 Å effective resolution, it appears to form a funnel-shaped pore, with a 15 Å diameter on the lumenal side that widens toward the ribosome, forming a 35 Å diameter vestibule [32]. The pore lines up directly with a tunnel that emanates from the interface between major domains in the ribosome and is proposed to be the exit pore for nascent polypeptide chains as they leave the ribosome. Prior to ribosome binding, the narrow lumenal side is sealed by the BiP protein [4·]. On the basis of fluorescence measurements, the pore is proposed to change during translocation, losing the BiP protein cap and expanding from 9­15 Å in ribosome-free translocons to a significantly larger pore size of 40­60 Å diameter when passing the nascent chain [4·]. This alignment of ribosome tunnel and translocon pore therefore suggests that the ribosome feeds the nascent chain directly into the translocation pore formed in the membrane. This topical example of protein targeting reveals parallels with mechanical engines; it suggests a requirement for at least three states in a cycle for each participant in the complexes. SRP, SR, the translocon complex and the ribosome must each adopt at least three structural states in order to catalyze a unidirectional process -- namely a free state, a state signaling that an encounter has taken place and a response affecting the affinity of the next step in the pathway. The jigsaw puzzle of pieces and their successive complexes promise to set new paradigms in biology.

Acknowledgements
Ulrich Schmitz provided Figure 4, Robert Keenan assisted with figure generation and Janet Finer-Moore provided critical commentary on the manuscript. Research is supported by National Institutes of Health grants to RMS and PW. PW is an investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

Eliminating the evidence
Once threaded through the translocon, signal sequences are cleaved by a membrane-associated `signal peptidase' on the distal side [1]. The structure of the signal peptidase from E. coli suggests how this takes place [33··]. It is an integral
1.

· of special interest ·· of outstanding interest
Walter P, Johnson AE: Signal sequence recognition and protein targeting to the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. Annu Rev Cell Biol 1994, 10:87-119. Bernstein HD: Protein targeting: getting into the groove. Curr Biol 1998, 8:R715-R718.

2.

Signal sequence recognition and protein targeting Stroud and Walter

759

3.

Moller I, Jung M, Beatrix B, Levy R, Kreibich G, Zimmermann R, Wiedmann M, Lauring B: A general mechanism for regulation of access to the translocon: competition for a membrane attachment site on ribosomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:13425-13430.

18. Martoglio B, Dobberstein B: Signal sequences: more than just · greasy peptides. Trends Cell Biol 1998, 8:410-415. The authors provide evidence that signal sequences are not simply recognized by their hydrophobicity, but that they are multipurpose peptides containing a wealth of functional information. 19. Zheng N, Gierasch LM: Domain interactions in E. coli SRP: stabilization of M domain by RNA is required for effective signal sequence modulation of NG domain. Mol Cell 1997, 1:1-20. 20. Schmitz U, James TL, Lukavsky P, Walter P: Structure of the most ·· conserved internal loop in SRP RNA. Nat Struct Biol 1999, 6:1-6. This recently solved NMR structure shows unusual cross-strand interactions within the symmetric and conserved loop in 4.5S SRP RNA. 21. Schmitz U, Behrens S, Freymann DM, Keenan R, Lukavsky P, Walter P, ·· James TL: Structure of the phylogenetically most conserved RNA motif in SRP RNA. RNA 1999, in press. The NMR structure of the entire domain IV of 4.5S SRP RNA revealed the unique hinged structure to which Ffh specifically binds. The presence of the flexible hinge and chemical protection data argue for conformational adaptation upon binding Ffh. 22. Althoff S, Selinger D, Wise JA: Molecular evolution of SRP cycle components: functional implications. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:1933-1947. 23. Kurita K, Honda K, Suzuma S, Takamatsu H, Nakamura K, Yamane K: Identification of a region of Bacillus subtilis Ffh, a homologue of mammalian SRP54 protein, that is essential for binding to small cytoplasmic RNA. J Biol Chem 1996, 271:13140-13146. 24. Powers T, Walter P: Co-translational protein targeting catalyzed by the Escherichia coli signal recognition particle and its receptor. EMBO J 1997, 16:4880-4886. 25. Jagath JR, Rodnina MV, Lentzen G, Wintermeyer W: Interaction of · guanine nucleotides with the signal recognition particle from Escherichia coli. Biochemistry 1998, 37:15408-15413. Kinetic rates and binding constants for guanine nucleotides reflect the coupling of RNA and contact with ribosomes. 26. Moser C, Mol O, Goody RS, Sinning I: The signal recognition particle receptor of Escherichia coli (FtsY) has a nucleotide exchange factor built into the GTPase domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:11339-11344. 27. Connolly T, Rapiejko PJ, Gilmore R: Requirement of GTP hydrolysis for dissociation of the signal recognition particle from its receptor. Science 1991, 252:1171-1173.

4. ·

Hamman BD, Hendershot LM, Johnson AE: BiP maintains the permeability barrier of the ER membrane by sealing the lumenal end of the translocon pore before and early in translocation. Cell 1998, 92:747-758. A demonstration that the lumenal end of the translocon pore is blocked early in translocation. BiP seals the lumenal end of the pore and also seals translocons not engaged in translocation. Ribosome-free translocons have smaller pores (only 9­15 Å diameter) compared with 40­60 Å in functioning translocons. BiP maintains the permeability barrier by sealing both nontranslocating and newly targeted translocons. 5. Powers T, Walter P: The nascent polypeptide-associated complex modulates interactions between the signal recognition particle and the ribosome. Curr Biol 1996, 6:331-338. Samuelsson T, Zwieb C: The signal recognition particle database (SRPDB). Nucleic Acids Res 1999, 27:169-170. von Heijne G, Abrahmsen L: Species-specific variation in signal peptide design. Implications for protein secretion in foreign hosts. FEBS Lett 1989, 244:439-446. von Heijne G: Signal sequences. The limits of variation. J Mol Biol 1985, 184:99-105. Valent QA, Kendall DA, High S, Kusters R, Oudega B, Luirink J: Early events in preprotein recognition in E. coli: interaction of SRP and trigger factor with nascent polypeptides. EMBO J 1995, 14:5494-5505.

6. 7.

8. 9.

10. Zheng N, Gierasch LM: Signal sequences: the same yet different. Cell 1996, 86:849-852. 11. Matoba S, Ogrydziak DM: Another factor besides hydrophobicity · can affect signal peptide interaction with signal recognition particle. J Biol Chem 1998, 273:18841-18847. A demonstration that single mutations in a signal sequence, including those that increase hydrophobicity, can redirect proteins from co-translational to post-translational translocation by failing to bind SRPs. The switch from SRP-dependent to SRP-independent translocation without a decrease in hydrophobicity and the restoration of SRP-dependent translocation without an increase in hydrophobicity indicate that some factor(s), in addition to hydrophobicity, determines selection of the targeting pathway. 12. Rothe C, Lehle L: Sorting of invertase signal peptide mutants in · yeast dependent and independent on the signal-recognition particle. Eur J Biochem 1998, 252:16-24. Mutated signal sequences with proline or glycine in the core were shown to be translocated, but independently of SRP, using a different pathway. This emphasizes the structural features of signal sequences that are important in recognition by the M domain of the SRP. 13. Freymann DM, Keenan RJ, Stroud RM, Walter P: Structure of the conserved GTPase domain of the signal recognition particle. Nature 1997, 385:361-364. 14. Montoya G, Svensson C, Luirink J, Sinning I: Crystal structure of the NG domain from the signal-recognition particle receptor FtsY. Nature 1997, 385:365-368. 15. Zopf D, Bernstein HD, Walter P: GTPase domain of the 54-kD subunit of the mammalian signal recognition particle is required for protein translocation but not for signal sequence binding. J Cell Biol 1993, 120:1113-1121. 16. Keenan RJ, Freymann DM, Walter P, Stroud RM: Crystal structure of ·· the signal sequence binding subunit of the signal recognition particle. Cell 1998, 94:181-191. The determination of the structure of full-length Ffh in three different crystal forms shows, in total, five versions of the structure. The structure reveals a deep groove bounded by a flexible loop and lined with sidechains of conserved hydrophobic residues, which are likely to contribute to signal sequence specificity. An arginine-rich  helix is implicated in forming the core of an extended RNA-binding surface. 17. Bernstein HD, Poritz MA, Strub K, Hoben PJ, Brenner S, Walter P: Model for signal sequence recognition from amino-acid sequence of 54K subunit of signal recognition particle. Nature 1989, 340:482-486.

28. Farmery M, Macao B, Larsson T, Samuelsson T: Binding of GTP and GDP induces a significant conformational change in the GTPase domain of Ffh, a bacterial homologue of the SRP 54 kDa subunit. Biochim Biophys Acta 1998, 1385:61-68. 29. Freymann DM, Keenan RJ, Stroud RM, Walter P: Structural changes ·· in the signal recognition particle on binding GDP and Mg2+ GDP. Nat Struct Biol 1999, 6:793-801. Structures of the N and G domains of the SRP, obtained at 2.0 Å resolution, were determined in presence of GDP and GDP plus Mg2+. Structural changes were analyzed and suggest that a hinge region is involved in signaling to and from the GTP-binding site. 30. Bourne HR, Sanders DA, McCormick F: The GTPase superfamily: a conserved switch for diverse cell functions. Nature 1990, 348:125-132. 31. Valent QA, Scotti PA, High S, de Gier JW, von Heijne G, Lentzen G, Wintermeyer W, Oudega B, Luirink J: The Escherichia coli SRP and SecB targeting pathways converge at the translocon. EMBO J 1998, 17:2504-2512. 32. Beckmann R, Bubeck D, Grassucci R, Penczek P, Verschoor A, Blobel G, Frank J: Alignment of conduits for the nascent polypeptide chain in the ribosome-Sec61 complex. Science 1997, 278:2123-2126. 33. Paetzel M, Dalbey RE, Strynadka NC: Crystal structure of a ·· bacterial signal peptidase in complex with a beta-lactam inhibitor. Nature 1998, 396:186-190. The structure solved suggests that a novel peptidase acts within the membrane bilayer to remove signal sequences after translocation is initiated. 34. Nielson H, Engelbrecht J, Brunak S, von Heijne G: Identification of prokaryotic and eukaryotic signal peptides and prediction of their cleavage sites. Protein Eng 1997, 10:1-6.

