Pathol Biol 2001 ; 49 : 237-46  2001 Éditions scientifiques et médicales Elsevier SAS. Tous droits réservés S0369-8114(01)00135-3/SSU

Actualité biologique

HIV-1 integrase: the next target for AIDS therapy?
J. d'Angelo 1 , J.F. Mouscadet 2 , D. Desmaële 1 , F. Zouhiri 3 , H. Leh 3
1 Unité associée au CNRS, faculté de pharmacie, 5, rue Jean-Baptiste Clément, 92296 Châtenay-Malabry, France ; 2 unité associée au CNRS, institut Gustave-Roussy, 39, rue Camille Desmoulins, 94805 Villejuif, France ; 3 BioAlliance Pharma SA, 67, rue Vergniaud, 75013 Paris, France

(Received 10 July 2000; accepted 21 July 2000)

Summary HIV-1 is the aetiological agent of AIDS. Present treatment of AIDS uses a combination therapy with reverse transcriptase and protease inhibitors. Recently, the integrase (IN), the third enzyme of HIV-1 which is necessary for the integration process of proviral DNA into the host genome, has reached as a legitimate new drug target. Several families of inhibitors of the catalytic core domain of HIV-1 IN exhibiting submicromolar activities have now been identified. Our contribution in this field was related to the development of new polyhydroxylated styrylquinolines. The latter compounds have proved to be potent HIV-1 IN inhibitors, that block the replication of HIV-1 in cell culture, and are devoid of cytotoxicity. The crystal structure of the catalytically active core domain of a HIV-1 IN mutant has been determined. The active site region is identified by the position of two of the conserved carboxylate residues essential for catalysis, Asp64 and Asp116 , which coordinate a Mg2+ ion, whereas the third catalytic residue, Glu152 does not participate in metal binding. However, a recent molecular dynamics simulation of the HIV-1 IN catalytic domain provides support to the hypothesis that a second metal ion is likely to be carried into the HIV-1 IN active site by the DNA substrate. The structure of a complex of the HIV-1 IN core domain with the inhibitor 5-CITEP has been recently reported. The inhibitor binds centrally in the active site of the IN and makes a number of close contacts with the protein, particularly with Lys156 , Lys159 and Gln148 , amino acids which were identified to be near the active site of the enzyme, through site-directed mutagenis and photo-crosslinking experiments. The exact mechanism by which HIV-1 IN inhibitors block the catalytic activity of the protein remains unknown. However, several putative pharmacophore components have been characterized. All these groups lie in a possible coordination to a divalent ion, supporting thus the hypothesis that the interaction causing the inhibition is mediated by one or two cations. Finally, among the HIV-1 IN inhibitors, three classes have proved to exhibit significant antiviral activities. Thus, it seems likely that the efficient use of HIV-1 IN as a target for rational design will become possible in the next future, possibly through the use of combination regimens including IN inhibitors.  2001 Éditions scientifiques et médicales Elsevier SAS
AIDS / antiviral agents / enzyme inhibitors / HIV / virus integration

Résumé ­ L'intégrase du VIH : la prochaine cible de la chimiothérapie du SIDA ? L'agent infectieux responsable du SIDA est le VIH (virus de l'immunodéficience humaine). La chimiothérapie actuelle du SIDA repose sur l'utilisation d'inhibiteurs de la transcriptase inverse et de la protéase. D'une manière récente, l'intégrase (IN), la troisième enzyme essentielle du VIH nécessaire à l'intégration de l'ADN proviral dans le génome humain, est apparue comme une nouvelle cible thérapeutique. Plusieurs familles d'inhibiteurs du domaine catalytique de l'IN ont été identifiées, qui présentent des activités in vitro submicromolaires. Nous avons montré récemment que certaines styrylquinoléines polyhydroxylées sont de puissants inhibiteurs de l'IN du VIH-1, bloquent la réplication du VIH-1 en culture cellulaire, et sont dénuées de cytotoxicité. La structure cristalline du domaine catalytique de l'IN d'un mutant du VIH-1 a été déterminée. Le site actif est caractérisé par la présence de deux acides aminés essentiels pour la catalyse, Asp64 et Asp116 , qui sont liés à un ion magnésium, alors que le troisième amino acide essentiel, Glu152 , n'établit pas de liaison avec le métal.

 Correspondence and reprints.

E-mail address: jean.dangelo@cep.u-psud.fr (J. d'Angelo).

238

J. d'Angelo et al.

Cependant une récente simulation par dynamique moléculaire du domaine catalytique de l'IN du VIH-1 a montré qu'un second ion métallique est probablement impliqué dans le site actif. La structure d'un complexe entre le domaine central de l'IN de VIH-1 et de l'inhibiteur 5-CITEP montre que l'inhibiteur se lie avec le site actif en établissant de nombreux contacts avec la protéine, particulièrement avec les amino acides Lys156 , Lys159 et Gln148 , qui ont été identifiés comme étant proches du site actif par des expériences de mutagénèse dirigée et de marquage d'affinité. Le mécanisme selon lequel les inhibiteurs de l'IN du VIH-1 bloquent l'activité catalytique de la protéine reste imprécisé. Néanmoins, plusieurs éléments constitutifs d'un pharmacophore ont pu être identifés. D'une manière remarquable, tous ces groupes sont susceptibles de se lier aux ions métalliques divalents ; ainsi l'inhibition pourrait faire intervenir la complexation d'un ou de deux cations. Finalement, trois familles d'inhibiteurs de l'IN du VIH-1 présentent une activité antivirale marquée. Il apparaît ainsi que l'usage des inhibiteurs de l'IN du VIH-1 pourrait se développer dans un futur proche, en particulier en combinaison avec les inhibiteurs de la transcriptase inverse et de la protéase, actuellement utilisés en chimiothérapie du SIDA.  2001 Éditions scientifiques et médicales Elsevier SAS
agents antiviraux / inhibiteurs enzymatiques / intégration virale / SIDA / VIH

The Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) is the aetiological agent of AIDS, which is therefore a viral disease. Consequently AIDS should be treated with antiviral agents, thus warranting the interest in the search for new powerful inhibitors of the virus replication. The latter depends on the molecular engine consisting of three viral enzymes, the reverse transcriptase, the protease and the integrase (IN) (figure 1). Thus, these three enzymes constitute privileged targets for anti-HIV drugs. The advent of combination therapy with protease and reverse transcriptase inhibitors has made possible to suppress the replication of HIV to such an extent that the virus becomes undetectable in infected persons, giving rise to a decline of both mortality and morbidity due to the virus in the recent years [1]. However, these treatments refereed to as HAART (`Highly Active AntiRetroviral Therapy') fail to eradicate the viral replication which persists at a low level, despite the chemotherapy [2, 3]. Moreover the capability of HIV to evolve drug resistance and the cytotoxicity of present regimens makes the third enzyme, the IN, a legitimate new drug target. Unlike reverse transcriptase and protease for which several classes of potent inhibitors were developed, no anti-HIV-1 IN compounds have reached so far to clinical studies, with the noticeable exception of an oligonucleotide, whose antiviral effect turned out to be most likely not related to its anti-IN properties [4]. However, it must be noted that the search for reverse transcriptase and protease inhibitors has taken advantage of previous studies based on already known cellular enzymes, whereas IN has no known cellular counterpart in cells, and thus came into sight ten years ago as a completely new challenge. The HIV-1 IN is a 288aa protein, encoded by the 3 -extremity of the pol gene that mediates the viral DNA integration into the genomes of infected cells (figure 2).

Figure 1. Pharmacological targets during HIV-1 replication. The three enzymes, reverse transcriptase (RT), integrase (IN) and protease (PR) form the molecular engine responsible for the viral replication and are therefore privileged targets for anti-HIV pharmacology. Viruses bind to a specific receptor on cell surface, leading to their entry into the cell. A double-stranded DNA, generated by the RT, migrates into the nucleus wherein it is integrated by the IN. Transcription generates messengers RNAs as well as progeny virion RNA. Viral proteins and genomic RNA assemble at the cell periphery and virus is released by budding. Subsequent maturation into infectious virus that takes place into the virions is carried out by the viral PR.

This integration process is necessary for the production of progeny viruses, and mutations that inactivate the IN have deleterious effect on the capability of HIV to replicate. In vitro studies using recombinant protein have permitted the distinction between the two main reactions catalyzed by IN, respectively named the 3 -processing and the strand-transfer [5, 6]. Both reactions consist in a nucleophilic attack of a phosphodiester bond by a hydroxyl group and require a divalent metal ion (Mn2+

HIV-1 integrase and AIDS therapy

239

Figure 2. Specific in vitro assays for HIV integrase activity. 3 -processing: In the presence of recombinant integrase, short oligonucleotides mimicking the viral DNA extremities are trimmed at their 3 -ends with the release of a dinucleotide. Strand transfer: IN carries out a covalent insertion of pre-processed oligonucleotides into homologous or heterologous DNA target, thus generating longer fragments that can be easily detected. Disintegration: The viral part of a branched DNA substrate that mimics the integration intermediate is cleaved by IN and a closed double-stranded DNA is regenerated. These three assays are easily made compatible with high-throughput screenings of chemical libraries.

High-screening throughput compatible assays have been developed and are now available. These assays use a purified, recombinant IN and oligonucleotide substrates mimicking the extremities of the viral DNA ends (figure 2). Three different activities of IN can be followed, i.e. the 3 -processing, the strand transfer and the reversal reaction or disintegration catalyzed by IN. The latter assay is particularly attractive, since it can be performed with the isolated active-site containing core domain of the protein, whereas the two other assays require the fulllength protein. Thus, inhibitors that bind specifically to the active site of the enzyme are readily detected with the reverse assay. However, the three tests suffer from some limitations and particularly from the fact that the in vitro reaction mediated by the enzyme is substantially different from the one observed with the physiological enzyme. Although recombinant IN is capable of performing both the strand transfer and processing reactions in vitro, it does not accurately reproduce the in vivo process. For instance, a marked preference for Mn2+ over Mg2+ is generally observed in vitro, although Mg2+ is widely considered to be the physiological relevant cofactor. Consequently, the in vitro integration is not completely satisfying in terms of pharmacological study, although it was recently showed that new purification route may substantially improve the enzyme activity in vitro [11, 12].

Preintegration complexes (PICs)
IN as well as viral DNA and other factors are packaged in preintegration complexes (PICs) found in the cytoplasm of infected cells. PICs can be isolated from freshly infected cells. These complexes are competent for integration and carry out the whole integration process yielding concomitant integration of both strands of viral DNA in the presence of Mg2+ . Using PICs as a source for integration activity in screening assay may lead to the identification of new types of HIV-1 inhibitors that would have been missed in conventional assay. Conversely, compounds that appear to inhibit the 3 -processing and strand transfer mediated by recombinant IN may turn out to be ineffective against PICs mediated integration. Thus, PIC assays are very useful in testing new drug candidates, although the difficulty encountered during their purification and the poor yield of recovery is a major drawback preventing their use in high-throughput screening assay. Finally, it is worthy to note that although a functional IN is strictly required for the viral replication, under rare circumstances IN is not strictly required for DNA integration, and proviral DN can be recovered from cells infected with virus whose IN was inactivated. An interesting hypothesis is that IN also plays a role in the translocation of the preintegration complex into the nucleus, leading to the possible search for PICs inhibitors that will rather block the transport of PICs than the integration process itself.

or Mg2+ ) as a cofactor. During the processing reaction which takes place in the cytoplasm of infected cells, the enzyme removes two 3 -nucleotides from each strand of the linear viral DNA, resulting in overhanging CAends. In the strand transfer reaction, the 3 -processed ends acting as nucleophilic agents attack phosphodiester bonds on the opposite strand of the target DNA [7]. HIV-1 IN is formed by three independent domains which are required for both steps of integration. The central core domain contains the catalytic D,D(35)E motive which is highly conserved among all retroviral INs. The overall topology of this core domain allows to link up IN to the superfamily of polynucleotidyl transferases that includes transposases and polymerases [8]. It also shares some structural characteristics with the restriction enzymes type II, such as EcoRI [9]. Thus, unexpected effects of anti-IN compounds on these enzymes cannot be ruled out. Nevertheless, inhibitors that were discovered so far display fortunately a good specificity toward IN protein.

ACTIVITY ASSAYS Recombinant integrase
Recently, in vitro assays were worked out allowing for a systematic screening of active compounds [10].

240

J. d'Angelo et al.

ANTI-IN ACTIVITIES OF HIV-IN INHIBITORS
Several families of HIV-1 IN inhibitors have now been identified. Most of them can be classified into three groups, DNA ligands, C-terminal domain ligands, and compounds that interfer with the catalytic domain of the protein. The first family contains nonspecific intercalating agents [13] as well as more specific oligonucleotides targeting IN binding sites on both LTRs [14]. The second class includes polyanionic drug, such as suramin which interacts with the highly basic C-terminal domain [15]. Finally, the third group embodies hydroxylated aromatic compounds including aurintricarboxylic acids [16], bis-catechols [17], CAPE 1, flavones and flavonoids (exemplified by quercetagenin, 2) [18], curcumin [19], tyrphostins (exemplified by 3) [20], lignanolides (exemplified by -conidendrol, 4) [21], coumarin-derivatives [22], cosalanes [23], tetracyclines (exemplified by 5) [24], hydrazide-derivatives (exemplified by salicylhydrazide, 6) [25], depsides and depsidones [26], diarylsulfones (exemplified by 7) [27], L-chicoric acid, 8, and analogues [28], diketo acids and analogues (5-CITEP, 9 [29]; L-731,988, 10 [30]) (figure 3). We have recently reported that polyhydroxylated styrylquinolines are potent HIV-1 IN inhibitors; moreover some of these compounds block the replication of HIV-1 in cell culture and are devoid of cytotoxicity [31, 32]. The in vitro activities of these inhibitors are depicted in table I. A complete lack of inhibitory potency was observed with parents 11 and 12. However, introduction of a carboxyl function at C-7 and a hydroxyl at C-8 in the quinoline half resulted in micromolar to submicromolar activities (compounds 13 to 26). One striking feature of the above findings is that the replacement of the ancillary phenyl ring of prototype molecule 13 by a variety of heteroatomic nuclei (compounds 14, 15 and 16), or the variation of the  -electron density of this phenyl subunit (compounds 17 and 18) have only a limited effect on the anti-HIV-1 IN activity. Likewise, hydroxylated analogues 19­26 were all active in the range between 0.3 and 5 micromolar. However, presence of a free carboxyl group is crucially involved in anti-IN activities, since its replacement by a carbomethoxy function (compound 27) completely abolished the inhibitory potency. Finally, a full anti-IN activity was restored in molecule 28, where the central ethylenic linker is replaced by an ethano bridge (table I).

STRUCTURE OF THE HIV-1 IN CORE DOMAIN AND BINDING MODE OF HIV-1 IN INHIBITORS
In 1994, the crystal structure of the catalytically active core domain (residues 50 to 212) of a HIV-1 IN mutant was determined at 2.5 Å resolution [33]. The central

feature of the structure is a five-stranded -sheet flanked by helical regions. The overall topology reveals that this domain of integrase belongs to a superfamily of polynucleotidyl transferases that include ribonuclease H, DNA polymerases. The active site region is identified by the position of two of the conserved carboxylate residues essential for catalysis (Asp64 in the middle of the 1 and Asp116 after 4), which are located at similar positions in ribonuclease H. The third IN catalytic residue, Glu152 , lies in a disordered region between 5 and 4, which begins at residue 154. Two years later, the results of a crystallographic study of the F 185 H mutant of HIV-1 IN at 2.6 Å resolution were presented [34]. The conformation of the loop that includes Glu152 was compared with two different conformations found in the catalytic domain of the closely related avian sarcoma virus integrase (ASV-IN). It was suspected that the conformation of the active site of HIV-1 IN does not correspond to that present in the active enzyme, and that the flexibility of this region may be required in order for the enzyme to assume a functional conformation in the presence of substrate and/or cofactors. In 1998 a crystal structure the core domain of a HIV-1 IN mutant complexed with Mg2+ has been reported [35]. The Mg2+ ion is coordinated by Asp64 and Asp116 , whereas the third catalytic residue, Glu152 does not participate in metal binding (figure 4). Several enzymes of the polynucleotidyl transferases family show the presence of two divalent cations in the active site. Thus the active site of ternary complex of DNA polymerase , a DNA template primer, and the inhibitor ddCTP contains two Mg2+ ions, the nucleotidebinding ion (site A), and the catalytic ion (site B) (figure 5) [36]. It has long been established that divalent metal ions are essential for the hydrolytic phosphoryltransfer reaction. On this basis, Beese and Steitz have proposed a two metal ion-mechanism for the exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase I [37]. A nucleophilic attack on the phosphorous atom of the terminal nucleotide is postulated to be carried out by an hydroxide ion that is activated by one divalent metal (A), while the expected pentacoordinate transition state and the leaving alkoxide are stabilized by a second divalent metal ion (B), that is 3.9 Å from the first (figure 6). Recently, a molecular dynamics simulation of the HIV-1 IN catalytic domain including two Mg2+ ions, has been reported [38]. The simulation reveals a high degree of flexibility in the region of residues 140­149 even in the presence of a second divalent metal ion, and a dramatic conformational change of the side chain of Glu152 when the second metal ion is present. This study shows similarities in the behavior of the catalytic residues in the HIV-1 (A) and the ASV (B) INs upon metal binding (figure 7). This simulation also provides support to the

HIV-1 integrase and AIDS therapy

241

Table I. HIV-1 IN inhibitory potencies of styrylquinolines. Compound IC50 values (µM) 3 -processing integration > 100 Compound IC50 values (µM) 3 -processing integration

nd

2.4

1.0

> 100

> 100

0.8

nd

5.3

2.1

2.8

3.7

1.9

5.1

0.9

3.3

3.4

3.0

0.3

0.4

4.1

11

0.7

1.7

1.2

1.7

4.9

4.5

3.5

2.2

> 100

> 100

1.6

1.6

2.3

1.5

242

J. d'Angelo et al.

Figure 3. Most representative HIV-1 IN inhibitors. The corresponding HIV-1 IN inhibitory potencies (IC50 values in 3 -end processing and/or strand transfer reactions) are given in brackets.

HIV-1 integrase and AIDS therapy

243

Figure 4. Binding of magnesium ion by the core domain of HIV-1 IN (after [35]).

Figure 6. Proposed transition state of the two metal ion enzymatic mechanism for the 3 ­5 exonuclease reaction (after [37]).

Figure 7. Residue conformations in the active sites of HIV-1 (A) and ASV (B) INs (after [38]).

Figure 8. Chemical structure of the Y-3 inhibitor.

Figure 5. Active site of the rat pol -DNA-ddCTP ternary complex (after [36]).

hypothesis that the second metal ion is likely to be carried into the HIV-1 IN active site by the DNA substrate. The X-ray structure of a complex of the catalytic core domain of ASV IN with the naphthalene-disulfonic acid inhibitor Y-3 (29, figure 8) was solved at 1.9­2.0 Å resolution [39]. The Y-3 molecule is located in close proximity to the enzyme active site, interacts with the

flexible loop, and affects the conformation of the active site. Not long after, the structure of a complex of the HIV-1 IN core domain with 5-CITEP (9, figure 3) was reported [29]. The inhibitor binds centrally in the active site of the IN and makes a number of close contacts with the protein (figure 9). Site-directed mutagenis and photocrosslinking experiments have previously identified several residues near the active site [40]. Interestingly, many of these residues, including Lys156, Lys159 , and Gln148 , also are involved in binding the 5-CITEP inhibitor. It is noteworthy that no substantial changes in the protein were observed in the complex, except possibly for a

244

J. d'Angelo et al.

thy that these groups all lie in a possible coordination to a divalent metal ion; then one might hypothesize that the interaction causing the inhibition is mediated by one or two cations. Such an assumption has been recently reinforced by computational studies. Indeed, minimization of the energy of interaction between styrylquinoline drugs on the whole surface of the catalytic core domain of RSV IN revealed that the best fits were found for binding of the drugs on the Mg2+ in the vicinity of the active site [42].

ANTIVIRAL EFFECT OF HIV-1 IN INHIBITORS
Although inhibition of HIV-1 IN in vitro by small molecules has been relatively simple to demonstrated, inhibition of HIV-1 IN within the cell has proven difficult to study. The selection of variants resistant to inhibitors remains the most convincing manner for validating that IN is the actual target of the compounds. Another indirect proof comprises assays that are performed with HeLa cells harboring -galactosidase under control of the HIVtransactivating factor Tat. This viral protein is expressed in cells shortly after viral DNA-integration and, thus, the amount of DNA-integration can be estimated from the -gal production following infection. Activity of IN inhibitors results in a decrease of -gal expression, although IC50 are generally higher that the one obtained in cellular assays measuring viral replication over several days. The first clear-cut demonstration of the antiviral effect of a HIV-1 IN inhibitor was provided by Robinson et al. [42]. Following three months of selection in the presence of increasing concentrations of L-chicoric acid (8, figure 3), they established that HIV-1 was completely resistant to this drug. Introduction of the mutant IN containing a single glycine-to-serine amino acid change at position 140 into the native, L-chicoric acid-sensitive virus demonstrated that this change was sufficient to confer resistance to L-chicoric acid. These results confirm through natural selection previous biochemical studies showing that L-chicoric acid inhibits HIV-IN, and that the drug is likely to interact at residues near the catalytic triad in the IN active site. Addition of styrylquinoline derivatives (table I) to cultures of de novo infected CEM4fx cells resulted in a concentration dependent reductions in virus production as measured by both p24 and infectious virus production assays. To validate IN as the molecular target responsible for the antiviral effect, time-of-addition experiments are commonly used. Styrylquinoline-type IN inhibitors display activity when added up to 16 h post-infection, a time-course compatible with the inhibition of a postpenetration step of replication [31]. A Merck group has recently presented diketo acids (exemplified by L-731,988, 10, figure 3) as a new class

Figure 9. Schematic drawing of the HIV-1 IN-5CITEP complex at the active site (after [29]).

Figure 10. Putative pharmacophore components of HIV-1 IN inhibitors.

change in the orientation of the side-chain of Glu152. The temperature factors of the side chain of Glu152 and Lys156 are noticeably lower in the complex that in the free protein, indicating an increased degree of order upon binding of the inhibitor. The inhibitor binding seems to mimic the DNA/substrate IN interaction. The exact mechanism by which HIV-1 IN inhibitors block the catalytic activity of the protein remains unknown. However, putative pharmacophore components such as the catechol (A), salicylic acid (B), bis-amide (C), hydrazide (D), -alkoxy acid (E), and -diketone (F) moieties have been identified (figure 10). It is nothewor-

HIV-1 integrase and AIDS therapy

245

of HIV-IN inhibitors and novel antiretroviral agents [30]. Through extensive site-directed mutagenis experiments, the authors have demonstrated that these compounds are specific inhibitors of integration, which exert their antiviral effect on HIV-1 solely as a consequence of their ability to inhibit the strand transfer activity of IN. The compounds exhibit a preference for the strand transfer reaction in vitro and inhibit integration without affecting synthesis or processing of the HIV-1 DNA in infected cells. Interestingly, the fact that mutated residue 140 was observed with L-chicoric acid but not L-731,988 suggests that variants resistant to one family of drug may remain sensitive to another.

CONCLUSION
After one decade of exploratory studies, several classes of HIV-1 IN inhibitors displaying antiviral activities have now been identified. Today, recent advances in the understanding of the structure and enzymology of IN provide with new opportunities for improving potency of these drugs. Thus, IN has become an attractive target for intervention by chemotherapeutics, because of the rapid emergence of resistance against both reverse transcriptase and protease inhibitors, currently used for the treatment of AIDS. Although significant difficulties continue to restrict structure-based design approaches, it seems likely that the efficient use of HIV-1 IN as a target for rational design will become possible in the next future, possibly through the use of combination regimens including IN inhibitors. Therefore, it is imperative that the development of even more potent inhibitors of HIV-1 IN should be vigorously pursued.

REFERENCES
1 Palella FJJ, Delaney KM, Moorman AC, Loveless MO, Fuhrer J, Satten GA, et al. Declining morbidity and mortality among patients with advanced human immunodeficiency virus infection. HIV outpatient study investigators. N Engl J Med 1998; 38: 853-60. 2 Ramratnam B, Mittler JE, Zhang L, Boden D, Hurley A, Fang F, et al. The decay of the latent reservoir of replication-competent HIV-1 is inversely correlated with the extent of residual viral replication during prolonged anti-retroviral therapy. Nat Med 2000; 6: 82-5. 3 Finzi D, Blankson J, Siliciano JD, Margolick JB, Chadwick K, Pierson T, et al. Latent infection of CD4+ T cells provides a mechanism for lifelong persistence of HIV-1, even in patients on effective combination therapy. Nat Med 1999; 5: 512-7. 4 Cherepanov P, Este JA, Rando RF, Ojwang JO, Reekmans G, Steinfeld R, et al. Mode of interaction of G-quartets with the integrase of human immunodeficiency virus type 1. Mol Pharmacol 1997; 52: 771-80. 5 Fujiwara T, Mizuuchi K. Retroviral DNA integration: structure of an integration intermediate. Cell 1997; 54: 497-504. 6 Brown PO, Bowerman B, Varmus HE, Bishop JM. Retroviral integration: structure of the initial covalent product and its precursor, and a role for the viral IN protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989; 86: 2525-9.

7 Brown PO. Integration. In: Coffin JM, Hughes SH, Varmus HE, editors. Retroviruses. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 1997, p. 161-203. 8 Rice P, Craigie R, Davies DR. Retroviral integrases and their cousins. Curr Opin Struct Biol 1996; 6: 76-83. 9 Venclovas C, Timinskas A, Siksnys V. Five-stranded beta-sheet sandwiched with two alpha-helices: a structural link between restriction endonucleases EcoRI and EcoRV. Proteins 1994; 20: 279-82. 10 Pommier Y, Neamati N. Inhibitors of human immunodeficiency virus integrase. Adv Virus Res 1999; 52: 427-58. 11 Leh H, Brodin P, Bischerour J, Deprez E, Tauc P, Brochon JC, et al. Determinants of Mg2+ -dependent activities of recombinant human immunodeficiency Virus type I integrase. Biochemistry 2000; 39. In press. 12 Deprez E, Tauc P, Leh H, Mouscadet JF, Auclair C, Brochon JC. Oligomeric states of the HIV-1 integrase as measured by timeresolved fluorescence anisotropy. Biochemistry 2000; 39. In press. 13 Carteau S, Mouscadet JF, Goulaouic H, Subra F, Auclair C. Effect of topoisomerase inhibitors on the in vitro HIV DNA integration reaction. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1993; 192: 1409-14. 14 Bouziane M, Cherny DI, Mouscadet JF, Auclair C. Alternate strand DNA triple helix-mediated inhibition of HIV-1 U5 long terminal repeat integration in vitro. J Biol Chem 1996; 271: 10359-64. 15 Carteau S, Mouscadet JF, Goulaouic H, Subra F, Auclair C. Inhibitory effect of the polyanionic drug suramin in the in vitro HIV DNA integration reaction. Arch Biochem Biophys 1993; 305: 60610. 16 Cushman M, Sherman P. Inhibition of HIV-1 integration protein by aurintricarboxylic acid monomers, monomer analogs, and polymer fractions. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1992; 185: 85-90. 17 LaFemina RL, Graham PL, LeGrow K, Hastings JC, Wolfe A, Young SD, et al. Inhibition of human immunodeficiency virus integrase by bis-catechols. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1995; 39: 320-4. 18 Fesen MR, Pommier Y, Leteurtre F, Hiroguchi S, Yung J, Kohn KW. Inhibition of HIV-1 integrase by flavones caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE) and related compounds. Biochem Pharmacol 1994; 48: 595-608. 19 Mazumder A, Raghavan K, Weinstein J, Kohn KW, Pommier Y. Inhibition of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 integrase by curcumin. Biochem Pharmacol 1995; 49: 1165-70. 20 Mazumder A, Gazit A, Levitzki A, Nicklaus M, Yung J, Kohlhagen G, et al. Effects of tyrphostins, protein kinase inhibitors, on human immunodeficiency virus type 1 integrase. Biochemistry 1995; 34: 15111-22. 21 Eich E, Pertz H, Kaloga M, Schulz J, Fesen MR, Mazumder A, et al. Arctigenin as a lead structure for inhibitors of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 integrase. J Med Chem 1996; 39: 86-95. 22 Zhao H, Neamati N, Hong H, Mazumder A, Wang S, Sunder S, et al. Coumarin-based inhibitors of HIV integrase. J Med Chem 1997; 40: 242-9. 23 Cushman M, Golebiewski WM, Pommier Y, Mazumder A, Reymen D, De Clercq E, et al. Cosalane analogues with enhanced potencies as inhibitors of HIV-1 protease and integrase. J Med Chem 1995; 38: 443-52. 24 Neamati N, Hong H, Sunder S, Milne GWA, Pommier Y. Potent inhibitors of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 integrase: identification of a novel four-point pharmacophore and tetracyclines as novel inhibitors. Mol Pharmacol 1997; 52: 1041-55. 25 Zhao H, Neamati N, Sunder S, Hong H, Wang S, Milne GWA, et al. Hydrazide-containing inhibitors of HIV-1 integrase. J Med Chem 1997; 40: 937-41. 26 Neamati N, Hong H, Mazumder A, Wang S, Sunder S, Nicklaus MC, et al. Depsides and depsidones as inhibitors of HIV-1 integrase: discovery of novel inhibitors through 3D database searching. J Med Chem 1997; 40: 942-51.

246

J. d'Angelo et al.

27 Neamati N, Mazumder A, Zhao H, Sunder S, Burke Jr TR, Schultz RJ, et al. Diarylsulfones, a novel class of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 integrase inhibitors. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1997; 41: 385-93. 28 King PJ, Ma G, Miao W, Jia Q, McDougall BR, Reinecke MG, et al. Stucture-activity relationships: analogues of the dicaffeoylquinic and dicaffeoyltartaric acids as potent inhibitors of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 integrase and replication. J Med Chem 1999; 42: 497-509. 29 Goldgur Y, Craigie R, Cohen GH, Fujiwara T, Yoshinaga T, Fujishita T, et al. Structure of the HIV-1 integrase catalytic domain complexed with an inhibitor: a platform for antiviral drug design. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999; 96: 13040-3. 30 Hazuda DJ, Felock P, Witmer M, Wolfe A, Stillmock K, Grobler JA, et al. Inhibitors of strand transfer that prevent integration and inhibit HIV-1 replication in cells. Science 2000; 287: 646-50. 31 Mekouar K, Mouscadet JF, Desmaële D, Subra F, Savouré D, Auclair C, et al. Styryl-quinoline derivatives: a new class of potent HIV-1-integrase inhibitors that block HIV-1 replication in CEM cells. J Med Chem 1998; 41: 2846-57. 32 Zouhiri F, Mouscadet JF, Mekouar K, Desmaële D, Savouré D, Leh H, et al. Structure-activity relationships and binding mode of styrylquinolines as potent inhibitors of HIV-1 integrase and replication of HIV-1 in cell culture. J Med Chem 2000; 43: 1533-40. 33 Dyda F, Hickman AB, Jenkins TM, Engelman A, Craigie R, Davies DR. Crystal structure of the catalytic domain of HIV-1 integrase: similarity to other polynucleotidyl transferases. Science 1994; 266: 1981-6. 34 Bujacz G, Alexandratos J, Zhou-Liu Q, Clément-Mella C, Wlodawer A. The catalytic domain of human immunodefi-

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

ciency virus integrase: ordered active site in the F185H mutant. FEBS Letters 1996; 398: 175-8. Goldgur Y, Dyda F, Hickman AB, Jenkins TM, Craigie R, Davies DR. Three new structures of the core domain of HIV-1 integrase: an active site that binds magnesium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998; 95: 9150-4. Pelletier H, Sawaya MR, Wolfle W, Wilson SH, Kraut J. A structural basis for metal ion mutagenicity and nucleotide selectivity in human DNA polymerase . Biochemistry 1996; 35: 12762-77. Beese LS, Steitz TA. Structural basis for the 3 -5 exonuclease activity of Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I: a two metal ion mechanism. EMBO J 1991; 10: 25-33. Lins RD, Straatsma TP, Briggs JM. Similarities in the HIV1 and ASV integrase active sites upon metal cofactor binding. Biopolymers 2000; 53: 308-15. Lubkowski J, Yang F, Alexandratos J, Wlodawer A, Zhao H, Burke Jr TR , et al. Stucture of the catalytic domain of avian sarcoma virus integrase with a bound HIV-1 integrase-targeted inhibitor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998; 95: 4831-6. Drake RR, Neamati N, Hong H, Pilon AA, Sunthankar P, Hume SD, et al. Identification of a nucleotide binding site in HIV-1 integrase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998; 95: 4170-5. Ouali M, Laboulais C, Leh H, Gill D, Desmaële D, Mekouar K, et al. Modeling of the inhibition of retroviral integrases by styrylquinoline derivatives. J Med Chem 2000; 43: 1949-57. King PJ, Robinson Jr WE. Resistance to the anti-human immunodeficiency virus type 1 compound L-chicoric acid results from a single mutation at amino acid 140 of integrase. J Virol 1998; 2: 8420-4.

