Article No. jmbi.1999.3182 available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

J. Mol. Biol. (1999) 293, 733±744

The Interaction of DNA Gyrase with the Bacterial Toxin CcdB: Evidence for the Existence of Two Gyrase-CcdB Complexes
Sotirios C. Kampranis, Alison J. Howells and Anthony Maxwell*
Department of Biochemistry University of Leicester University Road, Leicester LE1 7RH, UK CcdB is a bacterial toxin that targets DNA gyrase. Analysis of the interaction of CcdB with gyrase reveals two distinct complexes. An initial complex (a) is formed by direct interaction between GyrA and CcdB; this complex can be detected by af®nity column and gel-shift analysis, and has a proteolytic signature which is characterised by a 49 kDa fragment of GyrA. Surface plasmon resonance shows that CcdB binds to the N-terminal domain of GyrA with high af®nity. In this mode of binding, CcdB does not affect the ability of gyrase to hydrolyse ATP or promote supercoiling. Incubation of this initial complex with ATP in the presence of GyrB and DNA slowly converts it to a second complex (b), which has a lower rate of ATP hydrolysis and is unable to catalyse supercoiling. The ef®ciency of formation of this inactive complex is dependent on the concentrations of ATP and CcdB. We suggest that the conversion between the two complexes proceeds via an intermediate, whose formation is dependent on the rate of ATP hydrolysis.
# 1999 Academic Press

*Corresponding author

Keywords: topoisomerase; supercoiling; surface plasmon resonance; proteolysis; CcdA

Introduction
The enzymes responsible for maintaining the topological state of DNA in cells are DNA topoisomerases. Type II topoisomerases perform their task by creating a double-stranded break in one DNA segment and passing another segment through this break in a process coupled to ATP hydrolysis (Wang, 1998). DNA gyrase is a type II topoisomerase responsible for the negative supercoiling of DNA in bacteria (Reece & Maxwell, 1991a; Wigley, 1995). Escherichia coli gyrase consists of two subunits, GyrA (97 kDa) and GyrB (90 kDa), and the active complex is an A2B2 heteroPresent address: S. C. Kampranis, MAICh, Alsyllion Agrokepion, P.O. Box 85, GR-73100, Chania, Greece. Abbreviations used: ADPNP, 5H -adenylyl-b,gimidodiphosphate; GyrA, DNA gyrase A protein; GyrB, DNA gyrase B protein; GyrA59, the 59 kDa N-terminal domain of GyrA; GyrA64, the 64 kDa N-terminal domain of GyrA; GyrA33, the 33 kDa C-terminal domain of GyrA, GyrB43; the 43 kDa N-terminal domain of GyrB; GyrB47, the 47 kDa C-terminal domain of GyrB; SPR, surface plasmon resonance. E-mail address of the corresponding author: ony@le.ac.uk
0022-2836/99/430733±12 $30.00/0

tetramer. The gyrase subunits contain distinct functional domains. The N-terminal domain of GyrA (59-64 kDa) contains residues involved in the cleavage of DNA, while the C-terminal 33 kDa domain (GyrA33) has a DNA-binding function. The 43 kDa N-terminal domain of GyrB (GyrB43) contains the site of ATP hydrolysis, and the C-terminal 47 kDa domain (GyrB47) interacts with GyrA and DNA. Gyrase is believed to operate as a molecular clamp (Roca & Wang, 1992). The enzyme binds $130 bp of DNA in a positive superhelical sense and directs a contiguous DNA segment (the T or ``transported'' segment) to the entrance of a clamp formed by the two GyrB subunits (Kampranis et al., 1999a; Orphanides & Maxwell, 1994). ATP binding causes dimerisation of the N-terminal domains of GyrB, thus closing the protein clamp and trapping the T segment inside the enzyme. A pair of tyrosine residues (one in each GyrA subunit), situated near the centre of the wrapped DNA (the G or ``gate'' segment), cleave the phosphodiester backbone and become covalently attached to the DNA. This creates a double-stranded break in the G segment with a four-base stagger between the cleavage sites. The presence of the trapped T segment inside the enzyme is thought to promote the opening of an interface between the GyrA protomers
# 1999 Academic Press

734 (the DNA gate) allowing the T segment to pass through. T segment trapping and DNA-gate opening are proposed to trigger ATP hydrolysis (Tingey & Maxwell, 1996; Williams & Maxwell, 1999a). The T segment translocates through the enzyme and is released via an exit gate (also known as the ``primary dimer interface''; Berger et al., 1996; Morais Cabral et al., 1997) located within the N-terminal domain of GyrA (Williams & Maxwell, 1999b). DNA gyrase is present only in prokaryotes and as such is an ideal target for antibacterial agents (Maxwell, 1997). Quinolones (e.g. cipro¯oxacin, oxolinic acid) are antibacterial agents that act on gyrase and have found widespread clinical application in recent years (Schacht, 1997). These drugs stabilise a conformation of the enzyme-DNA complex in which the DNA cleavage-religation equilibrium is shifted towards the cleaved form (Gellert et al., 1977; Sugino et al., 1977). The cleaved DNA complex can be isolated in vitro by arresting a reaction between gyrase, DNA and quinolone with SDS. In vivo, cell death is thought to occur as the result of this complex forming a barrier to proteins that translocate along the DNA (e.g. helicases, polymerases; Howard et al., 1994; Willmott et al., 1994). Quinolones have been very successful in the ®ght against bacterial pathogens; however, the widespread development of multi-drug resistance among bacterial populations has prompted the search for novel antibacterial agents. CcdB is a bacterial toxin involved in the maintenance of the F plasmid in a bacterial population whose target is DNA gyrase. The mode of action of CcdB appears to be similar to that of quinolones on gyrase (Couturier et al., 1998). The F plasmid is a 95 kb low-copy number plasmid that is maintained very ef®ciently in dividing E. coli. One of the mechanisms that ensures the stability of the F plasmid is the ccd (coupled cell division, or control of cell death) system. This is composed of two elements, a stable toxin and a less stable antidote which neutralises the toxin and prevents cell death. The ccd module contains two genes, ccdA and ccdB (also known as letA and letB or H and G), which give rise to two small proteins, CcdA (8.3 kDa) and CcdB (11.7 kDa). CcdB is the toxin while CcdA is the unstable antidote. In a cell containing the F plasmid, CcdB is bound and neutralised by CcdA, and the intracellular levels of the CcdACcdB complex are autoregulated by the binding of this complex to a $113 bp operator-promoter site (de Feyter et al., 1989; Tam & Kline, 1989a,b). When cell division results in loss of the F plasmid, no new synthesis of CcdA or CcdB can take place in the plasmid-free progeny. CcdA is degraded by the ATP-dependent Lon protease (Van Melderen et al., 1994, 1996) allowing free CcdB to poison the cell. The action of CcdB results in reduced DNA Â synthesis (Jaffe et al., 1985), activation of the SOS response (Karoui et al., 1983), cell ®lamentation Â (Miki et al., 1984), and eventually cell death (Jaffe et al., 1985).

DNA Gyrase-CcdB Interaction

Bacterial mutants resistant to CcdB were found to carry mutations in gyrA, suggesting that the intracellular target of CcdB is DNA gyrase (Bernard & Couturier, 1992; Miki et al., 1992). One of the mutations conferring resistance to CcdB involves substitution of Arg462 to Cys (Bernard & Couturier, 1992). In a merodiploid strain it was found that sensitivity to CcdB was dominant over resistance. A similar phenomenon is observed with quinolone drugs, suggesting that CcdB, like quinolones, kills cells by converting gyrase into a poison (reviewed by Maxwell, 1997; Maxwell & Critchlow, 1998). In support of this notion, when cells over-expressing CcdB in the absence of CcdA were treated with SDS, the DNA was found to be cleaved (Bernard & Couturier, 1992). In vitro, CcdB can induce gyrase-mediated cleavage of DNA, while the addition of CcdA prevents cleavage (Bernard et al., 1993). The action of CcdB on gyrase shows a number of similarities with the action of quinolones but with some important differences. Both CcdB and quinolones can form stable, long-lived complexes with gyrase (Scheirer & Higgins, 1997). Both agents can stimulate DNA cleavage by gyrase, but, unlike quinolones, CcdB-stimulated cleavage is dependent on the presence of ATP (Bernard et al., 1993); many rounds of gyrase turnover are required to form cleavage complexes (Scheirer & Higgins, 1997). Gyrase-quinolone complexes are reversible by heat treatment or the addition of EDTA (Gellert et al., 1977), but gyrase-CcdB complexes are not (Bernard et al., 1993; Scheirer & Higgins, 1997). CcdB can form a complex with gyrase and DNA, which, as in the case of quinolones, blocks transcription by RNA polymerase (Critchlow et al., 1997); blocking of transcription by CcdB is also ATP-dependent. DNA cleavage by gyrase in the presence of quinolones can be observed with DNA fragments as È short as 20 bp (Cove et al., 1997; Gmunder et al., 1997); in the case of CcdB, a minimum of $160 bp is required for ef®cient cleavage (Critchlow et al., 1997). Another difference in the mode of action of CcdB and quinolones on gyrase is that the CcdBresistant mutant GyrACys462 is still susceptible to quinolones both in vivo and in vitro (Bernard & Couturier, 1992; Bernard et al., 1993). Examination of the crystal structure of GyrA59 (Morais Cabral et al., 1997) shows that the residues conferring resistance to quinolones map in a different part of the protein to those implicated in CcdB resistance. The apparent differences between CcdB and quinolone-induced cleavage suggest that CcdB traps a cleavage complex between gyrase and DNA in a manner distinct from quinolones (Critchlow et al., 1997). The dependence of CcdB-induced DNA cleavage on ATP hydrolysis and DNA length prompted the suggestion (Critchlow et al., 1997) that CcdB binds at a site revealed at the exit gate of GyrA (Morais Cabral et al., 1997) while a DNA segment is in transit through the enzyme. This is consistent with the location of the CcdB-resistant mutation GyrACys462 at the exit gate. CcdB may

DNA Gyrase-CcdB Interaction

735 ever, such a model does not take into account the fact that the DNA gate can open in the absence of ATP during ATP-independent relaxation.) According to this model, formation of the inactive GyrACcdB complex in vitro in the absence of DNA and ATP requires the denaturation of GyrA in order to open the DNA gate. The solution of the crystal structure of the CcdB dimer has been a signi®cant advance in the process of elucidating the mode of action of CcdB, but the information that can be deduced from it is limited by the absence of the structure of the gyrase-CcdB complex. The purpose of this work is to study the biochemical aspects of the interaction of CcdB with DNA gyrase in order to improve our understanding of the mechanism of action of CcdB.

interact with both the enzyme and the T segment, trapping a post-strand passage intermediate of the gyrase catalytic cycle (Critchlow et al., 1997). Apart from inducing gyrase-mediated DNA cleavage, CcdB also interacts with gyrase to produce a complex that is incapable of supercoiling. Plasmid DNA isolated from cells over-expressing CcdB was found to be signi®cantly relaxed (Maki et al., 1992). Moreover, the supercoiling activity of a cell-free extract of a CcdB overproducing strain was found to be approximately 1 % of that found in extracts from normal cells. Upon addition of puri®ed CcdA to this extract, the supercoiling activity could be restored, suggesting that, in vivo, CcdB forms a complex in which gyrase is inactive. An inactive GyrA-CcdB complex has been isolated from cells and found not to be able to cleave DNA in the presence of GyrB and ATP, in contrast to gyrase reconstituted in vitro with puri®ed subunits in the presence of CcdB (Maki et al., 1996). Moreover, no inhibition of supercoiling was observed when CcdB was added to reconstituted gyrase in vitro. This behaviour prompted Maki et al. (1996) to suggest that CcdB in the GyrA-CcdB complex inhibits the supercoiling reaction of gyrase with a mechanism that is different to the one that causes DNA cleavage, and that mixing of GyrA and CcdB in vitro does not produce the inactive GyrA-CcdB complex produced upon overexpression of CcdB in vivo. An inactive GyrA-CcdB complex can be produced in vitro by denaturation and renaturation of GyrA in the presence of CcdB (Bahassi et al., 1999). This complex appears to have the same characteristics as a GyrA-CcdB complex formed in vivo upon over-expression of CcdB, suggesting that, inside the cell, the inactive complex may be formed soon after GyrA production from the ribosome, before the protein has folded properly. The gyraseCcdB cleavage complex and the GyrA-CcdB complex that has been produced by denaturationrenaturation appear to share common features in the molecular details of the GyrA-CcdB interaction, since mutations in GyrA or CcdB that abolish CcdB-induced cleavage also prevent the formation of the in vitro GyrA-CcdB complex (Bahassi et al., 1999). Recently, the crystal structure of CcdB has been solved (Loris et al., 1999). In the crystal, CcdB appears to be a dimer, consistent with ®ndings that suggest that the protein is predominantly a dimer in solution (Van Melderen et al., 1996). In order to account for the location of the CcdB-resistant mutations in GyrA, Loris and co-workers proposed that CcdB binds in the hole between the two GyrA subunits. This hole in the crystal structure of the GyrA59 dimer may be slightly too small to accommodate a CcdB dimer without steric con¯icts, and it is proposed that the DNA gate must open in order for the toxin to bind. It is postulated that opening of the DNA gate and CcdB binding is the consequence of ATP hydrolysis and results in CcdB-induced cleavage (Loris et al., 1999). (How-

Results
The binding of CcdB to DNA gyrase Previous work has shown that CcdB can bind to the N-terminal domain of the DNA gyrase A protein (GyrA59) immobilised on a column (Bahassi et al., 1999). In similar experiments we have shown that CcdB can bind to immobilised GyrA; the bound CcdB could not be eluted with NaCl up to 2 M, but could readily be eluted by the addition of CcdA (data not shown). In control experiments it was shown that GyrB could be bound by a GyrAaf®nity column and eluted with moderate NaCl concentrations (0.5 M). Moreover, CcdB had no effect on GyrB previously bound to a GyrA-af®nity column, and GyrB could still bind to the column if CcdB had been bound ®rst, i.e. binding of GyrB and CcdB to GyrA are not mutually exclusive. These experiments suggest that CcdB can form a tightly bound complex with GyrA that cannot be dissociated with GyrB or high salt concentration, but can be dissociated by CcdA. It has been suggested that CcdB can only bind to GyrA when the protein is denatured or when it is newly synthesised in vivo (Bahassi et al., 1999). It is possible that immobilised GyrA (or GyrA59) on an af®nity column is in a partially unfolded state, despite its ability to bind GyrB. In other experiments we have found that CcdB can form a complex with GyrA which can be resolved on a non-denaturing polyacrylamide gel (data not shown; Critchlow, 1996). Taken together, these data suggest that CcdB may be able to bind to native GyrA. To explore this phenomenon further we have investigated GyrACcdB interactions using other methods. CcdB binding results in a characteristic proteolytic pattern Limited proteolysis has been successfully applied to DNA gyrase to reveal conformational changes associated with the binding of ligands to the enzyme (Kampranis et al., 1999b; Kampranis & Maxwell, 1998a). We have now used this approach to identify conformational changes resulting from

736 CcdB binding. Proteolysis of GyrA by 10 mg/ml trypsin (for one hour at 37  C) produces one major fragment of $62 kDa corresponding to the N-terminal domain (Kampranis & Maxwell, 1998a). Proteolysis at higher concentrations of trypsin results in the breakdown of this fragment to give a $45 kDa fragment (Figure 1(a)), which was found by peptide sequencing to begin at residue 25 of GyrA (AMSVIVGR, which corresponds to residues 25-32). When CcdB was incubated with GyrA prior to proteolysis, the breakdown product of the 62 kDa fragment was different (Figure 1(a)). In this case a $49 kDa fragment was produced instead of the $45 kDa fragment. The appearance of the $49 kDa fragment was evident at lower trypsin concentrations than those required for the production of the $45 kDa fragment, suggesting an overall increased susceptibility of the 62 kDa protein to proteolysis in the presence of CcdB. The $49 kDa fragment was found by peptide sequencing to start at residue 130 of GyrA (IAHELMA). This fragment probably comprises residues from Ile130 to the end of the $62 kDa fragment, Arg571. CcdB was found to be resistant to proteolysis by trypsin and no degradation of CcdB was observed under the conditions of these experiments (data not shown). Proteolysis of gyrase (A2B2) by 10 mg/ml trypsin for one hour at 37  C produces two major fragments, the 62 kDa fragment of GyrA and a $25 kDa tryptic fragment of GyrB (Kampranis & Maxwell, 1998a). At higher trypsin concentrations, the protease degradation pattern of the A2B2 complex is characterised by the breakdown of the $62 kDa fragment to the $45 kDa fragment and the degradation of the $25 kDa product. In the presence of CcdB, the proteolytic behaviour of the A2B2 complex, in the absence and presence of DNA, is similar to that observed upon binding of the toxin to GyrA, namely the conversion of the 62 kDa fragment to a 49 kDa product and increased susceptibility of the 62 kDa fragment; in addition, the susceptibility to proteolysis of the 25 kDa GyrB fragment is reduced ca twofold (Figure 1(b)).

DNA Gyrase-CcdB Interaction

CcdB-induced DNA cleavage requires ATP hydrolysis (Bernard & Couturier, 1992). To study the conformation of the cleavage complex, the gyrase-DNA-CcdB complex was formed and incubated in the presence of ATP. After treatment with 30 mg/ml trypsin, an additional fragment was faintly present (data not shown). This fragment has a size of $47 kDa and was identi®ed by peptide sequencing to be part of GyrB, beginning at residue 395 (N-terminal sequencing revealed the sequence GALDLAGLPG) and is therefore likely to comprise residues 395-803 (i.e. the C-terminal 47 kDa domain of GyrB). A similar fragment was detected in proteolysis experiments in the presence of quinolones (Kampranis & Maxwell, 1998a), raising the possibility that the CcdB- and quinolonestabilised cleavage complexes may have similar conformations. The above ®ndings suggest that CcdB interacts directly with GyrA resulting in a conformational change that is detectable by proteolysis. To verify that the proteolytic signature observed was speci®c to the binding of CcdB, a mutant GyrA protein that is resistant to the action of CcdB was used. This mutant, GyrACys462, failed to reveal any of the characteristic proteolytic signatures when incubated alone or together with GyrB and/or DNA and ATP, in the presence of the toxin (data not shown). GyrA-CcdB interaction probed by surface plasmon resonance The results of the proteolysis experiments suggest that CcdB interacts directly with GyrA and that this interaction is independent of the presence of GyrB, DNA or ATP. To investigate the details of the interaction of CcdB with gyrase, we studied the binding of the toxin to individual gyrase subunits and domains using surface plasmon resonance (SPR). GyrA, GyrB, and GyrA59 were immobilised on the chip surface of individual ¯ow-cells and the binding of CcdB was measured by passing a solution of the toxin over the ¯owcells at a ¯ow rate of 20 ml/minute (Figure 2). Binding of CcdB to GyrA and GyrA59 was seen (Table 1). The interaction of CcdB with GyrA or

Table 1. Study of the gyrase-CcdB interaction by SPR
Analyte CcdB kon (MÀ1 sÀ1) koff (sÀ1) Kd (M) CcdA kon (MÀ1 sÀ1) koff (sÀ1) Kd (M) GyrA 6.1 Â 104 2.4 Â 10À5 3.9 Â 10À10 Â GyrA59 4.6 Â 104 2.2 Â 10À5 4.8 Â 10À10 Â Immobilised protein GyrB GyrAC462 CcdB CcdB-CcdA

Â

Â

Â >1 Â 106 7.8 Â 10À5 <10À10

Â

Â

Â

N/A

Results are shown as apparent rate constants, derived by ®tting the experimental data to a 1:1 model of interaction. The cross (Â) indicates that no interaction could be detected. The CcdB-CcdA complex was formed by immobilising CcdB and then injecting CcdA, subsequent injection of CcdB showed no detectable binding to the complex.

DNA Gyrase-CcdB Interaction

737

Figure 1. (a) Proteolysis of GyrA and the GyrA-CcdB complex with increasing concentrations of trypsin. Samples contained 0.3 mg/ml of GyrA and CcdB (where indicated), and after incubation for one hour at 25  C, the indicated ®nal concentration of trypsin was added and the reaction was allowed to proceed for one hour at 37  C. The products were analysed by SDS12 % PAGE. On the right is a diagrammatic representation of the identity of the proteolytic fragments. (b) Proteolysis of the gyraseDNA complex by trypsin. Experimental conditions were identical with those described in (a), except for the presence of 0.3 mg/ml GyrB and 0.4 mg/ml linear pBR322.

GyrA59 was found not to be monophasic, this could be due to a number of reasons (see Discussion). CcdB was found to bind GyrA59 and fulllength GyrA with similar af®nities (Table 1). The GyrA and GyrA59-CcdB complexes were found to be very stable at high ionic strength (1 M K2HPO4) or low pH (pH 3.0). However, these complexes were readily dissociated by injection of CcdA. No interaction of CcdB with GyrB could be detected (Figure 2 and Table 1). These results clearly suggest that the binding site of CcdB is located in the N-terminal domain of GyrA. Mutation of Arg462 to Cys in GyrA was found to confer resistance to CcdB in bacteria (Bernard &

Figure 2. Investigation of the interaction between gyrase and CcdB by surface plasmon resonance. Typical sensorgram showing the interaction of CcdB with immobilised GyrA59, GyrB and CcdB; response units (RU) are plotted as a function of time (s). The results of the SPR experiments are summarised in Table 1.

Couturier, 1992). To assess the ability of this mutant to bind the toxin, GyrACys462 was coupled to the chip and probed for CcdB binding. The mutant showed very poor af®nity for CcdB and no kinetic parameters could be measured for this interaction (Table 1). Examination of the crystal structure of CcdB reveals a large dimer interface, suggesting that CcdB is likely to form a stable dimer (Loris et al., 1999). Gel-®ltration experiments have also shown that CcdB is predominantly a dimer in solution while a small amount can also be found in the tetrameric form (Van Melderen et al., 1996). To determine whether CcdB could interact with itself, CcdB was immobilised on the surface and its ability to bind CcdB was tested. No interaction between immobilised and free CcdB was detected (Figure 2 and Table 1), consistent with the idea that immobilised CcdB is dimeric. The inability to detect any interaction between immobilised and free CcdB may be due to poor af®nity between the two dimers or due to the mode of immobilisation of CcdB on the surface. CcdA showed no af®nity for GyrA, GyrA59 or GyrB (Table 1). However, when CcdA was injected over immobilised CcdB very strong interaction between the two proteins could be observed (Table 1). It has been suggested that the CcdACcdB complex consists of four CcdB molecules and two molecules of CcdA (Van Melderen et al., 1996). In such a complex it is possible that a CcdA dimer acts as a bridge between two CcdB dimers. To test this, CcdB was coupled on the chip and CcdA was subsequently injected to form the CcdB-CcdA complex. CcdB was then injected to detect the

738 formation of the CcdB-CcdA-CcdB complex. No interaction of CcdB with the CcdB-CcdA complex could be observed, i.e. providing no support for the idea that CcdA acts as a bridge between two CcdB dimers (Table 1). It is feasible that CcdA could bridge two CcdB dimers that are immobilised on the chip surface, i.e. the immobilised CcdB competes with the soluble CcdB for CcdA. However, it is also possible that the CcdB-CcdA complex is immobilised on the chip surface such that additional binding of CcdB cannot be observed. Alternative methods will be required to de®nitively address this issue. The effect of CcdB on the DNA gyrase ATPase reaction The binding of quinolones to the gyrase-DNA complex has been found to have profound effects on the rate of ATP hydrolysis; changes in the rate of hydrolysis have been used to monitor the formation of the gyrase-quinolone complex (Kampranis & Maxwell, 1998b). We have studied the effect of CcdB binding on the rate of ATP hydrolysis by gyrase in order to establish whether a similar approach can be applied to the study of the gyrase-CcdB complex. In the absence of DNA, gyrase hydrolysed ATP with a rate of 0.13 sÀ1, while this rate increased to $1.03 sÀ1 when DNA was present. At low CcdB concentrations (50500 nM) with 20 nM gyrase, no inhibition of the ATPase rate of the gyrase-DNA complex could be observed. Under these conditions, all the gyrase molecules would be expected to be CcdB-bound, as judged from the binding constants determined by SPR (Table 1). However, at higher CcdB concentrations (2.5-15 mM) slow inhibition of the rate of hydrolysis could be observed (Figure 3(a)). CcdB gradually reduced the rate of hydrolysis of the gyrase-DNA complex until this reached a plateau at $0.33 sÀ1 (Figure 3(a)). This inhibition in the rate of hydrolysis is not due to loss of enzyme activity because of the long incubation, since in the absence of CcdB the rate of hydrolysis remained constant throughout the experiment (data not shown). In addition, the loss of gyrase ATPase activity at high CcdB concentrations could be due to CcdB displacing gyrase from the DNA, however, the fact that the rate plateaus at a value signi®cantly above the DNA-independent rate argues against this possibility. The rate by which CcdB inhibited the ATPase of gyrase was dependent on the concentration of the toxin (Figure 3(a)); this behaviour explains the inability of low concentrations of CcdB to reveal signi®cant inhibition of the complex in the timescale of these experiments. The concentration of CcdB was varied from 2.5 to 15 mM and the observed rate of inhibition (kobs) was determined for each concentration by ®tting the data to a ®rstorder exponential (see Discussion). The values of kobs were plotted against CcdB concentration and a linear relationship was obtained (Figure 3(b)).

DNA Gyrase-CcdB Interaction

Figure 3. (a) Time-course of the conversion to the CcdB-characteristic ATPase rate in the presence of increasing concentrations of CcdB. Assays contained 20 nM GyrB dimer, 30 nM GyrA dimer and 16 mM bp linear pBR322 DNA and were carried out in 35 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 24 mM KCl, 4 mM MgCl2, 5 mM DTT, 6.7 % (w/v) glycerol, and 2 mM ATP at 25  C. The concentration of CcdB was 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, 15 mM; the concentration for the highest curve is 2.5 mM while for the lowest it is 15 mM. (b) Plot of the observed rate of conversion kobs, determined from (a) against the concentration of CcdB.

To investigate the relationship between the formation of the gyrase-CcdB complex and the ability of gyrase to promote supercoiling, the gyrase-DNA complex was formed with relaxed DNA (approximately one gyrase tetramer per relaxed pBR322) and incubated with increasing concentrations of CcdB (2.5 to 15 mM) in the presence of ATP. The rate of ATP hydrolysis was monitored until in all reactions the rate of hydrolysis had reached the CcdB-characteristic rate, then samples were removed from the ATPase reactions and analysed by agarose gel electrophoresis to determine the extent of supercoiling. At the highest CcdB concentration, inhibition of supercoiling was ef®cient resulting in the introduction of only a few turns

DNA Gyrase-CcdB Interaction

739

(data not shown). As the concentration of CcdB decreased, more ef®cient supercoiling could be observed, resulting in virtually no inhibition at the lower CcdB concentrations, consistent with previous observations (Scheirer & Higgins, 1997). When SDS and proteinase K were added to gyrase-CcdB complexes in the presence of ATP, DNA cleavage activity was consistent with previous observations (Bernard et al., 1993; Scheirer & Higgins, 1997). The role of ATP hydrolysis in the formation of the poisoned gyrase-CcdB complex was studied. The gyrase-DNA complex was incubated with a constant concentration of CcdB (15 mM) and the rate of ATP hydrolysis was observed over a range of ATP concentrations (0.25-1.5 mM). The ATPase activity of gyrase was inhibited with a rate that was dependent on the concentration of ATP, with higher nucleotide concentrations resulting in more rapid inhibition. The observed rate of inhibition (kobs) was plotted against ATP concentration (Figure 4(a)). The dependence of kobs on ATP follows a similar trend to the dependence of the rate of ATP hydrolysis by free gyrase on ATP concentration (Maxwell & Gellert, 1984). This would suggest a possible relationship between the rate of turnover and the rate that CcdB inhibits the enzyme. The rate of ATP hydrolysis of the poisoned complex was determined for each ATP concentration and these rates were plotted against ATP concentration and compared with the respective rates of the gyrase-DNA and the gyrase-DNAquinolone complex (Figure 4(b)). These data show that the ATPase kinetics for the CcdB-complex are distinct from those for free gyrase, but resemble those for the quinolone drug complex.

Discussion
Evidence for two CcdB-gyrase complexes Using a range of biochemical techniques we have obtained evidence for two distinct complexes between CcdB and DNA gyrase. A complex between CcdB and GyrA can be detected by binding of CcdB to a GyrA-af®nity column and by gelmobility assays. This complex can form irrespective of the presence of GyrB or DNA and can be disrupted by CcdA. The implication from these experiments is that CcdB can bind to native GyrA. Proteolysis and SPR experiments provided further support for this contention. Previously, proteolysis of GyrA at low trypsin concentrations (0.4 mg/ml) gave two major fragments, 64 kDa and 33 kDa, which were found to be the N and C-terminal domains of GyrA (Reece & Maxwell, 1989). Higher concentrations of protease (10 mg/ml) fully degrade the 33 kDa domain and reduce the 64 kDa domain to a 62 kDa fragment (Kampranis & Maxwell, 1998a). Here, even higher concentrations of trypsin (10-90 mg/ml) were used and it was found that under these conditions, the 62 kDa fragment breaks down to a

Figure 4. (a) The rate of conversion to the CcdBtrapped complex, kobs, was measured at different concentrations of ATP. (b) The rate of ATP hydrolysis by the gyrase-DNA-CcdB complex (complex b) is plotted against the concentration of ATP (open diamonds). The hydrolysis rates of the gyrase-DNA quinolone complex (open squares) and gyrase-DNA complexes (open circles) are shown for comparison (data from Kampranis & Maxwell, 1998b).

45 kDa fragment. This fragment begins at residue Ala25 of GyrA and probably ends at Arg426 (Figure 5). This peptide has a calculated molecular mass of 44,568 Da, which is in agreement with the estimated size from SDS-PAGE. Moreover, examination of the crystal structure of the 59 kDa protein shows that Arg426 is located in a loop close to the primary dimer interface (Figure 5). This loop appears to be ¯exible, since it was found to be disordered in the crystal (Morais Cabral et al., 1997); this makes the peptide bond C-terminal to Arg426 a very likely substrate for trypsin. Other arginine or lysine residues in the region that could potentially give rise to fragments of similar size (Arg433, Arg444) are less likely to represent cleavage sites, since they are situated in less accessible parts of the protein. At the N terminus of this GyrA fragment, cleavage does not appear to have occurred

740

DNA Gyrase-CcdB Interaction

Figure 5. Ribbon representation of the GyrA59 structure (Morais Cabral et al., 1997) showing the identity of the proteolytic products and the location of the sites of tryptic cleavage. The residues implicated in CcdB resistance (Arg462 and Gly214) are also shown. The bars indicate the locations of the proteolysis sites on the GyrA62 fragment.

speci®cally after an arginine or lysine residue (the residue N-terminal to Ala25 is a tyrosine residue). It is possible that cleavage occurred speci®cally after Lys18 and the amino acids N-terminal to Ala25 have been non-speci®cally degraded by trypsin due to the high concentrations of protease used, and the likely introduction of disorder of the residues close to the cleaved bond after dissociation of the cleaved peptide. Binding of CcdB results in a characteristic change in the proteolytic ®ngerprint. CcdB binding to GyrA protects the Arg426 site and induces cleavage at the bond next to Lys129 (Figures 1 and 5). As a result, degradation of the 62 kDa fragment is more ef®cient than in the absence of CcdB and gives rise to a 49 kDa product comprising residues 130-571, instead of the 45 kDa fragment. The calculated molecular mass of this product is 49,571 Da, consistent with its apparent size from SDS-PAGE. The same change in the proteolysis pattern is seen with the A2B2-CcdB and A2B2-DNA-CcdB complexes, and is accompanied by a decreased susceptibility of GyrB to proteolysis. This effect is speci®c to the binding of CcdB, as proteolysis of a CcdBresistant GyrA mutant (GyrACys462) failed to produce the same ®ngerprint. The effect of CcdB binding on the proteolytic pattern can be attributed

either to a conformational change that protects the region close to Arg426 and exposes Lys129, or to direct protection of the Arg426 site by binding of CcdB close to this region and blocking access of the protease. The details of the interaction between gyrase and CcdB were studied using SPR. CcdB binds equally well to GyrA and GyrA59, but has no af®nity for GyrB (Figure 2 and Table 1). This suggests that the binding site for CcdB is located in the GyrA59 domain. The kinetics of this interaction were biphasic. This was not due to mass-transport limitations, as mass-transport was found to have no effect in simulations of the interaction using the appropriate software (BIAsimulation, Biacore). Moreover, ®tting the kinetic traces to a model encompassing mass-transport effects was unable to account for the biphasic interaction. A likely explanation for this behaviour is heterogeneity in the mode of immobilisation of the protein on the surface, i.e. some molecules may have impaired ability to bind the toxin due to the manner in which they are coupled to the chip surface. Another possibility that cannot be ruled out is that there are two communicating CcdB-binding sites in GyrA59. Due to these uncertainties, the kinetic data were ®tted to a

DNA Gyrase-CcdB Interaction

741 conversion of the gyrase ATPase rate to the CcdBdependent rate (Figure 3(a)) and was found to follow exponential kinetics, i.e.: GyrXDNA  GyrXDNAo eÀkobs t 3

1:1 model and presented here as apparent rate constants. This initial complex between gyrase and CcdB we term complex a. In this conformation, CcdB does not have any observable effect on the rate of ATP hydrolysis and does not block supercoiling. Incubation of complex a with ATP in the presence of GyrB and DNA slowly converts it to a complex that has a lower rate of ATP hydrolysis and is incapable of supercoiling; this complex we term complex b. (Under certain conditions, complex b can also be formed in the presence of the nonhydrolysable ATP analogue ADPNP (Critchlow et al., 1997).) Complex b has a somewhat different proteolytic signature from complex a. Proteolysis of the CcdB-gyrase-DNA complex in the presence of ATP results in the additional appearance of a 47 kDa fragment comprising the C-terminal domain of GyrB (residues 396-804, calculated molecular mass 46,268 Da). A similar fragment has been previously detected in the proteolysis of the gyrase-DNA complex in the presence of quinolones (Kampranis & Maxwell, 1998a). This suggests that the appearance of this band may be characteristic of a conformational state of the enzyme associated with DNA cleavage. Characterisation of CcdB-gyrase interaction The binding of CcdB to gyrase, GyrA, or the N-terminal domain of GyrA (GyrA59) can be represented as a simple equilibrium: E  CcdB 2 EXCcdB 3
a Kd

1

where E is DNA gyrase, GyrA or GyrA59, E.CcdB is complex a, and Ka is the equilibrium dissociation d constant for this complex. Ka has been measured to d be $0.4 nM for GyrA and GyrA59 (Table 1). The stoichiometry of this complex is unclear, but a number of lines of evidence (see below) suggest that it is 1:1 in terms of CcdB dimer to GyrA dimer. The formation of complex a is not dependent on the presence of GyrB, DNA or ATP. However, in the presence of these components, an alternative complex (b) occurs, whose formation is dependent on ATP hydrolysis. We suggest that this complex results from the interaction of CcdB with a conformation of gyrase (Gyr*) that is transiently revealed during the ATP hydrolysis cycle. We suggest the following scheme: GyrXDNA 2 GyrÃ XDNA 3
CcdB ATP

À GyrÃ XDNAXCcdB 3

2

where Gyr.DNA is the gyrase-DNA complex, Gyr*.DNA.CcdB is complex b. Again the stoichiometry of complex b is uncertain, but for the sake of simplicity we suggest a 1:1 complex between a CcdB dimer and a GyrA dimer. The rate of formation of complex b can be monitored by the

where [Gyr.DNAo] is the concentration of the gyrase-DNA complex at time zero and kobs is the apparent ®rst-order rate constant for the formation of Gyr*.DNA. The values of kobs were found to be linearly dependent upon CcdB concentration (Figure 3(b)), suggesting that the formation of complex b has a ®rst-order dependence on [CcdB] and that, at high [ATP], the conversion of Gyr*.DNA to complex b (Gyr*.DNA.CcdB) is rate limiting. When the concentration of ATP was varied, at constant [CcdB], a hyperbolic dependence of kobs on [ATP] was observed (Figure 4(a)). This suggests that the concentration of Gyr*.DNA is dependent on the turnover of ATP and re¯ects the hyperbolic dependence of the rate of ATP hydrolysis on [ATP] observed for the gyrase ATPase reaction (Maxwell & Gellert, 1984). (The deviation from true Michaelis-Menten behaviour observed for the gyrase ATPase reaction, which is attributable to the cooperative binding of two ATPs to the gyrase tetramer (Maxwell et al., 1986), can be ignored for the purposes of this discussion.) The rate of ATP hydrolysis by complex b shows a near-hyperbolic dependence on [ATP] that is distinct from the enzyme without CcdB (Figure 4(b)). The altered kinetics of ATP hydrolysis in the presence of CcdB are reminiscent of those seen in the presence of the quinolone drug cipro¯oxacin (Figure 4(b); Kampranis & Maxwell, 1998b). However, it is not clear whether complex b is equivalent to the complex stabilised by quinolone drugs, but it is interesting to note that both complexes can stabilise a cleaved DNA intermediate and reveal a 47 kDa fragment (derived from GyrB) in proteolysis experiments. It is not yet clear what is the form of complexes a and b. A simple interpretation that could account for these results is that in the initial interaction (complex a), gyrase interacts with a monomer of CcdB, as a dimer may be too large to ®t in the GyrA cavity. In this complex, supercoiling would not be abolished since the bound CcdB molecule is not large enough to block the passage of the DNA. A conformational change occurring during strand passage would allow a second CcdB monomer to bind, ®lling the GyrA cavity and blocking strand passage. In this conformation (complex b), the DNA-binding domain could be strained in such a way that DNA cleavage could be revealed, i.e. by opening of the DNA gate. This strained conformation is also less ef®cient in ATP hydrolysis. However, this model is inconsistent with the evidence that CcdB is a stable dimer (Loris et al., 1999; Van Melderen et al., 1996). Another possible interpretation of these results is that in complex a, gyrase is bound to one CcdB dimer while in complex b a second CcdB dimer can bind to give rise

742 to a gyrase-CcdB4 complex. The conformation of the bound CcdB dimer in complex a is such that it does not inhibit strand passage but at the same time does not allow the binding of a second dimer. In this case, Gyr*.DNA is an intermediate that occurs brie¯y during strand passage and is capable of binding the second CcdB dimer. A further model would be one in which both complex a and b have only one CcdB dimer bound. In this case, when in the complex a conformation, CcdB is associated through the same main interactions as in complex b but it is not as tightly docked, presumably due to an unfavourable gyrase conformation. ATP hydrolysis and strand passage may be able to dislodge the bound CcdB, whose interaction with gyrase is possibly now altered due to the conformational changes occurring in the enzyme during strand passage. Because of this dissociation of CcdB, supercoiling or ATPase are not inhibited. Gyr*.DNA may be a transient intermediate of gyrase in which the conformation of the CcdB-binding site is more favourable for CcdB binding than when the enzyme is in the resting state. CcdB then binds strongly to this new site, inhibiting supercoiling and ATPase and altering the DNA cleavage-religation equilibrium. It is not clear whether complex a is a prerequisite for the formation of complex b. Full characterisation of complexes a and b is likely to require high-resolution structural information on the gyrase-CcdB complex.

DNA Gyrase-CcdB Interaction

interaction of CcdB with newly transcribed GyrA (Maki et al., 1992), by binding of CcdB to unfolded GyrA in vitro (Bahassi et al., 1999), and by the interaction of CcdB with a conformation of gyrase revealed during the DNA-dependent ATP hydrolysis reaction (Scheirer & Higgins, 1997; this work). When the DNA substrate is supercoiled, complex b may also be formed in the presence of ADPNP (Critchlow et al., 1997). Complex a results from the interaction of CcdB with the N-terminal domain of GyrA and does not appear to affect the enzymatic activities of gyrase. It remains to be seen whether complex a is a prerequisite for the formation of complex b or merely represents an alternative gyrase-CcdB complex. Additionally, the stoichiometry of complexes a and b remains an uncertain issue that may be resolved by X-ray crystallography or other biophysical methods.

Materials and Methods
Enzymes and DNA GyrA, GyrASer122, GyrACys462 (a gift from N. Williams), GyrA64, GyrA59 (a gift from C. Smith) and GyrB (gifts from A. Jackson and J. Heddle), were prepared as described (Maxwell & Howells, 1999; Reece & Maxwell, 1991b). CcdA and CcdB were gifts from M. Couturier and R. Loris. Linear pBR322 was prepared by digestion of the supercoiled form with EcoRI. Enzyme assays GyrA-af®nity columns were made by coupling GyrA to CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B (Pharmacia) as described (Maxwell & Howells, 1999). Gyrase-CcdB complexes were resolved on non-denaturing polyacrylamide gels in the presence of 5 mM MgCl2, as described (Maxwell & Gellert, 1984). ATPase reactions were performed using a pyruvate kinase/lactate dehydrogenaselinked assay as described (Ali et al., 1993; Hammonds & Maxwell, 1997). ATPase assays contained 20 nM GyrB dimer, 30 nM GyrA dimer and linear pBR322 DNA and were carried out in 35 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 24 mM KCl, 4 mM MgCl2, 5 mM DTT, 6.5 % (w/v) glycerol, and 0.25-2 mM ATP at 25  C. The concentration of CcdB was varied between 0.05 and 15 mM. CcdB-induced cleavage of DNA by gyrase was carried out as described (Bernard & Couturier, 1992; Critchlow et al., 1997) and was revealed by the addition of 0.2 % SDS to and 0.1 mg/ml proteinase K, and incubation at 37  C for 30 minutes. The results were analysed by electrophoresis on 1 % (w/v) agarose gels. Limited proteolysis Samples contained 0.3 mg/ml of GyrA or GyrA59 and/or GyrB, 0.4 mg/ml linear pBR322 DNA (where indicated) in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 50 mM KCl, 4 mM MgCl2, 4 mM dithiothreitol, 6.5 % (w/v) glycerol. When present, CcdB was at 0.3 mg/ml, and ATP was included at a ®nal concentration of 2.5 mM. After incubation for one hour at 25  C, 10-30 mg/ml trypsin (®nal concentration) was added and the reaction was allowed to proceed for one hour at 37  C. Samples were quenched by adding an equal volume of 125 mM Tris-

Conclusions
The results presented here suggest that there are two modes of CcdB binding to DNA gyrase. Initially, CcdB binds to the N-terminal domain of GyrA in an interaction that results in a characteristic proteolytic ®ngerprint. In this mode of binding (complex a) CcdB does not have an observable effect on the rate of ATP hydrolysis of the complex, and does not it inhibit the supercoiling reaction. Incubation of complex a with ATP (in the presence of GyrB and DNA) converts it slowly to another complex (b) that can reveal DNA cleavage when treated with SDS. Complex b has a lower rate of ATP hydrolysis than the gyrase-DNA complex, and is incapable of supporting supercoiling. The dependence of the rate of conversion between the two complexes on the concentration of the toxin reveals the existence of a CcdB-dependent step in the maturation process. Moreover, the dependence of the rate of complex b formation on the concentration of nucleotide suggests that the rate of enzyme turnover is a signi®cant factor affecting the formation of complex b. From the work described here and elsewhere it seems that complex b is the CcdB-poisoned form of DNA gyrase, which shows loss of supercoiling activity, reduced ATPase activity and the ability to stabilise a cleaved DNA complex. Complex b can apparently be formed in a number of ways: by

DNA Gyrase-CcdB Interaction HCl (pH 6.8), 20 % (v/v) glycerol, 4 % (w/v) SDS, 10 % (w/v) b-mercaptoethanol, 0.002 % (w/v) bromophenol blue, and boiling for ten minutes. The products were analysed by SDS-PAGE. Surface plasmon resonance Surface plasmon resonance experiments were performed on a BIAcore 2000 system (BIAcore). GyrA, GyrA59, GyrACys462 or CcdB were immobilised on a CM5 sensor chip (BIAcore) via amine coupling. The immobilisation procedure was as follows. The system was primed in 10 mM Hepes (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 3.4 mM EDTA, and 0.05 % Tween 20 and the ¯ow rate was set at 5 ml/minute. The carboxymethylated dextran surface was activated by a seven minute injection of a solution containing 0.2 M N-ethyl-NH -(3-(diethylamino) propyl) carbodiimide and 0.05 M N-hydroxysuccinimide. A protein solution in 10 mM sodium acetate (pH 4.5) was then injected until the desired amount of protein was immobilised. After immobilisation the surface was blocked by a seven minute injection of 1 M ethanolamine hydrochloride. Binding experiments were performed at 25  C in 35 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 24 mM KCl, 4 mM MgCl2, 5 mM dithiothreitol, 6.5 % (w/v) glycerol, 0.02 % Tween 20. The ¯ow rate was set at 20 ml/minute and the data collection at 2 Hz. A range of concentrations of CcdB or CcdA in the same buffer was injected over the immobilised proteins and the association phase was observed for 260 seconds. After the end of the injection the ¯ow was switched back to protein-free buffer and the dissociation phase was observed for 300 seconds. At the end of the dissociation phase the immobilised protein was regenerated from bound CcdB by a ten minute injection of CcdA at a ¯ow rate of 5 ml/minute, and the same procedure was repeated at a different CcdB or CcdA concentration. Control experiments showed no signi®cant loss in binding capacity of the surface after successive binding and regeneration steps, suggesting that there was very little residual bound CcdB after the end of each regeneration step. The binding data were analysed using the program BIAevaluation 3.0 (BIAcore).

743
ase B protein hydrolyses ATP and binds coumarin drugs. Biochemistry, 32, 2717-2724. Bahassi, E. M., O'Dea, M. H., Allali, N., Messens, J., Gellert, M. & Couturier, M. (1999). Interaction of CcdB with DNA gyrase. Inactivation of GyrA, poisoning of the gyrase-DNA complex, and the antidote action of CcdA. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 10936-10944. Berger, J. M., Gamblin, S. J., Harrison, S. C. & Wang, Ê J. C. (1996). Structure at 2.7 A resolution of a 92 K yeast DNA topoisomerase II fragment. Nature, 379, 225-232. Bernard, P. & Couturier, M. (1992). Cell killing by the F plasmid CcdB protein involves poisoning of the DNA-topoisomerase II complex. J. Mol. Biol. 226, 735-745. Â Bernard, P., Kezdy, K. E., Van Melderen, L., Steyaert, J., Wyns, L., Pato, M. L., Higgins, N. P. & Couturier, M. (1993). The F plasmid CcdB protein induces ef®cient ATP-dependent DNA cleavage by gyrase. J. Mol. Biol. 234, 534-541. Couturier, M., Bahassi, E. M. & Van Melderen, L. (1998). Bacterial death by DNA gyrase poisoning. Trends Microbiol. 6, 269-275. Cove, M. E., Tingey, A. P. & Maxwell, A. (1997). DNA gyrase can cleave short DNA fragments in the presence of quinolone drugs. Nucl. Acids Res. 25, 27162722. Critchlow, S. E. (1996). The molecular basis of quinolone drug action on DNA gyrase, PhD thesis, University of Leicester. Critchlow, S. E., O'Dea, M. H., Howells, A. J., Couturier, M., Gellert, M. & Maxwell, A. (1997). The interaction of the F-plasmid killer protein, CcdB, with DNA gyrase: induction of DNA cleavage and blocking of transcription. J. Mol. Biol. 273, 826-839. de Feyter, R., Wallace, C. & Lane, D. (1989). Autoregulation of the ccd operon in the F plasmid. Mol. Gen. Genet. 218, 481-486. Gellert, M., Mizuuchi, K., O'Dea, M. H., Itoh, T. & Tomizawa, J. (1977). Nalidixic acid resistance: a second genetic character involved in DNA gyrase activity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 74, 4772-4776. È Gmunder, H., Kuratli, K. & Keck, W. (1997). In the presence of subunit A inhibitors DNA gyrase cleaves DNA fragments as short as 20 bp at speci®c sites. Nucl. Acids Res. 25, 604-611. Hammonds, T. R. & Maxwell, A. (1997). The DNA dependence of the ATPase activity of human DNA topoisomerase IIa. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 32696-32703. Howard, M. T., Neece, S. H., Matson, S. W. & Kreuzer, K. N. (1994). Disruption of a topoisomerase-DNA cleavage complex by a DNA helicase. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 91, 12031-12035. Â Jaffe, A., Ogura, T. & Hiraga, S. (1985). Effects of the ccd function of the F plasmid on bacterial growth. J. Bacteriol. 163, 841-849. Kampranis, S. C. & Maxwell, A. (1998a). Conformational changes in DNA gyrase revealed by limited proteolysis. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 22606-22614. Kampranis, S. C. & Maxwell, A. (1998b). The DNA gyrase-quinolone complex: ATP hydrolysis and the mechanism of DNA cleavage. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 22615-22626. Kampranis, S. C., Bates, A. D. & Maxwell, A. (1999a). A model for the mechanism of strand passage by DNA gyrase. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 96, 84148419. Kampranis, S. C., Gormley, N. A., Tranter, R., Orphanides, G. & Maxwell, A. (1999b). Probing the

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Jan Backmann, Martin Gellert, Mary O'Dea, Mike Smyth and Nicola Williams for critically reading the manuscript and for useful discussions. We thank Martine Couturier, Jonathan Heddle, Andy Jackson, Remy Loris, Clare Smith and Nicola Williams for gifts of proteins and DNA, and Kathryn Lilley (PNACL, University of Leicester) for peptide sequencing. S.C.K. was supported by a BBSRC-CASE studentship funded by the BBSRC and Glaxo-Wellcome, and a grant from the Alexander S. Onassis Public Bene®t Foundation. Support for this work was provided in part by grants from the Wellcome Trust and BBSRC. We acknowledge the Wellcome Trust for funding the purchase of the BIAcore 2000 system.

References
Ali, J. A., Jackson, A. P., Howells, A. J. & Maxwell, A. (1993). The 43-kDa N-terminal fragment of the gyr-

744
binding of coumarins and cyclothialidines to DNA gyrase. Biochemistry, 38, 1967-1976. Á Karoui, H., Bex, F., Dreze, P. & Couturier, M. (1983). Ham22, a miniF mutation which is lethal to host cell and promotes recA-dependent induction of lambdoid prophage. EMBO J. 2, 1863-1868. Loris, R., Dao-Thi, M.-H., Bahassi, E. M., Van Melderen, L. V., Poortmans, F., Liddington, R. C., Couturier, M. & Wyns, L. (1999). Crystal structure of CcdB, a topoisomerase poison from E. coli. J. Mol. Biol. 285, 1667-1677. Maki, S., Takiguchi, S., Miki, T. & Horiuchi, T. (1992). Modulation of DNA supercoiling activity of Escherichia coli DNA gyrase by F plasmid proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 12244-12251. Maki, S., Takiguchi, S., Horiuchi, T., Sekimizu, J. & Miki, T. (1996). Partner switching mechanisms in activation and rejuvenation of Escherichia coli DNA gyrase by F plasmid proteins, LetD (CcdB) and LetA (CcdA). J. Mol. Biol. 256, 473-482. Maxwell, A. (1997). DNA gyrase as a drug target. Trends Microbiol. 5, 102-109. Maxwell, A. & Critchlow, S. E. (1998). Mode of action. In Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology-Quinolone Antibacterials (Kuhlmann, J., Dalhoff, A. & Zeiler, H.-J., eds), vol. 127, pp. 119-166, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. Maxwell, A. & Gellert, M. (1984). The DNA dependence of the ATPase activity of DNA gyrase. J. Biol. Chem. 259, 14472-14480. Maxwell, A. & Howells, A. J. (1999). Overexpression and puri®cation of bacterial DNA gyrase. In Protocols for DNA Topoisomerases I: DNA Topology and Enzyme Puri®cation (Bjornsti, M.-A. & Osheroff, N., eds), pp. 135-144, Humana Press, Towata, New Jersey. Maxwell, A., Rau, D. C. & Gellert, M. (1986). Mechanistic studies of DNA gyrase. In Biomolecular Stereodynamics III. Proceedings of the Fourth Conversation in the Discipline of Biomolecular Stereodynamics (Sarma, R. H. & Sarma, M. H., eds), pp. 137-146, Adenine Press, Albany, NY. Miki, T., Yoshioka, K. & Horiuchi, T. (1984). Control of cell division by sex factor F in Escherichia coli I. The 42.84-43.6 F segment couples cell division of the host bacteria with replication of plasmid DNA. J. Mol. Biol. 174, 605-625. Miki, T., Park, J. A., Nagao, K., Murayama, N. & Horiuchi, T. (1992). Control of segregation of chromosomal DNA by sex factor F in Escherichia coli. J. Mol. Biol. 225, 39-52. Morais Cabral, J. H., Jackson, A. P., Smith, C. V., Shikotra, N., Maxwell, A. & Liddington, R. C. (1997). Structure of the DNA breakage-reunion domain of DNA gyrase. Nature, 388, 903-906. Orphanides, G. & Maxwell, A. (1994). Evidence for a conformational change in the DNA gyrase-DNA complex from hydroxyl radical footprinting. Nucl. Acids Res. 22, 1567-1575. Reece, R. J. & Maxwell, A. (1989). Tryptic fragments of the Escherichia coli DNA gyrase A protein. J. Biol. Chem. 264, 19648-19653.

DNA Gyrase-CcdB Interaction Reece, R. J. & Maxwell, A. (1991a). DNA gyrase: structure and function. CRC Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 26, 335-375. Reece, R. J. & Maxwell, A. (1991b). Probing the limits of the DNA breakage-reunion domain of the Escherichia coli DNA gyrase A protein. J. Biol. Chem. 266, 3540-3546. Roca, J. & Wang, J. C. (1992). The capture of a DNA double helix by an ATP-dependent protein clamp: a key step in DNA transport by type II DNA topoisomerases. Cell, 71, 833-840. Schacht, P. (1997). Clinical use of quinolones. In Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology-Quinolone Antibacterials (Kuhlmann, J., Dalhoff, A. & Zeiler, H.-J., eds), vol. 127, pp. 421-453, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. Scheirer, K. & Higgins, N. P. (1997). The DNA cleavage reaction of DNA gyrase. Comparison of stable ternary complexes formed with enoxacin and CcdB protein. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 27202-27209. Sugino, A., Peebles, C. L., Kruezer, K. N. & Cozzarelli, N. R. (1977). Mechanism of action of nalidixic acid: puri®cation of Escherichia coli nalA gene product and its relationship to DNA gyrase and a novel nicking-closing enzyme. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 74, 4767-4771. Tam, J. E. & Kline, B. C. (1989a). Control of the ccd operon in plasmid F. J. Bacteriol. 171, 2353-2360. Tam, J. E. & Kline, B. C. (1989b). The F plasmid ccd autorepressor is a complex of CcdA and ccdB proteins. Mol. Gen. Genet. 219, 26-32. Tingey, A. P. & Maxwell, A. (1996). Probing the role of the ATP-operated clamp in the strand-passage reaction of DNA gyrase. Nucl. Acids Res. 24, 4868-4873. Van Melderen, L., Bernard, P. & Couturier, M. (1994). Lon-dependent proteolysis of CcdA is the key control for activation of CcdB in plasmid-free segregant bacteria. Mol. Microbiol. 11, 1151-1157. Van Melderen, L., Dao Thi, M. H. Lecchi, P., Gottesman, S., Couturier, M. & Maurizi, M. R. (1996). ATPdependent degradation of CcdA by Lon protease. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 27730-27738. Wang, J. C. (1998). Moving one DNA double helix through another by a type II DNA topoisomerase: the story of a simple molecular machine. Quart. Rev. Biophys. 31, 107-144. Wigley, D. B. (1995). Structure and mechanism of DNA gyrase. In Nucleic Acids and Molecular Biology (Eckstein, F. & Lilley, D. M. J., eds), vol. 9, pp. 165176, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg. Williams, N. L. & Maxwell, A. (1999a). Locking the DNA gate of DNA gyrase: investigating the effects on DNA cleavage and ATP hydrolysis. Biochemistry, in the press. Williams, N. L. & Maxwell, A. (1999b). Probing the twogate mechanism of DNA gyrase using cysteine cross-linking. Biochemistry, in the press. Willmott, C. J. R., Critchlow, S. E., Eperon, I. C. & Maxwell, A. (1994). The complex of DNA gyrase and quinolone drugs with DNA forms a barrier to transcription by RNA polymerase. J. Mol. Biol. 242, 351-363.

Edited by I. B. Holland (Received 8 July 1999; received in revised form 14 September 1999; accepted 14 September 1999)

