BBRC
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 298 (2002) 598­602 www.academicpress.com

The domain-swapped dimer of cyanovirin-N contains two sets of oligosaccharide binding sites in solution
Laura G. Barrientos and Angela M. Gronenborn*
Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA Received 17 September 2002

Abstract

The binding of high-mannose oligosaccharides to the domain-swapped dimeric form of the potent HIV-inactivating protein cyanovirin-N (CV-N) was investigated in solution by NMR, complementing recent structural studies by X-ray crystallography on similar complexes [J. Biol. Chem. 277 (2002) 34336]. The crystal structures of CV-N dimer complexed with Man-9 and hexamannoside revealed two carbohydrate binding sites on opposite ends of the molecule. No binding was observed at site 1, previously identified on the solution monomer of CV-N [Structure 9 (2001) 931; Shenoy et al., Chem. Biol. 9 (2002) 1109]. Here, we report the presence of four sugar binding sites on the CV-N dimer in solution, identified by chemical shift mapping with hexamannoside and nonamannoside, synthetic substructures of Man-9. Our results demonstrate that in solution the domain-swapped CV-N dimer, like the CV-N monomer, contains two types of sites that are available for carbohydrate binding, suggesting that the occlusion of the primary sites in the crystal is due to specific features of the solid state. Ó 2002 Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.
Keywords: Cyanovirin-N; Domain-swapped dimer; High-mannose sugars; Protein­carbohydrate interaction; HIV inactivation

A number of high-resolution three-dimensional structures of the cyanobacterial lectin cyanovirin-N (CV-N) with and without bound carbohydrate have been determined by NMR and X-ray crystallography [1,2,4­7], aimed at investigating the structural basis for high-mannose-mediated binding of CV-N to the HIV-1 viral envelope protein gp120 [8­11]. CV-N consists of a 101 amino acid long polypeptide with an internal sequence duplication that can either fold into a compact monomeric bilobal structure with pseudo-symmetry or a domain-swapped dimer. In the monomer, the structural pseudo-symmetric domains AM and BM consist of residues [1­38/90­101] and [39­89] each comprising a triple-stranded b-sheet with a bhairpin packed on top. At the pseudo-twofold axis both domains are connected by two helical turns. Domain BM also contains a helical linker in the middle of the sequence (residues 51­56) whose counterpart in domain AM are the N- and C-termini. In the domain-swapped dimer (CV-N
*

Corresponding author. Fax: 1-301-496-1690. E-mail address: gronenborn@nih.gov (A.M. Gronenborn).

(D)) two monomers (monomer 1, M; monomer 2, M0 ) open up and interact with each other essentially via identical interactions as observed in the monomer. The swapped dimer in solution is in a meta-stable state slowly converting to monomer at physiological temperature [6], whereas it is the sole structure observed in all X-ray structures to date [1,5­7]. Using the domain notation of the monomer introduced above, the domain-swapped dimer contains the following four domains: two of these are identical to domain AM , although they contain residues from two different polypeptide chains. They are referred to subsequently as domains AD and AD , comprising residues 1­38 from monomer 1 (M) and 900 ­1010 from monomer 2 (M0 ), and residues 10 ­380 from M0 and 90­101 from M, respectively. The other two domains are similar, but not identical, to domain BM . They are referred to as domains BD and BD , comprising residues 39­50 and 510 ­890 from M and M0 , and residues 390 ­500 and 51­89 from M0 and M, respectively. They both differ from domain BM in the linker region that is helical in the monomer whereas it is essentially extended in the dimer. In solution,

0006-291X/02/$ - see front matter Ó 2002 Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved. PII: S 0 0 0 6 - 2 9 1 X ( 0 2 ) 0 2 4 8 9 - 0

L.G. Barrientos, A.M. Gronenborn / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 298 (2002) 598­602

599

residues in the monomer linker as well as those in the hinge of the dimeric species exhibit conformational mobility on the ms to s time scale [6]. The virucidal activity of CV-N against HIV involves the earliest events in infection, with the protein blocking essential interactions between the viral envelope glycoprotein and cellular receptors [8]. In particular, recognition of N-linked high-mannose oligosaccharides, Man-8 and Man-9, on gp120 was shown to be intimately involved in viral inactivation [9­11]. Studies by ITC and NMR with monomeric CV-N identified the consensus binding epitope on the sugar, namely the Mana1 ! 2Man moiety at the termini of the D1 and D3, and identified one carbohydrate binding pocket on each domain [2,3]: a lower affinity binding site on domain AM and a higher affinity binding site at domain BM . The conformation of the sugars in the bound state and critical carbohydrate­protein interactions between the Mana1 ! 2Man moiety and polar and charged amino acid residues on CV-N were delineated from the solution structure of monomeric CVN, complexed with Mana1 ! 2Man dimannose at the high-affinity site in domain BM [2] and from the crystal structure of Man-9 and hexamannoside (HM) bound in domains AD and AD of the domain-swapped dimer [1]. In the latter, density observed for the sugars revealed three stacked a1 ! 2-linked mannose rings for Man-9 and two stacked mannose rings for HM, with the remainder of the oligosaccharide protruding into solution. No sugar density was observed in the sites of domains BD =BD , primarily due to unfavorable steric interactions. We believe that crystal packing is the most likely cause for this, as evidenced by our solution data. Interestingly, these sites are occupied by a detergent molecule (CHES) used in the crystallization [1]. Here, we characterize the interaction of the domain-swapped dimer with synthetic sub-structures of Man-9, namely nonamannoside (NM) and HM [12,13] in solution by NMR. We delineate the critical residues for protein­carbohydrate interaction in domains BD =BD , including those of the flexible hinge region (E41, S52, N53, and E56), in addition to the previously identified sites on AD and AD . Our work yields new results not available from the previous structural studies and demonstrates the complementary nature of data obtained by X-ray crystallography and NMR.

with (x; y; z)-shielded gradient triple resonance probes. Titrations were performed with protein samples containing 100 lM CV-N (concentrations are reported for the monomeric unit) in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 6.0, 0.05% NaN3 , and 90% H2 O/10% D2 O, and changes in the 1 H­15 N HSQC spectra recorded were followed after each aliquot addition from stock solutions of 7.7 mM nonamannoside and 3.0 mM hexamannoside. Protein and oligosaccharides were quantitated as described before [3]. Spectra were processed and analyzed with NMRPipe [14]. The molecular sizes of the complexes at the end of the titration were assessed based on heteronuclear T2 values for the amide protons and nitrogens. These values were previously correlated with analytical ultracentrifugation data [3,6].

Results and discussion The domain-swapped dimer is the only quaternary state of CV-N to date that crystallizes over a wide window of conditions [1,5­7]. Interestingly, even the P51G mutant that exists preferentially in a very stable, monomeric form has proved refractory towards crystallization, despite considerable effort [6]. Therefore, crystallographic studies on CV-N/high-mannose oligosaccharide complexes contain only the domain-swapped dimeric species [1]. In particular, the high pH tetragonal crystals were those that proved successful for determining sugar/CV-N structures. These structures revealed bound sugars in domains AD and AD and no carbohydrate was observed in domains BD and BD , irrespective of whether the complexes were formed by co-crystallization or by soaking of protein crystals with the oligosaccharide [1]. The question therefore arose why no sugar was bound on domains BD and BD of CV-N in the crystal, given that this site was identified as the primary site on domain BM in the solution monomer [2,3]. Since pure dimeric CV-N can be produced and was shown to be very similar in intra-domain packing and overall structure to the crystal structure dimer [6], we investigated the interaction of the solution dimer with two synthetic carbohydrate substructures of Man-9, HM, and NM, by titration and chemical shift mapping using NMR. Fig. 1A displays the 1 H­15 N HSQC spectrum of uncomplexed CV-N(D) (black contours). A single set of resonances is observed for both monomeric units in the dimer, indicative of a symmetric structure [6]. Interestingly, amino acids whose resonances were missing or severely broadened reside in the hinge region of the dimer. Such line-broadening is generally indicative of conformational averaging on the ms­s time scale. The structural region involved is highlighted in yellow on the backbone representation of the domain-swapped dimer structure in Fig. 1B. Addition of 1/2 molar equivalent of HM to CV-N(D) resulted in easily detectable changes in the spectrum involving amino acids of all four domains AD =AD and BD =BD . This can be appreciated immediately from those resonances displayed in the inset of Fig. 1A (yellow contours). Both slow exchange and intermediate exchange behavior were noted. Addition of a second half-equivalent of sugar resulted in more changes (inset,

Materials and methods
Preparation of solution CV-N(D). Uniformly 15 N-labeled CV-N(D) was produced and purified as reported previously [6]. Purified protein was dialyzed against 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 6.0. Sample integrity and purity were assessed by Superdex-75 column chromatography, mass spectrometry, and two-dimensional 1 H­15 N HSQC spectroscopy. NMR titration experiments. In order to maintain CV-N in dimeric state [6], all NMR experiments were carried out at 20 °C. Spectra were recorded on Bruker DRX600 and DMX750 spectrometers equipped

600

L.G. Barrientos, A.M. Gronenborn / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 298 (2002) 598­602

Fig. 1. Interaction of hexamannoside with CV-N(D). (A) Superposition of the 600 MHz 1 H­15 N HSQC spectra of sugar-free CV-N(D) (black contours, 100 lM in monomer concentration) and CV-N(D) in the presence of an 18-fold molar excess of hexamannoside (red contours). The resonances arising from residues in the carbohydrate binding sites of domains AD =AD and BD =BD are labeled in blue by residue type and number, and the corresponding free (black) and complex (red) cross-peaks are connected. Resonances arising from residues in the hinge region exhibit extreme line broadening in spectrum of the free protein and only those resonances that sharpened up and became visible upon sugar binding are labeled in lighter type. Resonances marked by asterisks (*) have not been assigned yet and may be due to residues in the hinge or the N-terminal region. The inset shows a close-up view of the dotted region displaying superpositions of intermediate points in the HM titration (1:1, yellow contours; 1:2, pink contours; and 1:18, red contours). (B) Backbone tubular representation of CV-N(D) delineating those residues whose backbone amide resonances are affected upon sugar binding. Residues whose amide resonances exhibit large changes upon hexamannoside binding are colored blue, those not affected gray, and hinge residues whose resonances exhibit extreme line broadening in the free protein are colored yellow. The four structural domains are labeled AD , AD , BD , and BD , and their exact sequence delineations are defined in the text. The N- and C-termini of each monomeric unit in the dimer are labeled N and C (monomer 1; M) and N0 and C0 (monomer 2; M0 ). Disulfide bonds are shown in yellow. The molecular structure was generated with the program GRASP [15] and the coordinates of CV-N(D) employed are those of the solution NMR structure (Accession Code 1L5E) [6]. (C) Schematic representation of the chemical formula of NM and HM. The green triangles represents single mannose units and the orange triangle represents the core linkage. The binding epitopes (a1 ! 2-linked dimannoses) on the D1 and D3 arms are circled.

pink contours) and the addition of an excess of sugar (18 molar equivalents of HM with respect to monomeric CV-N; 9 sugars per site) resulted in the spectrum superimposed in red contours onto the free protein spectrum (Fig. 1A). Chemical shift perturbations were observed for residues K3, F4, T7, C8, R24, T25, N26, Y29, D35, A92, N93, I94, and G96 in domains AD =AD and V43, D44, G45, S46, K48, T57, C58, T75, R76, A77, Q78, Q79, and F80 in domains BD =BD demonstrating that HM binds to sites on both domains. The two protein areas involved are displayed on the CVN(D) structure in Fig. 1B. Of special interest is the reappearance of those resonances that were exchange broadened in the free protein spectrum beyond their detection limit. In particular, amino acids residing in the hinge region, F54, I55, and E56 and others lining the primary site in the monomer, such as L36, V37, S38, and V39 (light labels in Fig. 1A) sharpen up and are clearly observable for the sugar­protein complex. This proves

that HM is interacting with the carbohydrate site in domain BD =BD and the observed narrowing of the resonances of the associated amino acids suggests that sugar binding results in a less flexible, well-defined conformation of this part of the polypeptide chain. At this point it may be worth mentioning that at the highest HM concentration employed (9 sugars/site), the site on domains BD =BD are saturated, whereas those on AD =AD are not, indicating a slightly higher affinity of HM for the sites on domains B compared to those on A. Structurally, the protein remains in its domainswapped, dimeric state with no conversion of the dimer to the monomer. Evidence for this is the different spectrum with HM presented here, compared to the HMsaturated monomer spectrum [3]. The overall molecular size of the CV-N(D)/HM complex was estimated from NMR relaxation measurements. The amide proton and nitrogen T2 values are 21 and 58 ms, respectively, and they are similar to those previously reported for the

L.G. Barrientos, A.M. Gronenborn / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 298 (2002) 598­602

601

Fig. 2. Comparison of the sugar binding sites on CV-N(D). Molecular surface representations of the binding pockets in domains AD =AD (A) and BD =BD (B), with residues exhibiting large or no chemical shift changes in their amide resonance positions upon sugar binding colored blue and gray, respectively. Hinge residues in the domain-swapped dimer are colored in yellow. Those residues that are occupying different positions in the low and high pH X-ray structures of the free domain-swapped dimer are indicated by white dotted circles. The origin of the arrow indicates the positions of residues E41, P510 , S520 , N530 , E560 , and T570 in high pH tetragonal crystal structure and the tip of the arrow indicates the corresponding position of the same residues in the low pH trigonal crystal structure. The coordinates used for the figure were those of the high pH tetragonal crystals (accession code 1L5B) [6]. Residues labeled in (A) and (B) are those identified in the X-ray structure of CV-N(D) as contacting Man-9 [1] and those observed in the solution complex with a1 ! 2 dimannose [2], respectively. Molecular structures were generated with the program GRASP [15].

uncomplexed CV-N dimer [6]. It is most likely that the interaction between the carbohydrate and the CV-N dimer involves the terminal a1 ! 2-linked dimannose unit of the D1 arm of HM (Fig. 1C), as previously observed for monomeric CV-N [2,3]. Binding of NM to CV-N(D) to dimeric CV-N was also investigated. NM, like Man-9, contains three consecutive a1 ! 2-linked mannoses in the D1 and D2 arms and two consecutive a1 ! 2-linked mannoses in the D3 arm (Fig. 1C). Again, upon titration with NM, the chemical shift changes for the protein were essentially identical to those observed for HM binding, indicating that the same regions of the protein are involved (data not shown). In contrast to the results with HM, however, heteronuclear T2 values for the amide protons yielded average values of 11 ms and low sensitivity/high noise levels prevented the measurement of amide nitrogen T2 values. The lower T2 values are indicative of higher order complex formation, clearly of larger size than dimeric CV-N. The increased size of the NM complexes suggests that each binding site on the protein can potentially interact arbitrarily with more than one arm of NM and that CV-N(D) can bind NM at all four binding sites, resulting in two dimer molecules binding to at least one or two sugars. It is interesting to note that in the presence of 10 molar equivalents of NM (5 sugars/site) saturation of the sites in domains BD =BD had not been reached, while those in domains AD =AD are saturated at that point. This is different from the observation with HM and suggests that unfavorable steric interactions render the affinity of sites in domains BD =BD significantly lower than that observed for BM for a multivalent oligosaccharide such as NM.

In contrast to the results for CV-N(M), CV-N(D) appears to bind HM and NM with similar affinities at both sites, whereas for CV-N(M) the two carbohydrate binding sites exhibited distinctly different binding affinities--tight binding in domain BM and weaker binding in domain AM . Clues as to the origin of the similar binding affinities come from the comparison of the surface representations of the respective sites in Figs. 2A and B. The binding pocket topology in domain AD =AD is similar to that in domain BD =BD , when taking into account the conformational flexibility of the hinge region. This particular area of the protein is colored yellow in Fig. 2B. Indeed, the two crystal structures of the CV-N dimer exhibit different conformations in this region and the two conformations are schematically indicated on the protein surface by the dotted ovals. This suggests that the site BD =BD is structurally less defined than BM , possibly having lost some of the important contacts. Nevertheless, all four binding sites on dimeric CV-N are capable of interacting with carbohydrate in solution, demonstrating that the lack of binding observed in the crystal is most likely caused by the particulars of crystal packing.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Daniel M. Ratner and Peter H. Seeberger for supplying the hexa- and nonamannoside samples and to John M. Louis for preparing the dimeric CV-N. This work was supported in part by the Intramural AIDS Targeted Antiviral Program of the Office of the Director of the National Institutes of Health (to A.M.G.).

602

L.G. Barrientos, A.M. Gronenborn / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 298 (2002) 598­602 C.M. Laurencot, M.J. Currens, J.H. Cardellina, R.W. Buckheit, P.L. Nara, L.K. Pannell, R.C. Sowder, L.E. Henderson, Discovery of cyanovirin-N, a novel human immunodeficiency virusinactivating protein that binds viral surface envelope glycoprotein gp120: potential applications to microbicide development, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 41 (1997) 1521­1530. B.R. OÕKeefe, S.R. Shenoy, D. Xie, W. Zhang, J.M. Muschik, M.J. Currens, I. Chaiken, M.R. Boyd, Analysis of the interaction between the HIV-inactivating protein cyanovirin-N and soluble forms of the envelope glycoproteins gp120 and gp41, Mol. Pharmacol. 58 (2000) 982­992. A.J. Bolmstedt, B.R. OÕKeefe, S.R. Shenoy, J.B. McMahon, M.R. Boyd, Cyanovirin-N defines a new class of antiviral agent targeting N-linked, high-mannose glycans in an oligosaccharidespecific manner, Mol. Pharmacol. 59 (2001) 949­954. S.R. Shenoy, B.R. OÕKeefe, A.J. Bolmstedt, L.K. Cartner, M.R. Boyd, Selective interactions of the human immunodeficiency virus-inactivitating protein cyanovirin-N with high-mannose oligosaccharides on gp120 and other glycoproteins, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 297 (2001) 704­710. O.J. Plante, E.R. Palmacci, P.H. Seeberger, Automated solidphase synthesis of oligosaccharides, Science 291 (2001) 1523­ 1527. D.M. Ratner, O.J. Plante, P.H. Seeberger, A linear synthesis of branched high-mannose oligosaccharides from the HIV-1 viral surface glycoprotein gp120, Eur. J. Org. Chem. 5 (2002) 826­833. R. Delaglio, S. Grzesiek, G.W. Vuister, G. Zhu, J. Pfizer, A. Bax, NMRPipe: a multidimensional spectral processing system based on UNIX pipes, J. Biomol. NMR 6 (1995) 277­293. A. Nichols, K.A. Sharp, B. Honig, Protein folding and association; insights from interfacial and thermodynamic properties of hydrocarbons, Proteins Struct. Func. Gen. 11 (1991) 281­296.

References
[1] I. Botos, B.R. OÕKeefe, S.R. Shenoy, L.K. Cartner, D.M. Ratner, P.H. Seeberger, M.R. Boyd, A. Wlodawer, Structures of the complexes of a potent anti-HIV protein cyanovirin-N and highmannose oligosaccharides, J. Biol. Chem. 277 (2002) 34336. [2] C.A. Bewley, Solution structure of a cyanovirin-N:Mana1­ 2Mana complex: structural basis for high-affinity carbohydratemediated binding to gp120, Structure 9 (2001) 931­940. [3] S.R. Shenoy, L.G. Barrientos, D.M. Ratner, B.R. OÕKeefe, P.H. Seeberger, A.M. Gronenborn, M.R. Boyd, Multisite and multivalent binding between cyanovirin-N and branched oligomannosides: Calorimetric and NMR characterization, Chem. Biol. 9 (2002) 1109­1118. [4] C.A. Bewley, K.R. Gustafson, M.R. Boyd, D.G. Covell, A. Bax, G.M. Clore, A.M. Gronenborn, Solution structure of cyanovirinN, a potent HIV-inactivating protein, Nat. Struct. Biol. 5 (1998) 571­578. [5] F. Yang, C.A. Bewley, J.M. Louis, K.R. Gustafson, M.R. Boyd, A.M. Gronenborn, G.M. Clore, A. Wlodawer, Crystal structure of cyanovirin-N, a potent HIV-inactivating protein, shows unexpected domain swapping, J. Mol. Biol. 288 (1999) 403­412. [6] L.G. Barrientos, J.M. Louis, I. Botos, T. Mori, Z. Han, B.R. OÕKeefe, M.R. Boyd, A. Wlodawer, A.M. Gronenborn, The domain-swapped dimer of cyanovirin-N is a metastable folding intermediate; reconciliation of X-ray and NMR structures, Structure 10 (2002) 673­686. [7] I. Botos, T. Mori, L.K. Cartner, M.R. Boyd, A. Wlodawer, Domain-swapped structure of a mutant of cyanovirin-N, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 294 (2002) 184­190. [8] M.R. Boyd, K.R. Gustafson, J.B. McMahon, R.H. Shoemaker, B.R. OÕKeefe, T. Mori, R.J. Gulakowski, L. Wu, M.I. Rivera,

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

