VIROLOGY

ARTICLE NO.

225, 240­242 (1996) 0595

SHORT COMMUNICATION Mutation in the Influenza Virus Neuraminidase Gene Resulting in Decreased Sensitivity to the Neuraminidase Inhibitor 4-Guanidino-Neu5Ac2en Leads to Instability of the Enzyme
J. L. MCKIMM-BRESCHKIN,1 M. MCDONALD, T. J. BLICK, and P. M. COLMAN
Biomolecular Research Institute, 343 Royal Parade, Parkville, Victoria 3052 Australia Received May 7, 1996; accepted August 27, 1996 We previously isolated a variant of the influenza virus NWS/G70C, with a decreased sensitivity to the neuraminidasespecific inhibitor 4-guanidino-Neu5Ac2en in vitro, which has a mutation in one of the conserved residues of the neuraminidase Glu 119 to Gly. Despite the mutation, purified neuraminidase demonstrated the same specific activity as the parent neuraminidase. In contrast, characterization of a similar mutant by another group revealed a low specific activity of the enzyme. We confirm here that the specific activity of our variant is the same as that of the parent, but report that this mutation makes the enzyme inherently unstable, at high and low temperatures, either on the virion or as purified neuraminidase. Thus, for a valid determination of specific activity the concentration of native NA needs to be determined at the time of enzyme assay. Structurally, the instability may be partially explained by the introduction of a side chain (Gly), which carries a greater entropy penalty in condensation of the structure from the unfolded to the folded state and this, together with the loss of stabilizing interaction between Glu 119 and its neighbors in the active site, is not compensated for by the water molecule 1996 Academic Press, Inc. occupying the position of the carboxylate group (6).

Influenza infection remains a major health problem throughout the world, in both developed and developing countries. Although a vaccine is available, the continual evolution of the virus surface proteins, hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA), necessitates annual immunization. Although the surface residues change, NA possesses an enzyme active site with residues that are conserved through all influenza subtypes (1). Based on the knowledge of the three-dimensional structure of the NA complexed with sialic acid (2), an NA specific inhibitor has been designed, 4-guanidino-2,4,-dideoxy-2,3-dehydroN-acetylneuraminic acid (4-guanidino-Neu5Ac2en), which has potent antiviral activity, both in vivo and in vitro (3­5). An essential part of the development of antiviral compounds is the documentation of the emergence of resistant variants. We have recently documented the emergence of variants in both the HA and the NA of the NWS/ G70C virus (6, 7). Another report has described the same NA mutation in the NWS/G70C virus (8), namely the Glu 119 Gly, and more recently the same mutation has been described in a Turkey, H4N2 virus (9). Glu 119 is one of the conserved residues in the active site, suggesting that this site is tolerant of a change that preserves activity but reduces drug binding. There was, however, a discrepancy in the data reported for the specific activity of the

1 To whom correspondence and reprint requests should be addressed. Fax: 613 9347 5481. E-mail: jennyb@mel.dbe.csiro.au.

NWS/G70C mutant NA enzyme between our results (6) and those of Staschke et al. (8), where the latter group reported that the mutant enzyme displayed only 5% of the specific activity of the parent virus. Evidence presented here confirms that although the specific activity of our mutant enzyme is no different than that of the parent virus, the enzyme is inherently unstable both as the purified NA protein and on the virion, and this instability is demonstrated at both low and high temperatures. Therefore for a valid measurement of specific activity the enzyme activity and concentration of native NA need to be determined concurrently. To quantitate the specific activity of the NA enzyme, NA crystals were taken, washed, and redissolved, so that enzyme activity, as well as the NA protein, could be quantitated (6). Neuraminidase enzyme activity was determined using a modification of the method of Potier et al. (10) as described previously (6), using methylumbelliferone N-acetlyneuraminic acid (MUNANA, 0.2 mM, Sigma) as the substrate. NA protein was quantitated in an ELISA assay, as described previously (6), using a monoclonal anti-NA antibody, NC-10, to bind NA onto the wells. When freshly assayed there was no difference between the ratio of NA protein to NA activity between the mutant and parent NAs (Fig. 1a). However, after storage at 4 for 7 weeks this material was retitrated, and the mutant NA activity had decreased by 90%, while the activity of the parent NA remained unchanged. When we
240

0042-6822/96 $18.00
Copyright 1996 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

SHORT COMMUNICATION

241

the enzyme assay to determine a dilution that was in the linear portion of the activity curve. To investigate thermal stability at elevated temperatures, duplicates of the selected dilution were prepared, and samples were incubated at 37, 45, 50, 55, and 60 for 1 hr. Enzyme activity was then determined in duplicate for each sample, and the activity was expressed as a percentage of the original sample held at 4 for 1 hr (Fig. 2a). After 1 hr the G70C4G mutant enzyme was significantly more labile at temperatures greater than 45 . At 55 there was less than 5% NA activity of the G70C4-G virus remaining, whereas there was still greater than 80% activity of the parent virus. Although we had shown rapid inactivation of NA enzyme activity at elevated temperatures, the virus would

FIG. 1. Effect of storage of purified NA at 4 . (a) Crystals of both wild-type NWS/G70C (WT) and mutant G70C4-G NA were redissolved and the activity was assayed in a 96-well, MUNANA-based enzyme activity assay. NA protein was quantitated in a capture ELISA, using the NC-10 monoclonal anti-NA antibody, which only reacts with native NA. (b) The same samples were retitrated after storage at 4 for 7 weeks, using the same dilutions. Serial twofold dilutions were prepared in parallel for each sample for both ELISA and MUNANA assays. Absorbance is higher for the second ELISA experiment as the assay was developed for a longer period.

quantitated NA protein in the ELISA assay (6), there was a strong correlation between the decrease in enzyme activity of the mutant and a decrease of mutant NA protein reacting in the ELISA (Fig. 1b). The results for the parent NA also correlated, demonstrating no change in either NA activity or NA protein reacting in the ELISA. The monoclonal antibody therefore appears to bind only to the active form of NA. These results demonstrated that the purified mutant NA was more unstable than the purified NA of the parent virus. To further investigate the stability of NA on virions and the kinetics of inactivation, stocks of the parent NWS/ G70C and the G70C4-G mutant virus (6) were prepared in Madin­Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells, in the absence of any inhibitor. Each virus stock was titrated in

FIG. 2. Inactivation of NA enzyme activity. Dilutions of the parent NWS/G70C (WT) and mutant G70C4-G viruses were prepared, samples were incubated at the specified temperatures, and residual activity was assayed. (a) Samples were incubated for 1 hr. (b) Tubes were incubated at 37 and samples were removed from each tube at 24-hr intervals. (c) Tubes were incubated at 4 for 2 weeks, and samples were removed on Days 0, 1, 2, 4, 7, 10, and 14.

242

SHORT COMMUNICATION

not be exposed to such high temperatures during normal growth or processing for purification of the NA. Extended incubations at a lower temperature may also achieve the same net result. The selected dilution of each of the two viruses was therefore incubated in duplicate at 37 for 7 days (Fig. 2b) and at 4 for 14 days (Fig. 2c). Samples were removed as indicated and were snap frozen and stored at 070 until the incubations were completed. All samples for a given temperature were tested simultaneously in an enzyme assay. Each sample was assayed in duplicate, and the activity was expressed as a percentage of the original activity from the Day 0 sample. Duplicate measurements were within 10% of each other. At 37 the NA on the parent virus was stable, with no loss of activity after 4 days of incubation and still retaining greater than 60% of the activity after 7 days. In contrast there was a marked decrease in activity of the NA of the G70C4-G variant, with only 20% of the activity remaining after 4 days. Even at 4 the G70C4-G NA was unstable, losing 60% of the original activity after 2 weeks at 4 , compared to a 10% loss of the parent NA activity. This correlated with inactivation of the purified mutant NA observed after storage at 4 . Our NA purification method requires minimal incubation periods at 37 . Virus is pelleted directly from allantoic fluid, followed by two short incubations with pronase at 37 , each for approximately 2­2.5 hr (11). In contrast, the method employed by Staschke et al. (8) requires initial purification of virus by adsorption to and subsequent elution from red blood cells at 37 , as well as an overnight incubation at 37 for the pronase cleavage step. Based on the instability of the NA we have demonstrated here, these extended incubation periods would result in significant inactivation of the purified mutant NA. Since they also assayed total protein, rather than native NA protein, the total protein would remain constant, although the NA was significantly denatured, thus leading to the conclusion that the mutant NA had a lower specific activity. Although these authors also reported that a lower specific activity was obtained using virions as the source of NA, they did not provide details of quantitation of the native NA on these virions, hence these calculations may not take into account the contribution of denatured NA to total NA protein. Structurally, there are two effects of the mutation that would affect the stability of NA. First, the replacement of the glutamic acid with glycine is expected to be destabilizing because the mutant has higher entropy than the wild type in the unfolded state. Several examples in which Gly to Ala point substitutions result in increased stability have been reported (12). The prediction would be that the Glu 119 Ala mutant described by Gubareva et al. (9) would be more stable than the Glu to Gly mutant because of the presence of the b-carbon in the Ala side

chain. The other important structural feature of the mutant is the presence of a water molecule occupying the space where the carboxylate of Glu 119 is found in the wild type. Evaluating the contribution of this water molecule to the overall stability of the protein is nontrivial and would involve consideration of entropy loss of that water molecule and the differences in the enthalpy of its interactions with protein atoms on one hand and the other solvent atoms on the other hand. In a recent paper (7), we also described mutants with decreased sensitivity to the 4-guanidino-Neu5Ac2en that had mutations in their HA, rather than in their NA. Two of these mutants also possessed HAs which were more thermolabile than the protein of the parent virus. As more of these mutants are isolated and characterized we may find that although the mutations may result in a decrease in sensitivity to the inhibitors, they may also compromise the stability of the NA or HA protein of the virus. Staschke et al. (8) reported that the Glu 119 Gly mutation affected the kinetics of replication of the virus in vitro, although it did not affect the ultimate yield of virus. The implication of the instability of this mutation on replication of this virus in vivo has yet to be determined. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by funding from Glaxo Wellcome Australia Pty. Ltd. We thank Jose Varghese for helpful discussions.

REFERENCES
1. Varghese, J. N., and Colman, P. M., J. Mol. Biol. 221, 473­486 (1991). 2. Varghese, J. N., McKimm-Breschkin, J. L., Caldwell, J. B., Kortt, A. A., and Colman, P. M., Proteins 14, 327­332 (1992). 3. von Itzstein, M., Wu, W. Y., Kok, G. B., Pegg, M. S., Dyason, J. C., Jin, B., Phan, T. V., Smythe, M. L., White, H. F., Oliver, S. W., Colman, P. M., Varghese, J. N., Ryan, D. M., Woods, J. M., Bethell, R. C., Hotham, V. J., Cameron, J. M., and Penn, C. R., Nature (London) 363, 418­423 (1993). 4. Woods, J. M., Bethell, R. C., Coates, J. A. V., Healy, N., Hiscox, S. A., Pearson, B. A., Ryan, M., Ticehurst, J., Tilling, J., Walcott, S. M., and Penn, C. R., Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 37, 1473­1479 (1993). 5. Hayden, F. G., Treanor, J. J., Betts, R. F., Lobo, M., Esinhart, J. D., and Hussey, E. K., J. Am. Med. Assoc. 275, 295­299 (1996). 6. Blick, T. J., Tiong, T., Sahasrabudhe, A., Varghese, J. N., Colman, P. M., Hart, G. J., Bethell, R. C., and McKimm-Breschkin, J. L., Virology 214, 475­484, (1995). 7. McKimm-Breschkin, J. L., Blick, T. J., Sahasrabudhe, A. V., Tiong, T., Marshall, D., Hart, G. J., Bethell, R. C., and Penn, C. R., Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 40, 40­46 (1996). 8. Staschke, K. A., Colacino, J. M., Baxter, A. J., Air, G. M., Bansal, A., Hornback, W. J., Munroe, J. E., and Laver, W. G., Virology 214, 642­ 646 (1995). 9. Gubareva, L. V., Bethell, R. C., Hart, G. J., Murti, K. G., Penn, C. R., and Webster, R. G., J. Virol. 70, 1818­1827 (1996). 10. Potier, M., Mameli, L., Belislem, M., Dallaire, L., and Melanxon, S. B., Anal. Biochem. 94, 287­296 (1979). 11. McKimm-Breschkin, J. L., Caldwell, J. B., Guthrie, R. E., and Kortt, A. A., J. Virol. Methods 32, 121­124 (1991). 12. Matthews, B., Biochemistry 26, 6885­6888 (1987).

