Protein Expression and Purification 15, 171­177 (1999) Article ID prep.1998.0992, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

Purification and Characterization of a Plant Antimicrobial Peptide Expressed in Escherichia coli
Stuart J. Harrison,* Ailsa M. McManus, John P. Marcus,* Ken C. Goulter,* Jodie L. Green,* Katherine J. Nielsen, David J. Craik, Donald J. Maclean,* and John M. Manners* ,1
*Cooperative Research Centre for Tropical Plant Pathology and Centre for Drug Design and Development, University of Queensland, Brisbane 4072, Australia

Received June 2, 1998, and in revised form September 28, 1998

MiAMP1 is a low-molecular-weight, cysteine-rich, antimicrobial peptide isolated from the nut kernel of Macadamia integrifolia. A DNA sequence encoding MiAMP1 with an additional ATG start codon was cloned into a modified pET vector under the control of the T7 RNA polymerase promoter. The pET vector was cotransformed together with the vector pSB161, which expresses a rare arginine tRNA. The peptide was readily isolated in high yield from the insoluble fraction of the Escherichia coli extract. The purified peptide was shown to have an identical molecular weight to the native peptide by mass spectroscopy indicating that the N-terminal methionine had been cleaved. Analysis by NMR spectroscopy indicated that the refolded recombinant peptide had a similar overall three-dimensional structure to that of the native peptide. The peptide inhibited the growth of phytopathogenic fungi in vitro in a similar manner to the native peptide. To our knowledge, MiAMP1 is the first antimicrobial peptide from plants to be functionally expressed in E. coli. This will permit a detailed structure­function analysis of the peptide and studies of its mode of action on phytopathogens. © 1999 Academic Press

Cysteine-rich, low-molecular-weight, antimicrobial peptides have been isolated from several plant, animal, and microbial sources. Many of these have been shown to possess inhibitory activity toward phytopathogens and expression of these peptides has the potential to confer disease resistance in transgenic plants (1,2). Antimicrobial peptides are either produced constitutively in some plant organs, e.g., seeds (1), or synthe1 To whom correspondence should be addressed at Cooperative Research Centre for Tropical Plant Pathology, Level 5, John Hines Building, University of Queensland, Brisbane 4072, Australia. Fax: 61-7-33654771. E-mail: j.manners@tpp.uq.edu.au.

sized locally and systemically after pathogen challenge (3). As such, antimicrobial proteins are most probably important components of the plant defense system. To fully understand the role of antimicrobial peptides in plant defense it is important to develop techniques for the study of their mode of action and function. The peptide MiAMP1 has been isolated from the nut kernels of Macadamia integrifolia and has in vitro inhibitory activity against numerous commercially important plant pathogens (4). In this report we describe a method for the production of this peptide in vitro. Large quantities of proteins and peptides are often necessary to allow full characterization of biological activity, three-dimensional structure, and mode of action. Until recently, the only way to obtain large quantities of MiAMP1 was to extract it from nut kernels. This is laborious and yields little protein. Recombinant DNA techniques permit the production of peptides and proteins in microorganisms so that large quantities can be purified. There are some reports of the production of antimicrobial peptides from animals in Escherichia coli (5) and yeast (6) but there is only one report of the in vitro expression and production of a plant antimicrobial peptide (7). In this case, a plant defensin originally purified from radish seeds was expressed in yeast. The radish defensin was expressed in yeast from a gene that encoded a preproprotein precursor from which the mature peptide was produced and secreted (7). E. coli provides a potentially simpler system for the expression of plant antimicrobial peptides and may be of more general use than yeast for the expression of peptides with inhibitory activity against fungi. However, to our knowledge the expression of functional antimicrobial peptides of plant origin in E. coli has not been reported. Previously we have shown that the plant antimicrobial peptide MiAMP1 inhibited the growth of baker's yeast but was inactive against most gram-negative bacteria including E. coli (4). Herein, we
171

1046-5928/99 $30.00 Copyright © 1999 by Academic Press All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

172

HARRISON ET AL.

describe the direct expression, purification, and characterization of a fully active and correctly folded form of MiAMP1 obtained using an E. coli expression system.
MATERIALS AND METHODS

Isolation of Basic Protein from E. coli Extracts Following growth and induction of the transformed E. coli, cells were centrifuged for 10 min at 5000 rpm and resuspended in 20 mM Tris (pH 9) containing 10 mM EDTA and 0.1 mM PMSF. The cells were lysed using a French Pressure Cell (Sim Aminco) at 1000 psi setting in a 40-mL pressure cell. Lysed cells were then incubated for 2 h at 4°C in the presence of DNase. Following incubation the mixture was centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 30 min to separate the insoluble material from the soluble fraction. The supernatant was passed over an anion-exchange column (Q Sepharose Fast Flow, Pharmacia) equilibrated with 20 mM Tris, pH 9. The flowthrough from 9) protein this column represented the basic (pI fraction. The pellet of insoluble material from the initial centrifugation was resolubilized overnight at 4°C with gentle shaking using 6 M guanidine hydrochloride and then centrifuged at 15,000 rpm to remove the remaining insoluble material after resolublization. This solution was then rapidly diluted (1:20) with 50 mM Trisbuffered saline containing 1.5 M urea and shaken gently for 6 h. The urea and guanidine were removed by dialysis against 10 mM 2-(morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES) 2 pH 6 plus 10 mM EDTA. After the completion the sample was removed from dialysis and frozen. Cation-Exchange Chromatography The dialyzed protein sample was adjusted to pH 6 by addition of 1/25 volume of 500 mM MES pH 6 and applied to a Source S High Performance column (18.5 mL) (Pharmacia) previously equilibrated with 20 mM MES pH 6. Gradients were run (60 min at 5 mL/min) from 0 ­2 M NaCl and the eluate was monitored at 280 nm and collected in 20-mL fractions. Reverse-Phase High-Pressure Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) Reverse-phase HPLC was performed on a Pep-S (C2/ C18, Pharmacia) column (25 0.93 cm) equilibrated with 95% H 2 O/5% acetonitrile (MeCN)/0.1% TFA (100% A). The column was eluted at 3 mL/min with a 60-min linear gradient (180 mL) from 100% A to 100% B (50% H 2O/50% MeCN/0.1% TFA). The eluate was monitored at 214 nm. Fractions (3 mL) were collected, vacuum dried, and resuspended in 1 mL of water three times to remove traces of TFA. Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA protein assay reagent (Pierce) following manufacturer's recommended protocol using bovine serum albumin as a standard.
2

Vector Construction Cloning procedures and DNA sequencing were undertaken using standard recombinant DNA techniques (8). The cDNA clone pMiAMP1 described previously (4) encoded a preprotein that included an N-terminal 26-aa signal sequence that was cleaved in planta to produce the 76-aa mature peptide (4). Using pMiAMP1 as template, the coding region of the 76-aa mature peptide MiAMP1 was amplified by the PCR using oligonucleotide primers Mi1 (5 -ACACCATATGAGTGCATTTACAGTATGAGTG-3 ) and Mi2 (5 -GAAGAGTATCTT CATCCAATGCTAAGGATCCACAC-3 ). These primers amplified a 251-nucleotide fragment and introduced an Nde1 restriction endonuclease site which included a new ATG codon at the 5 end of the coding sequence of the mature MiAMP1 peptide. Translation initiation from this AUG codon would produce a 77-aa peptide with an additional N-terminal methionine. A BamH1 site was included at the 3 end to facilitate cloning. The amplified fragment was digested with Nde1­BamH1 and subcloned into the Nde1­BamH1 sites of a modified form of the vector pET17b (Novagen Ltd.) and the insert sequence was confirmed. The vector pET17b was modified by removing the region that encodes the T7 expression Tag so that no additional amino acid residues would be added to the carboxyterminus of the MiAMP1 peptide. The resulting plasmid for expression of MiAMP1 was termed pEMi2. Expression studies were undertaken in the E. coli genotype BL21 [(F , ompT, hsdS B (r B m B ), gal, dcm(DE3)], which contains an IPTG-inducible T7 polymerase (9). SDS/PAGE Electrophoresis was performed on a precast 10 ­20% polyacrylamide/tricine gradient gel (Novex) following the manufacturers recommendations. Standards (BioRad) were used to determine approximate molecular masses. Growth and Induction of E. coli Cultures for protein expression were grown in NZCYM (10) and supplemented with 100 g/mL ampicillin and 50 g/mL kanamycin. Cultures were incubated at 37°C until OD 600 reached 0.6 whereupon protein expression was induced by the addition of 400 M IPTG.

Abbreviation used: 2-(morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid, MES.

EXPRESSION OF A PLANT ANTIMICROBIAL PEPTIDE

173

Mass Spectrometry Purified protein was subjected to mass spectrometric analysis at the Centre for Drug Design and Development, Brisbane. A PE-Sciex (Thornhill, Canada) API 111 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer with a pneumatically assisted electrospray (Ionspray) interface (25) was used. All samples were dissolved in acidified (0.1%TFA) MeCN­water (1:1) and injected with a syringe infusion pump at 3 L/min. Positive ion detection was performed at an orifice potential of 80 ­100 V. Full scan data were acquired using 0.1-Da steps and a dwell time of 0.5 ms. Reconstructed parent ion molecular weights were obtained using Biomultiview (PE-Sciex). One-Dimensional 1H NMR The NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker DMX 750 spectrometer equipped with a z-gradient unit. Protein concentrations were 1­1.5 mM in 90% H 2O/10% D 2O (pH 2.3, 308 K). One-dimensional 1H NMR experiments were run over 10,000 Hz with 16 K data points, 16 scans, a recycle delay of 1 s, and an acquisition time of 0.21 s. The H 2O solvent signal was suppressed using the Watergate sequence (11). Spectra were processed using UXNMR. FIDS were multiplied by an exponential function with a line broadening factor of 0.3 Hz. Chemical shifts were referenced externally to DSS at 0.00 ppm. Antimicrobial Activity Determinations All bioassays were carried out in 96-well microtiter plates with the test organism suspended in a defined growth medium (12). The test organism consisted of either cells or fungal spores (50,000 spores/mL). The test organism suspended in growth medium (50 L) was mixed with 50 L of test protein solution in a microtiter plate well with four replicates for each test solution. Water was added to 16 wells of each 96-well plate as a control. All fungi including yeast were tested at 25°C. Growth was monitored by measuring absorbance at 600 nm over timed intervals and percentage inhibition determined by comparison with controls. Growth inhibition as IC 50 values which are defined as 100 times the ratio of the change in absorbance of the mean growth in the control wells minus the change in absorbance in the test well over the mean change in absorbance of the control wells. Percentage inhibition levels used in the calculation of IC 50 values were taken from the second time period in the time course, i.e., 24 ­ 48 h for most other fungi and 24 ­36 h for the yeast.
RESULTS

FIG. 1. SDS­PAGE analysis of total protein from E. coli cultures containing the vectors pEMi2 and pSB161. Lane numbers refer to hours after induction of protein expression by addition of IPTG. NT refers to a sample of E. coli not transformed with the vectors. Lane M shows molecular weight markers with their size in kilodaltons indicated. The position of MiAMP1 is arrowed.

(4) using oligonucleotide primers that introduced a translation initiation codon. The amplified insert was then cloned into a modified pET vector to produce the expression construct pEMi2. Preliminary experiments suggested that expression of MiAMP1 from pEMi2 alone in E. coli was weak following induction with IPTG. Expression of eukaryotic genes in prokaryotes can be impeded by differences in codon usage. Arginine codons are especially a problem with two of the six variations in the triplet being very poorly represented in E. coli tRNAs. These arginine codons are present in the coding region of MiAMP1. To overcome this problem, pEMi2 was cotransformed with the plasmid pSB161 (13) that contains the argU gene encoding the rare tRNA arg4 (AGA). The production of tRNA arg4 then causes an increase in the chromosomal encoded tRNA arg corresponding to the AGG codon (14). Cultures of E. coli carrying both pEMi2 and pSB161 were then used for a time course study of the bacterial proteins expressed following IPTG induction (Fig. 1). The results demonstrated that the major protein present in the E. coli cells at 4 h after induction was a peptide with an approximate molecular weight of 9 kDa (Fig. 1). Purification of MiAMP1 Produced in E. coli A 2-L culture of BL21 (DE3) containing both pEMi2 and pSB161 was grown to logarithmic growth phase and induced with IPTG. Following isolation of the basic protein from both the soluble and the insoluble fractions the samples were further resolved by cation-exchange chromatography. Both the soluble and the insoluble fractions were composed of one major peak eluting at 200 mM NaCl in cation-exchange separations (Fig. 2A). Reverse-phase HPLC separation of this peak revealed one major protein component which eluted at 30% acetonitrile (data not shown). Table 1 displays the antimicrobial activity of each fraction

Vector Construction and Expression Induction The coding region of the mature antimicrobial peptide MiAMP1 was amplified from the cDNA clone pMiAMP1

174

HARRISON ET AL.

FIG. 2. Purification and mass spectrometric analysis of MiAMP1 obtained from E. coli. (A) Elution profile following cationic-exchange chromatography of resolubilized protein fractions; the major peak corresponding to MiAMP1 is indicated. (B) Mass spectrometric analysis of MiAMP1 purified from E. coli.

from the purification process and the approximate deduced yield of MiAMP1 at each step. The purification process resulted in at least a 50-fold increase in antiTABLE 1 Summary of the Purification of MiAMP1 Expressed in E. coli
Antimicrobial activity (IC 50 g/mL) N.D. 120 30 10

microbial activity from the crude extraction to the pure peptide. Analysis of E. coli-Expressed MiAMP1 Mass spectrometric analysis showed the peak to be composed of a single peptide with a mass of 8.13 kDa. This corresponded to the molecular weight of MiAMP1 isolated from nut kernels (Fig. 2B). This also indicated that the methionine codon added to the coding sequence to initiate translation was cleaved following production of the protein. The in vitro antifungal activity of expressed MiAMP1 was identical to that of nut kernel derived MiAMP1 against the five fungi selected (see Table 2). To physically compare the native and recombinant forms of MiAMP1, 1H NMR spectra of each were recorded under similar conditions. Figure 3 shows that the one-dimensional spectra of MiAMP1 produced in E. coli and that of the peptide purified from nut kernels were very similar suggesting that the global fold of these two peptides was essentially identical.
DISCUSSION

Purification step (1) (2) (3) (4) Crude extract Insoluble extract Cation exchange Reverse-phase HPLC

Purity (%) 5­10 8 33 99

Fold purification 1 1 4 12

Note. The antimicrobial activity of fractions from each purification step was assessed against the fungus Verticillium dahliae. Crude extract represents dialyzed extract from broken cells; insoluble extract is material from the insoluble pellet that has been resolubilized and dialyzed; cation-exchange and reverse-phase HPLC fractions represent pooled fractions from the respective purification steps. Antimicrobial activity is expressed as an IC 50 value ( g/mL) for each fraction. The calculated purity of MiAMP1 at each step is shown as a percentage of the protein in each fraction. N.D., not detected; antimicrobial activity was not detected in the crude extracts at concentrations as high as 500 g/ml due to the protein being present in insoluble protein bodies.

This paper describes the production in E. coli of MiAMP1, an antimicrobial peptide of Macadamia in-

EXPRESSION OF A PLANT ANTIMICROBIAL PEPTIDE

175

TABLE 2 A Comparison of the Antimicrobial Activities of MiAMP1 Produced in E. coli and MiAMP1 Isolated from Nut Kernels of Macadamia integrifolia
IC 50 ( g/mL) MiAMP1 (M. integrifolia) 10 10 5­10 5­10 2.5 MiAMP1 (E. coli) 10 10 5­10 5­10 2.5

Organism Verticillium dahliae Alternaria helianthi Sclerotinia sclerotiorum Fusarium oxysporum Saccharomyces cerevisiae

Note. Results are expressed as IC 50 values for the protein concentration ( g/mL) that gave 50% inhibition of growth. The growth phase from 24 to 48 h after inoculation was used for all determinations (4).

tegrifolia. A significant yield (5 mg per 2-L culture) of functionally active MiAMP1 was obtained using the modified pET vector under the control of a T7 promoter for expression in E. coli. The antimicrobial activity of MiAMP1 produced in E. coli was identical to that of the peptide isolated from nut kernels. To our knowledge,

MiAMP1 is the first antimicrobial peptide from plants to be functionally expressed in E. coli. The MiAMP1 produced using the E. coli expression system was identical to the native peptide. It was predicted that the MiAMP1 expressed in vitro would have a mass of 8.28 kDa which included the additional Nterminal methionine resulting from the AUG codon added to initiate translation. However, the mass spectrometric analysis demonstrated that the N-terminal methionine residue had been cleaved. Protein synthesis in bacteria starts with formylmethionine, which initiates translation. The formyl group is generally hydrolyzed by a deformylase followed by excision of the methionine by methionyl-aminopeptidase. Excision of methionine residues is dependent upon the size of the second amino acid, where larger side chains make it less likely that cleavage of the methionine will occur (14). The second amino acid in the MiAMP1 coding sequence is serine, which would tend to favor cleavage of the methionine. Recent studies indicate that the folding of proteins is extremely rapid (15). The formation of secondary structures such as disulfides can slow this folding and result in an increased proportion of folding intermediates and subsequent accumulation and deposition of these in-

FIG. 3. 1H NMR spectra (750 MHz) of the E. coli expressed (A) and native (B) peptides at 308 K. The similarity in peak position demonstrates identical folding of the native and expressed peptides. Intensity differences near the water resonance peaks (HOD) are due to slight differences in the degree of solvent suppression between the two samples.

176

HARRISON ET AL.

termediates as insoluble inclusion bodies. The vast majority of MiAMP1 produced in E. coli was recovered in the insoluble pellet after cell disruption and therefore was most probably deposited in inclusion bodies. To purify MiAMP1 from E. coli, the insoluble proteins were dissolved in a denaturant (guanidine hydrochloride) and then dialyzed to promote refolding of the peptide. The presence of six cysteine residues within this peptide raised the possibility that multiple folding intermediates might be formed. Since chemical shifts in NMR spectra are an extremely sensitive indicator of three-dimensional structure, the similarity in shifts between the recombinant and native MiAMP1 molecules demonstrates that the global folds are essentially identical. This has also been confirmed using two-dimensional NMR spectra (A. McManus, K. Neilsen, and D. Craik, unpublished results). Many recombinant proteins produced in E. coli are expressed by fusion to either a purification or a detection tag. For example, a lipid transfer protein from wheat was produced linked to a maltose binding protein (16) and a domain of the hepatitis C protease has been produced linked to a polyhistidine chain (17). Both of these purification tags assist in the isolation of the expressed protein from the crude E. coli extract using affinity chromatography, but in most cases cleavage of the tag is required prior to assessing biological activity and often undesirable residual amino acid residues remain on the purified protein. When producing small peptides such as MiAMP1, the effects that additional amino acid residues would have on the tertiary structure and biological activity of the peptide are not clear and such residues are best avoided if possible. The method described herein resulted in the high-level expression of a MiAMP1 peptide that appeared to be identical to the native peptide. The insolubility of the peptide when expressed in E. coli and its abundance among the basic proteins of E. coli made it simple to purify in the absence of any affinity tag or fusion epitope. The ability to produce the MiAMP1 peptide in vitro will facilitate the production of amino acid substitution variants that can be used to obtain a better understanding of its mode of action. Such engineering of the peptide has the potential to increase both its efficacy and its spectrum of activity. The production of MiAMP1 in E. coli has also allowed the peptide to be labeled with 15N and hence will assist in resolving its structure by NMR spectroscopy. It will also be possible to radiolabel the peptide to facilitate studies of binding sites. Finally, the ability to produce large quantities of the peptide easily will assist screening for fungal mutants resistant to the peptide and hence enable a genetic analysis of fungal target sites. A greater understanding of structure­function relationships and the mode of action of MiAMP1 may allow the design of new

control molecules, including both agrochemicals and products of transgenes, for the control of fungal phytopathogens.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to R. Mattes and P. Schenk for supplying the vector pSB161 and to A. McEwan for use of the French Pressure Cell. S.H. acknowledges a research scholarship from the Sugar Research and Development Corporation of Australia. D.C. is an Australian Research Council Professorial Fellow.

REFERENCES
1. Terras, F. R. G., Eggermont, K., Kovaleva, V., Raikhel, N. V., Osborn, R. W., Kester, A., Rees, S. B., Torrekens, S., Van, L. F., Vanderleyden, J., Cammue, B. P. A., and Broekaert, W. F. (1995) Small cysteine-rich antifungal proteins from radish: Their role in host defence. Plant Cell 7, 573­588. 2. Epple, P., Apel, K., and Bohlmann, H. (1997) ESTs reveal a multigene family for plant defensins in Arabidopsis thaliana. FEBS Lett. 400, 168 ­172. 3. Penninckx, I. A. M. A., Eggermont, K., Terras, F. R. G., Thomma, B. P. H. J., De Samblanx, G. W., Buchala, A., Metraux, J. P., Manners, J. M., and Broekaert, W. F. (1996) Pathogen-induced systemic activation of a plant defensin gene in Arabidopsis follows a salicylic acid-independent pathway. Plant Cell 8, 2309 ­ 2323. 4. Marcus, J. P., Goulter, K. C., Green, J. L., Harrison, S. J., and Manners, J. M. (1997) Purification, characterisation and cDNA cloning of an antimicrobial peptide from Macadamia integrifolia. Eur. J. Biochem. 244, 743­749. 5. Piers, K. L., Brown, M. H., and Hancock, R. E. W. (1993) Recombinant DNA procedures for producing small antimicrobial cationic peptides in bacteria. Gene 134, 7­13. 6. Reichhart, J. M., Petit, I., Legrain, M., Dimarcq, J. L., Keppi, E., Lecocq, J. P., Hoffmann, J. A., and Achstetter, T. (1993) Expression and secretion in yeast of active insect defensin, an inducible antibacterial peptide from the flesh fly Phormia terranovae. Invert. Reprod. Dev. 21, 15­24. 7. Vilas Alves, A. L., De Samblanx, G. W., Terras, F. R. G., Cammue, B. P. A., and Broekaert, W. F. (1994) Expression of functional Raphanus sativus antifungal protein in yeast. FEBS Lett. 348, 228 ­232. 8. Ausubel, F. M., Brent, R., Kingston, R. E., Moore, D. D., Seidman, J. G., Smith, J. A., and Struhl, K. (1995) "Current Protocols in Molecular Biology." Wiley, New York. 9. Studier, F. W., and Mofatt, B. A. (1986) Use of bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase to direct selective high-level expression of cloned genes. J. Mol. Biol. 189, 113­130. 10. Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F., and Maniatis, T. A. (1989) "Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual," 2nd ed., Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY. 11. Piotto, M., Saudek, V., and Sklenar, V. (1992) Gradient-tailored excitation for single quantum NMR spectroscopy of aqueous solutions. J. Biomol. NMR 2, 661. 12. Terras, F. R. G., Schoofs, H. M. E., De Bolle, M. F. C., Van Leuven, F., Rees, S. B., Vanderleyden, J., Cammue, B. P. A., and Broekaert, W. F. (1992) Analysis of two novel classes of plant antifungal proteins from radish (Raphanus sativus L.) seeds. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 15301­15309. 13. Schenk, P. M., Baumann, S., Mattes, R., and SteinbiB, H. H. (1995) Improved high-level expression system for eukaryotic

EXPRESSION OF A PLANT ANTIMICROBIAL PEPTIDE genes in Escherichia coli using T7 RNA polymerase and rare ArgtRNAs. Biotechniques 19, 196 ­200. 14. Spanjaard, R. A., Chen, K., Walter, J. R., and van Duin, J. (1990) Frameshift suppression at tandem AGA and AGG codons by cloned tRNA genes: assigning a codon to argU tRNA and T4 tRNA Arg. Nucleic Acids Res. 18, 5031­5036. 15. Hirel, P-H., Schmitter, J-M., Dessen, P., Fayat, G., and Blanquet, S. (1989) Extent of N-terminal methionine excision from Escherichia coli proteins is governed by side-chain length of the penultimate amino acid. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86, 8247­ 8251.

177

16. Sosnick, T. R., Mayne, L., Hiller, R., and Englander, S. W. (1994) The barriers in protein folding. Struct. Biol. 1, 149 ­156. 17. Dieryck, W., Lullien-Pellerin, V., Marion, D., Joudrier, P., and Gautier, M-F. (1995) Purification and activity of a wheat 9-kDa lipid transfer protein expressed in Escherichia coli as a fusion with the maltose binding protein. Protein Express. Purif. 6, 597­ 603. 18. Vishnuvardhan, D., Kakiuchi, N., Urvil, P. T., Shimotohno, K., Kumar, P. K. R., and Nishikawa, S. (1997) Expression of highly active recombinant NS3 protease domain of hepatitis C virus in E. coli. FEBS Lett. 402, 209 ­212.

