Privacy Statement MetaPress is committed to respecting data-protection regulations. This statement informs you of the steps we take to protect your rights. By personal data we mean (a) the details you provide us via our forms, e.g. your email address, all ordering and billing information, such as postal addresses and payment details, and (b) all data captured in authentication and tracking logs. By using our site and by registering for any of our services or products, you accept that such personal data will be gathered and stored in our databases. We will maintain appropriate safeguards to ensure the security, integrity and privacy of your personal data. We do not share personal data with other companies for marketing or similar purposes. This data will be used by MetaPress to provide you with the services and products you have ordered. We may also occasionally use it to inform you of new services and products related to those you have ordered and of changes and activities within MetaPress. By registering for services and products in MetaPress, you agree to MetaPress using your email address in this way. Authentication and tracking logs will be used to produce usage statistics. This information does not contain any personally identifiable information. MetaPress reserves the right to have logs and databases analyzed by external service providers, in which case every effort will be made to protect the security, integrity and privacy of the data. Please note that we take no responsibility for personal data posted on any open forums or message boards. Disclaimer MetaPress cannot take responsibility for information found on third party Web sites outside its control. While we attempt to provide links only to third-party Web sites that comply with all applicable laws and regulations and our standards, please understand that the content on these third-party Web sites is subject to change without notice to MetaPress. We therefore cannot be responsible for, and accept no liability for, any information or opinion contained in any third-party web site.

