33

Retinoid X receptor and its partners in the nuclear receptor family Fraydoon Rastinejad
Retinoid X receptor (RXR) and its dimerization partners in the nuclear receptor family recognize DNA response elements in which two AGGTCA binding sites are arranged in tandem. Target site selection by these complexes requires the spacing between the binding sites to act as the identity element. With the recent determination of three-dimensional structures of several different DNA-binding complexes of RXR, together with studies of protein conformational changes, it is clear how the interactions of RXR with its partners are precisely tuned to match the spacing between their DNA binding sites.
Addresses Department of Pharmacology, X-ray Crystallography Laboratory and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908-0735, USA; e-mail: fr9c@virginia.edu Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2001, 11:33­38 0959-440X/01/$ ­ see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. Abbreviations DBD DNA-binding domain DR direct repeat NGFI-B nerve growth factor induced-B PPAR peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor RAR retinoic acid receptor RXR retinoid X receptor TR thyroid hormone receptor VDR vitamin D receptor

(TR), the vitamin D receptor (VDR), the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) and nerve growth factor induced-B (NGFI-B) [4,5]. The receptors for glucocorticoids, mineralcorticoids, androgens and progesterone constitute a smaller subgroup not discussed here, which recognizes the consensus sequence 5-AGAACA-3 instead. The nuclear receptor DNA-binding domain (DBD) is one of the most prevalent DNA-interacting regions known. It is composed of a highly conserved 66 amino acid core domain located centrally in each nuclear receptor, together with a short, nonconserved extension into the hinge region of the receptor (see Figure 1) [6,7]. Its modular design is composed of two zinc-binding loops and a pair of  helices [8]. One of these helices mediates sequence-specific recognition of the AGGTCA sequence via major groove contacts. The sequence conservation of the DBD, together with the wide use of the AGGTCA response element sequence, raises the question as to how diversity is generated in this superfamily of transcription factors. In fact, considerable response element diversity is generated
Figure 1 (a) A/B N (b) Recognition helix C C DNA D Hinge E Ligand F C

Introduction
Lipophilic hormones exert genetic control through a superfamily of highly related transcription factors known as the nuclear receptors. Included in this family are many additional factors, known as orphan receptors, which have the hallmarks of bona fide hormone receptors, but whose bioactive ligands have not been identified at this time. Although most frequently isolated and characterized in mammals, homologs of the hormone and orphan receptors have also been identified in insects, worms and amphibians. Transcription regulation by both the hormone and orphan receptors depends on specific and ordered interactions with DNA and on subsequent binding of co-repressor and/or co-activator proteins [1­3]. The DNA targets of nuclear receptors, known as response elements, are the sequences through which receptors mediate the control of ligand-responsive genes. Most nonsteroid and orphan receptors recognize the consensus sequence 5-AGGTCA-3 in DNA that contains one or two copies of this sequence. This group includes nearly all known nonsteroid receptors, including the 9-cis retinoic acid receptor (retinoid X receptor, RXR), the all-trans retinoic acid receptor (RAR), the thyroid hormone receptor

Zn-I

N

Zn-II
Current Opinion in Structural Biology

The architecture of nuclear receptor proteins and their DBDs. (a) The core DBD (domain C) consists of 66 residues of highly conserved sequence in the nuclear receptor family. In some cases, as in TR, RevErb and NGFI-B, additional sequences in the hinge region (D) contribute to the DNA-binding specificity. The E region, labeled `Ligand', represents the ligand-binding domain of nuclear receptors. (b) The superposition of crystal structures of the core DBDs of RXR (red), RAR (cyan) and TR (blue) derived from their respective structures bound to DNA [9··,10··,11]. Each of the two zinc ions (orange) is coordinated by four sulfur atoms (yellow) from conserved cysteines shown in green. The  helix that recognizes the major groove of the AGGTCA sequence is labeled (recognition helix).

34

Protein­nucleic acid interactions

Figure 2 The 1­5 rule AGGTCAnAGGTCA TCCAGTnTCCAGT RXR­RXR RAR PPAR COUP HNF4 RXR­PPAR RAR

DR1

of RXR and its heterodimeric partners do not interact in the absence of response elements. However, in the presence of response elements, they produce the same patterns of DNA selectivity and dimerization as the fulllength receptors. The formation of heterodimers between DBDs is induced by specific repertoires of high-affinity response elements containing DRs with characteristic inter-half-site spacings [20­23]. These spacings can vary from one to five base pairs (with the corresponding DR elements known as DR1­DR5). The pattern of site selectivity based on the spacing of DRs is known as the 1­5 rule [21] (see Figure 2). This principle has remarkable consequences, implying, for example, that the signaling pathways of the thyroid hormone can be converted to those of vitamin D3 or retinoic acid by simply subtracting or adding, respectively, a single base pair from or to the spacing of a DR4 (Figure 2). For other family members, the response binding site repertoire is extended using additional geometric manipulations of the half-site motif. For example, some orphan receptors, such as NGFI-B, bind their DNA targets as monomers, using only one copy of the AGGTCA sequence, albeit one with unique 5 flanking sequences [7,13·], whereas the steroid receptors prefer symmetric (palindromic) repeats [8,24]. There are also several orphan receptors, such as RevErb, that also use DR elements with unique spacings, but that assemble cooperatively as homodimers without RXR [12]. In contrast to symmetric binding sites, DRs contain two AGGTCA half-sites that can be distinguished according to their upstream or downstream location. To further increase the number of combinatorial interactions with its partners, RXR has in its arsenal the ability to switch its polarity on a DR, binding alternately to the upstream or downstream half-sites in some DRs [1,25]. For example, the RXR­RAR complexes on DR1 and DR5 form with opposite polarity and these, in turn, have different responses to ligands and co-repressors [1,3]. Figure 3a shows a complex in which RXR is positioned upstream of its partner and Figure 3e shows a complex in which RXR is downstream of its partner. In the case of the RXR­RAR heterodimer, the switch in polarity in going from DR1 to DR5 allows a switch in the activity of the receptor heterodimer from a repressor to an activator of retinoid responsive genes. To ensure correct spacing recognition, RXR and each of its partners rely on cooperation at the level of protein­protein interactions to achieve the required binding affinity and selectivity for response elements. The monomeric binding of RXR and most of its partners is below that of detection by standard biochemical assays and is probably precluded in vivo [9··,20­23]. By contrast, the cooperativity in binding a cognate DR as a heterodimer is significant and ensures tight binding. This implies that the pairs of receptors form mutually stabilizing contacts on their cognate elements. If the

DR2

AGGTCAnnAGGTCA TCCAGTnnTCCAGT

DR3

AGGTCAnnnAGGTCA TCCAGTnnnTCCAGT

RXR­VDR

DR4

AGGTCAnnnnAGGTCA TCCAGTnnnnTCCAGT

RXR­TR LXR CAR RXR­RAR NGFI-B

DR5

AGGTCAnnnnnAGGTCA TCCAGTnnnnnTCCAGT

Current Opinion in Structural Biology

The 1­5 rule of DNA DR binding by RXR and its nuclear receptor partners. The base pair size of the spacing between the AGGTCA sequences can vary from one to five.

by taking the two AGGTCA sites and positioning them relative to each other in numerous geometrical arrangements to produce binding sites for various receptor homodimers and heterodimers. This review will focus on how dimerization patterns between the DBDs of RXR and its partners produce combinatorial transcription factors that are highly selective for their DNA response elements. The major advances of the past year include two new crystal structures of DNA-binding complexes involving RXR: one of an RXR homodimer bound to direct repeat (DR) 1 DNA [9··] and the other of the RXR­RAR heterodimer bound to DR1 [10··]. These structures, together with earlier structures of the RXR­TR complex bound to DR4 [11], the RevErb DBD homodimer bound to DR2 [12] and the NGFI-B DBD monomer bound to an extended halfsite [13·], allow us to see the depth of variety by which nuclear receptors form highly selective surfaces for DNA binding. These structures are nicely complemented by additional studies that examine conformational changes in the DBD polypeptide as it binds DNA, showing the importance of conformational flexibility and induced structures in the formation of highly specific DNA-binding complexes [14·,15].

The rules of engagement
RXR is a combinatorial partner in the nuclear receptor family, able to form heterodimers with a variety of hormone and orphan receptors [16­19]. The dimerization partners of RXR include itself, RAR, VDR, TR, PPAR and other receptors shown in Figure 2. Importantly, the DBDs

Retinoid X receptor Rastinejad

35

Figure 3 Structures of DNA-binding complexes involving RXR and their dimer interfaces. The overall structures are shown on the left, with close-up views of the protein­protein interactions shown on the right. Dotted blue lines indicate hydrogen bonds between proteins or between proteins and the DNA spacing. The dotted surface indicates complementary van der Waals interactions. DNA sequences (cyan) are shown with their 5 ends pointing up, with base pairs belonging to the spacing element of the DRs shown schematically in red. In each case, protein­protein contacts are formed directly over the minor groove of the spacing, with several protein­DNA phosphate contacts stabilizing the assembly. The interacting amino acid sidechains are shown in green, with nitrogen atoms indicated in blue and oxygen atoms indicated in red. (a,b) The RXR­TR DBD heterodimeric complex with DR4 [11], (c,d) the RXR DBD homodimeric complex with DR1 [9··] and (e,f) the RXR­RAR DBD heterodimeric complex with DR1 [10··]. (a) (b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Current Opinion in Structural Biology

association of the dimeric complex includes an obligatory coupling between subunits, the affinity of the dimer for the DNA is expected to be approximately that of the half-site binding affinity squared.

Structures of DNA-binding complexes
Three different co-crystal structures of DNA-binding complexes involving RXR are now available (see Figure 3). The first glimpse of how RXR mediates heterodimeric binding of other receptors on DR elements came from the the structure of the RXR­TR DNA-binding complex on DR4 [11]. The asymmetrical head-to-tail placement of the subunits fosters productive interactions between subunits

only when RXR occupies the 5 half-site and TR occupies the 3 half-site. Contacts between the two DBDs straddle the minor groove of the spacing and engage different parts of each protein. The four base pair spacing of the DR imposes a wide spatial gap that is bridged by salt bridges and hydrogen bonds using the long sidechains of arginines. The DBDs of RXR and TR bind with cooperativity to DR4 using protein­protein interactions that are buttressed by the DNA backbone. Spacing selectivity is ensured because these mutually supportive protein­protein and protein­DNA interactions could not occur on DRs with alternative spacings. The structure revealed the basis for cooperative assembly -- there were productive contacts

36

Protein­nucleic acid interactions

between the RXR and TR DBDs, and both were in firm contact with their AGGTCA half-sites. The recently reported structures of the RXR homodimer and RXR­RAR heterodimer DNA-binding complexes on DR1 have further solidified our understanding of how RXR facilitates the binding of its partners to DNA [9··,10··]. In these new structures, as in the RXR­TR heterodimer, the dimer contacts are formed exclusively at the minor groove of the spacing, but the contacts themselves are based on different protein­protein interactions. The DNA bridges the interactions between subunits, whereas the actual contacts between subunits are fewer than seen in the RXR­TR complex and do not tell the entire story. Given that the separation between binding sites is only one base pair, the binding of one subunit appears to reduce the conformational flexibility of the second site, thus prepaying some of the entropic costs. Furthermore, DNA distortions are seen in both the RXR­RAR and the RXR­RXR complexes, and these appear to facilitate the assembly of the complexes. Similar mechanisms for explaining cooperative behavior have been invoked for other systems in which there are also few or no contacts between proteins that nevertheless bind DNA cooperatively [26·,27­31]. Although the RXR homodimer and RXR­RAR heterodimer use DR1 as a common target for gene regulation, the heterodimer has an advantage in terms of the higher affinity for this site. A detailed examination of the protein­DNA contacts provides a possible explanation for the different affinity and, perhaps, for the graded affinity that is associated with other heterodimers that bind DR1 (RXR­PPAR, RXR­COUP and RXR­HNF4). In the RXR­RAR heterodimer, each subunit makes direct or water-mediated contacts along six base pairs [10··]. By contrast, each RXR subunit in the homodimer forms contacts only along three base pairs [9··]. The few and variable sequence-discerning contacts in the homodimer explain the relaxed sequence specificity noted for RXR when it is not assembled as a heterodimer [32,33]. This property may be advantageous for a receptor that must form so many different heterodimeric complexes, allowing its distinct partners to modulate the binding affinity, as well as the selectivity, for the various response elements.

change of 3.4 Å in terms of separation and nearly 36° in terms of rotation between the half-complexes. A challenge in these studies is understanding why RXR and each of its partners form mutually stabilizing contacts on some response elements, but are clearly excluded from doing so on other response elements. Although the crystal structures show us how dimerization is achieved on cognate response elements, they can not tell us directly how assembly fails on noncognate spacings. There are two probable mechanisms by which noncognate sites may be excluded. First, unique structural features at the C-terminal extension of TR, RevErb, NGFI-B and other receptors can act as steric rulers that preclude the binding of their heterodimers with RXR on improperly spaced elements [11,12,13·]. Second, the protein­protein interactions may mutually stabilize only the cognate elements, so that the binding of one subunit favors the binding of the other subunit by providing a complementary surface. A second major question is just how the RXR DBD can accommodate so many different dimerization partners. Clearly, it must possess a number of fixed surfaces to accommodate its many combinatorial interactions or, alternatively, use a few adaptable elements that can adjust to the rotations, displacements and polarity of its binding sites and partners. In fact, the recently determined structures of the RXR homodimer and RXR­RAR heterodimer confirm that structural transitions in both the receptor proteins and their DNA-binding sites allow the assembly of the complex to be highly cooperative [9··,10··]. A dramatic example of an adaptable surface used for dimerization is the RXR T-box, the C-terminal extension of its core DBD, which undergoes structural transitions as observed by crystallography and NMR [9··,15]. NMR structural studies of the RXR DBD both on and off DNA provided the first clues that this region of the protein, which is -helical in the absence of DNA, undergoes a helix-to-coil transition in binding an isolated AGGTCA half-site (see Figure 4a,b) [15,34]. The structural transition from helix to coil is necessary to position Glu74 toward the upstream subunit for protein­protein interactions, simultaneously exposing the sidechains of Arg30 and Lys26 in the recognition helix for major groove interactions (Figure 4a,b). Interestingly, the helix-to-coil transition is seen again in the T-box of RXR when downstream of RAR in the DR1-bound heterodimer [10··]. However, the coil adopts a new conformation that places Arg75 and Gln72, rather than Glu74, as the dimerization contact pointing to the upstream partner (Figure 3f). In assemblies in which RXR is the upstream binding partner, such as the RXR­TR/DR4 and RXR­RAR/DR5 complexes, the conformation of the RXR T-box would not affect dimerization as it would be pointed toward the 5 end of the upstream site. In these cases, the Zn-II module

The role of induced structures
The correctly spaced response element itself fosters heterodimerization between DBDs of RXR and its partners. This mechanism ensures efficiency in the nuclear receptor family by not requiring the formation of all possible tightly associated dimers in the absence of their gene regulatory sites [31]. Effective interaction between subunits implies that each DBD must remain simultaneously engaged to its partner and to its own AGGTCA binding site. To understand how the DNA spacing can effect subunit assembly, it is important to remember that the addition or subtraction of a single base pair at the inter-half-site space imposes a

Retinoid X receptor Rastinejad

37

Figure 4 The role of conformational flexibility and induced structures in the assembly of RXR and its partners on DNA. (a) The solution structure of the RXR DBD in the absence of DNA, determined by NMR spectroscopy [34]. (b) The structure of the RXR DBD bound to DNA as a homodimer [9··]. A conformational switch in the T-box of RXR causes a helix-tocoil transition facilitating the interaction of Glu74 with the upstream subunit and releasing residues on the DNA-binding helix for half-site binding (blue dashed lines). (c) The structure of the RAR DBD in the absence of DNA (pink) compared with that bound to DR1 with RXR (blue) [10··]. A structural rearrangement in the Zn-II domain of RAR, highlighted, allows it to form favorable protein­protein interactions with RXR. (d) DNA curvature associated with the DR1 bound to the RXR homodimer (orange) and the DR1 bound to the RXR­RAR heterodimer (green). Both DNA structures form small kinks at their spacings to accommodate the upstream binding partners of RXR (RAR in one case and RXR in the other). (a) (b)

T-box

DNA-binding helix Zn-II Upstream partner

Switch

Helix

C Glu-74 C (c) C (d) 5 3

Glu-74

Zn-I N

Zn-II

N
Current Opinion in Structural Biology

forms the dimerization interface of RXR. There is also good evidence that this region can be reconfigured, undergoing a subtle but critical transition upon DNA binding, as both the Zn-II region and T-box of RXR appear to be highly dynamic regions [11,14·,15]. In assembling on DR1 with RXR, the RAR Zn-II module appears to undergo a significant conformational change that facilitates its protein­protein interactions (see Figure 4c). A comparison of the DNA structure in the two DR1 complexes further showed that the DNA changes its structure to differentially accommodate subunit assembly, bending 12° with the RXR homodimer and 6° with the RXR­RAR heterodimer (see Figure 4d) [10··]. This was surprising as the DR1 sequence used was identical over the 13 base pairs forming the two half-sites and the spacing. The utilization of DNA distortions in accommodating protein­protein assembly is a lesson shared with other transcription factors [26·,35­37]. This is perhaps the most interesting means by which adaptable surfaces can be configured to bring together a combination of factors on a gene regulatory element.

have provided important new examples of how flexible surfaces on macromolecules can be precisely altered to facilitate the assembly of transcription factors on DNA. The lessons provided by these studies are likely to be shared with other transcription factor families that use similar site-selection strategies, whereby two or more factors converge on gene regulatory sites composed of their tandemly positioned binding sites. Structures that contain full-length receptors or DBDs in more complex assemblies with other transcription factors are likely to teach us new lessons and would be welcome additions.

Acknowledgements
The author thanks Qiang Zhao for assistance with the figures and Sepideh Khorasanizadeh for critical reading of the manuscript. The author's work on DNA-binding complexes is supported by the National Institutes of Health.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

· of special interest ·· of outstanding interest
1. Kurokawa R, Soderstrom M, Horlein A, Halachmi S, Brown M, Rosenfeld MG, Glass CK: Polarity-specific activities of retinoic acid receptors determined by a co-repressor. Nature 1995, 377:451-454. Glass CK, Rose DW, Rosenfeld MG: Nuclear receptor coactivators. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1997, 9:222-232. Zamir I, Zhang J, Lazar MA: Stoichiometric and steric principles governing repression by nuclear hormone receptors. Genes Dev 1997, 11:835-846.

Conclusions
The structures of RXR DNA-binding complexes illustrate the remarkable versatility of transcription factors in forming combinatorial interactions that rely on the architecture of the DNA response elements. These studies
2. 3.

38

Protein­nucleic acid interactions

4. 5.

Mangelsdorf DJ, Evans RM: The RXR heterodimers and orphan receptors. Cell 1995, 83:841-850. Mangelsdorf DJ, Thummel C, Beato M, Herrlich P, Schutz G, Umesono K, Blumberg B, Kastner P, Mark M, Chambon P: The nuclear receptor superfamily: the second decade. Cell 1995, 83:835-839. Rastinejad F: Structure and function of the steroid and nuclear receptor DNA binding domain. In Molecular Biology of Steroid and Nuclear Hormone Receptors. Edited by Freedman L. Boston: Birkhauser; 1998:105-131. Wilson TE, Paulsen RE, Padgett KA, Milbrandt J: Participation of non-zinc finger residues in DNA binding by two nuclear orphan receptors. Science 1992, 256:107-110. Luisi BF, Xu WX, Otwinowski Z, Freedman LP, Yamamoto KR, Sigler PB: Crystallographic analysis of the interaction of the glucocorticoid receptor with DNA. Nature 1991, 352:497-505.

a coregulator that enhances binding of retinoic acid, thyroid hormone, and vitamin D receptors to their cognate response elements. Cell 1991, 67:1251-1266. 20. Zechel C, Shen X-Q, Chen J-Y, Chen Z-P, Chambon P, Gronemeyer H: The dimerization interfaces formed between the DNA binding domains of RXR, RAR, and TR determine the binding specificity and polarity of the full-length receptors to direct repeats. EMBO J 1994, 13:1425-1433. 21. Umesono K, Murakami KK, Thompson CC, Evans RM: Direct repeats as selective response elements for the thyroid hormone, retinoic acid, and vitamin D3 receptors. Cell 1991, 65:1255-1266. 22. Mader S, Chen JY, Chen Z, White J, Chambon P, Gronemeyer H: The patterns of binding of RAR, RXR and TR homo- and heterodimers to direct repeats are dictated by the binding specificites of the DNA binding domains. EMBO J 1993, 12:5029-5041. 23. Perlmann T, Rangarajan PN, Umesono K, Evans RM: Determinants for selective RAR and TR recognition of direct repeat HREs. Gen Dev 1993, 7:1411-1422. 24. Gewirth DT, Sigler PB: The basis for half-site specificity explored through a non-cognate steroid receptor-DNA complex. Nat Struct Biol 1995, 2:386-394. 25. Kurokawa R, DiRenzo J, Boehm M, Sugarman J, Gloss B, Rosenfeld MG, Heyman RA, Glass CK: Regulation of retinoid signalling by receptor polarity and allosteric control of ligand binding. Nature 1994, 371:528-531. 26. Fuji Y, Shimizu T, Kusumoto M, Kyogoku Y, Tadatsugu T, Hakoshima T: · Crystal structure of an IRF-DNA complex reveals novel DNA recognition and cooperative binding to a tandem repeat of core sequences. EMBO J 1999, 18:5028-5041. This crystallographic study shows how two interferon regulatory factor subunits form a cooperative complex on a tandem repeat of GAAA sequences. Surprisingly, there are no protein­protein contacts. 27. Passner JM, Ryoo HD, Shen L, Mann RS, Aggarwal AK: Structure of a DNA-bound Ultrabithorax-Extradenticle homeodomain complex. Nature 1999, 397:714-719.

6.

7.

8.

Zhao Q, Chasse SA, Devarakonda S, Sierk ML, Ahvazi B, Rastinejad F: Structural basis of RXR-DNA interactions. J Mol Biol 2000, 296:509-520. The authors produced crystals that contain two different DNA-binding complexes of the retinoid X receptor homodimer. The role of the spacing and DNA-induced conformational changes in the T-box are described. 10. Rastinejad F, Wagner T, Zhao Q, Khorasanizadeh S: Structure of the ·· RXR-RAR DNA-binding complex on the retinoic acid response element DR1. EMBO J 2000, 19:1045-1054. The structure determined shows a polar arrangement of retinoid X receptor (RXR) and retinoic acid receptor (RAR) DNA-binding domains (DBDs) on DNA. The comparisons with DBD conformations without bound DNA illustrate how nuclear receptors use locally induced structures to generate dimeric assemblies. 11. Rastinejad F, Perlmann T, Evans RM, Sigler PB: Structural determinants of nuclear receptor assembly on DNA direct repeats. Nature 1995, 375:203-211. 12. Zhao Q, Khorasanizadeh S, Miyoshi Y, Lazar MA, Rastinejad F: Structural elements of an orphan nuclear receptor-DNA complex. Mol Cell 1998, 1:849-861. 13. Meinke G, Sigler PB: DNA-binding mechanism of the monomeric · orphan receptor NGFI-B. Nat Struct Biol 1999, 6:471-477. The structure of NGFI-B bound to its DNA response element shows how certain receptors use a monomeric mode of assembly. Residues C-terminal to the conserved DNA-binding domain engage the base pair sequence preceding the AGGTCA hexamer, using the same type of minor groove interactions described for RevErb in [12]. 14. van Tilborg PJA, Mulder FAA, de Backer MME, Nair M, van Heerde EC, · Folkers G, van der Saag PT, Karimi-Nejad Y, Boelens R, Kaptein R: Millisecond to microsecond time scale dynamics of the retinoid X and retinoic acid receptor DNA-binding domains and dimeric complex formation. Biochemistry 1999, 38:1951-1956. The authors found that the highly dynamic Zn-II region of retinoid X receptor may provide this protein with the ability to modulate its interaction surface in a variety of complexes. 15. Holmbeck SMA, Dyson HJ, Wright PE: DNA-induced conformational changes are the basis for cooperative dimerization by the DNA binding domain of the retinoid X receptor. J Mol Biol 1998, 284:533-539. 16. Kliewer SA, Umesono K, Mangelsdorf DJ, Evans RM: Retinoid X receptor interacts with nuclear receptors in retinoic acid, thyroid hormone and vitamin D3 signalling. Nature 1992, 355:446-449. 17. Kliewer SA, Umesono K, Noonan DJ, Heyman RA, Evans RM: Convergence of 9-cis retinoic acid and peroxisome proliferator signalling pathways through heterodimer formation of their receptors. Nature 1992, 358:771-774.

9. ··

28. Piper DE, Batchelor AH, Chang C-P, Cleary ML, Wolberger C: Structure of a HoxB1-Pbx1 heterodimer bound to DNA: role of the hexapeptide and a fourth homeodomain helix in complex formation. Cell 1999, 96:587-597. 29. Chan S-K, Pöpperl H, Krumlauf R, Mann RS: An extradenticleinduced conformational change in a HOX protein ovecomes an inhibitory function of the conserved hexapeptide motif. EMBO J 1996, 15:2476-2487. 30. Klemm JD, Pabo CO: Oct-1 POU domain-DNA interactions: cooperative binding of isolated subdomains and effects of covalent linkage. Genes Dev 1996, 10:27-36. 31. Khorasanizadeh S, Rastinejad F: Transcription factors: the right combination for the DNA lock. Curr Biol 1999, 9:509-520. 32. Dowhan DH, Downes M, Sturm RA, Muscat GE: Identification of deoxyribonucleic acid sequences that bind retinoid-X receptorgamma with high affinity. Endocrinology 1994, 135:2595-2607. 33. Castelein H, Janssen A, Declercq PE, Baes M: Sequence requirements for high affinity retinoid X receptor-alpha homodimer binding. Mol Cell Endocrinol 1996, 119:11-20. 34. Holmbeck SMA, Foster MP, Casimoro DR, Sem DS, Dyson HJ, Wright PE: High-resolution solution structure of the retinoid X receptor DNA-binding domain. J Mol Biol 1998, 281:271-284. 35. Lefstin JA, Yamamoto KR: Allosteric effects of DNA on transcriptional regulators. Nature 1998, 392:885-888. 36. Dickerson RE, Chiu TK: Helix bending as a factor in protein/DNA recognition. Biopolymers 1998, 44:361-403. 37. Dickerson RE: DNA bending-the prevalence of kinkiness and the virtues of normality. Nucleic Acids Res 1998, 26:1906-1926.

18. Forman BM, Umesono K, Chen J, Evans RM: Unique response pathways are established by allosteric interactions among nuclear hormone receptors. Cell 1995, 81:541-550. 19. Yu VC, Delsert C, Andersen B, Holloway JM, Devary OV, Naar AM, Kim SY, Boutin JM, Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG: RXR beta:

