ARTICLE IN PRESS

Journal of Theoretical Biology 225 (2003) 341­349

Solubility, adsorption, and the thermodynamics of the cutoff effect
Y. Katz*
The National Physical Laboratory of Israel, Givat Ram, Jerusalem 91904, Israel Received 15 February 2003; received in revised form 9 June 2003; accepted 23 June 2003

Abstract For many years, the expression ``cutoff effect of anesthesia,'' has been used to denote the failure of the higher alcohols or paraffins to produce anesthesia. As such, it is used to assess the plausibility of specific models, proposed for anesthesia. However, the uses were shown, in many respects, to be problematic. This article augments the notion of the cutoff to fit for all cases in which only some of the molecules in a homologous series are anesthetics. We find that the location of the cutoff points is affected by three free energy quantities: that of the adsorption of the agent to the anesthetic ``site'' (fsl;site ), that of the perturbation of the site (fll;site ), and that of the evaporation of the agent from its pure condensed phase (Dmo evaporation ). This outcome indicates that the cutoff cannot be attributed to a single parameter. In addition, the analyses that attribute the cutoff to the failure of compounds to obey the much-used Meyer­ Overton correlation will have to be amended. This article shows that cutoff results can be used to elucidate the structure of a site. r 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Origins of anesthetic cutoff; Meyer­Overton rule; Pressure reversal of anesthesia; Structure of anesthetic sites

1. Introduction The cutoff of anesthesia is both interesting and mysterious (Roth, 1979; Forman and Miller, 1989; Eckenhoff et al., 1999). The term ``cutoff effect'' denotes the failure of the higher alcohols or paraffins to produce anesthesia. This occurs despite the fact that the smaller members of these series are anesthetics, and the potencies do increase with the increase of the number of carbon atoms in the chain (Ferguson, 1939; Peoples et al., 1996). The interest in the cutoff effect stems, to a large degree, from the fact that progress in the study of anesthesia has been made mainly by the use of pharmacological criteria (Roth, 1979; Forman and Miller, 1989; Krasowski and Harrison, 1999; Eckenhoff and Johansson, 1999; Eger et al., 2001). The cutoff is used to judge the relevance of putative target sites to anesthesia by finding if the values of the cutoff points in these sites do correspond to the in vivo value (Forman and Miller, 1989; Franks and Lieb, 1994; Peoples and Weight, 1995; Godden et al., 2001). However, there are at least three problems with this usage. First, many different sites appear to have similar cutoff points of
*Tel.: 25661541; fax: 25664292. E-mail address: ykatz@newmail.net (Y. Katz). 0022-5193/$ - see front matter r 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/S0022-5193(03)00259-5

alcohols and alkanes (Godden et al., 2001). Secondly, various researchers have made different choices of what is a cutoff point. Some choose as cutoff point the point where the loss of anesthetic effect occurs (Liu et al., 1993), others prefer to choose the point where potency fails to increase further (Wick et al., 1998), and there are those who choose it to be the point at which the potency is at its maximum (Peoples and Weight, 1995). This raises, of course, the question if those various results could conform to each other. Thirdly, all alkanes, even the higher ones, either cause anesthesia or at least act to lower the anesthetic demand, which raises the question if the ``cutoff effect in alkanes'' (or in alcohols) is a ``real'' effect (Liu et al., 1993; Eckenhoff et al., 1999). The cutoff effect is also used to validate theories (by watching if the theory can predict the existence of a cutoff effect) and to map target sites (Cantor, 1997; Eckenhoff et al., 1999). The mapping is based on the assumption that the binding site is of limited size and can accommodate only those alcohols that can fit in (Franks and Lieb, 1985; Curry et al., 1991; Peoples and Weight, 1995; Wick et al., 1998; Eckenhoff et al., 1999). The interest in mapping is steadily growing due to the rapid rise in the number of studies on ligand-gated ion channels (Godden et al., 2001). The main problem is that besides the size, there are also other conditions such

ARTICLE IN PRESS
342 Y. Katz / Journal of Theoretical Biology 225 (2003) 341­349

as a low solubility or a small ability of the agents to stabilize sites that may lead to a cutoff. This limits its use and hampers the search for the ``right'' molecular details, ``right'' models, and ``right'' experimental systems (Roth, 1979; Peoples et al., 1996; Eckenhoff et al., 1999). In recent years, the use of ``the cutoff effect of anesthesia'' has been extended to other classes of anesthetic agents (e.g., the rare gases and the fluorocarbons). Each of these series has agents that fail to produce anesthesia and the desire is to base on this feature a usage similar to the one made with that of the cutoff of alcohols (Liu et al., 1994; Forman and Raines, 1998). The problem here is how to achieve this goal avoiding at the same time the conflicts that may arise from the use of conflicting definitions (Liu et al., 1994). This article clarifies and solves the above-mentioned problems. First, we generalize the definition of cutoff to include all those cases in which some of the molecules in a homologous series are anesthetics but the rest are not. We use thermodynamics to find out how comparison and mapping of sites should be made and interpreted. We then use the equations, which follow from this theoretical frame, to interpret experimental results and to compare and map sites. We show that the analysis covers the entirety of the known facts about cutoff and explains a wide range of cutoff properties such as the anesthetic behavior of the noble gases and the different conduct of alcohols and perfluorocarbons.

in the ideal case, no interaction exists between the molecules in the gas phase. Therefore, mo is the same gas;i for all solutes, and for this reason, its value can be chosen as zero for all solutes. By its very nature, thermodynamics permits us to write the standard free energy of solubilization, Dmo ; as the sum of the free energies of a two-step process. The only demand is that this sum will refer to the same initial and final states of the components involved in the process. Thus, the process of solubilization can be seen as if it consists of the creation of a hole in the solvent followed by a transfer of the solute from the gas phase to the hole (Fig. 1) (Pierotti, 1963; Katz, 1985, 1994a). (Arguments of the kind used here were first presented by Uhlig, 1937 and then by Eley, 1939.) One may write Dmo ¼ Nðfll À fsl Þ þ RT ln ðRT =Vl Þ: ð2Þ

2. The thermodynamics of the cutoff Relevant in the discussion that follows are those situations in which the conditions of thermodynamic equilibrium are fulfilled and the conditions of cutoff are at the same time obeyed. The assumption that true equilibrium exists in anesthesia is well established (Ferguson, 1939) and it can be stated by the well-known thermodynamic equation mo þ RT ln pgas;i ¼ mo þ RT ln Xsite;i : gas;i site;i ð1Þ Here, we denote by mo the standard chemical potential. pgas;i is the partial pressure of the agent in the gas phase and Xsite;i is its mole fraction in the anesthetic site. The equilibrium is between the partial pressure of the agent in the gas phase and its mole fraction on the site. The free energy of each phase is expressed as the sum of two terms: m ¼ mo þ mc where in the site phase mc ¼ RTlnXsite;i and in the gas phase it is equal to RTlnpgas;i : The mo terms contain the molecular factors involved in the adsorption process. Therefore, any model and consideration of the cutoff effect that is based on the use of molecular details should be reflected in the magnitude and properties of the mo terms. The choice of the gas phase as a reference system is very useful, since

In this equation, Nfll is the molar free energy of hole creation and ÀNfsl is the molar free energy of adsorption of a solute into the hole. N is Avogadro's number and Vl is the molar volume of the solvent. From the molecular point of view, this equation is of interest because it groups the interactions among anesthetic and site into two types. It reflects the molecular properties of the pure solvent by the first parameter and the interactions between solute and solvent by the second (Pierotti, 1963; Katz, 1985, 1994a,b). The first parameter, which is a measure of the creation of a hole in the solvent medium, depends on the geometry (size and shape) of the solute (Fig. 1). As such, the Nfll term reflects the extent of perturbation in the medium structure. ÀNfsl is the energy gained from the interaction of solute and solvent. The discussion above reveals two conditions that must be fulfilled for anesthesia to take place. First, Narcosis commences only when the concentration of the agent at a given site has reached a critical level. Hence, Xsite must exceed, or be equal, to this level, which is denoted by Xthreshold (i.e., Xsite XXthreshold ). Second, in order to be fruitful a perturbation must exceed a minimal critical size. As shown above, this is equivalent to a demand for the cavity created inside the site medium to surpass a critical size (i.e., rh Xrh;threshold ). (In the most general case rh and rh;threshold are vectors whose components are distances that specify the geometry of the cavity. For a spherical cavity rh and rh;threshold get the meaning of a radius.) These two conditions are manifested in demands put on the free energy terms of the above equations. The first condition implies that Dmc XDmc;threshold : The second entails that the free energy of cavity creation should exceed a threshold value in order to be fruitful (i.e., fll Xfll;threshold ). This later demand arises because fll is always a monotonic function of the cavity size, rh (Katz, 1994b). Insertion of these conditions into Eqs. (1) and

ARTICLE IN PRESS
Y. Katz / Journal of Theoretical Biology 225 (2003) 341­349 343

(A)

(B)

(C)
Fig. 1. The figure shows the process of solution of a solute molecule (shaded large circle) from the gas phase into a solvent medium (small empty circles). Fig. 1A describes the situation before solution takes place. The process is depicted as a two step process. In the first step, a cavity (empty large circle) is made in the solvent medium, which requires the investment of energy fll (Fig. 1B). The second step, in which an energy Àfsl is gained, involves the transfer of the solute from the gas phase to the hole (Fig. 1C). The standard free energy of solubilization, Dmo ; is thus seen to be the sum of the free energies of a two-step process.

(2) yields the following demand RT ln pgas;i þ Nfsl;threshold XNfll;threshold þ RT ln Xthreshold : ð3Þ As much as the above equations are simple, they offer a clear and unique definition of the cutoff. The cutoff point appears as a point at which breakdown occurs in either the condition presented by Eq. (3) or in the condition rh Xrh;threshold : These prerequisites define two possible types of cutoff. The first results when the partial pressure of the agent above its pure condensed phase is lower than the one required by Eq. (3). At the very point of cutoff, the agent at the bound site is at equilibrium with its pure condensed phase and both have the same

vapor pressure. It thus follows from Eqs. (1) and (3) that at the point of cutoff we have Dmo þ RT ln Xsite;i ¼ Dmo site;i pure;i and Dmo pDmo þ RT ln Xthreshold;i : pure;i site;i ð5Þ ð4Þ

The second type might occur with entities that are too small to produce fruitful anesthetic perturbations. These changes in structure will always come together with a low value of the fll parameter. Eq. (3) shows an inverse relation between the value of Xthreshold and that of Dmo threshold : Thus, in a system for which Dmo is high, the Xthreshold should be low and threshold

ARTICLE IN PRESS
344 Y. Katz / Journal of Theoretical Biology 225 (2003) 341­349

vice versa. That is, if much work is needed to perturb a site then it will also be difficult to get enough bound sites if the threshold value, Xthreshold ; will be high. Further inspection of Eq. (3) shows that the cutoff is not necessarily sharp. The amount of agent adsorbed is found by rewriting Eq. (3) in the form ðppure;i ÞÃexpfÀDmo =RT g ¼ Xsite;i oXthreshold : site;i ð3aÞ

4. Discussion The conditions for a cutoff that are outlined in this article (rh orh;threshold or Xsite oXthreshold ) divide any chosen set of agent molecules into two subsets, one of which is active and the other not. This extends the cutoff notion and makes it pertinent for a variety of types of molecules: the noble gases, the n-aliphatic molecules, the perfluorocarbons, and the series of CHF2(CF2)nCF3 compounds (a detailed description of this feature and the implications that follow from it are given in Appendix A). The article shows that cutoff events have many origins. The expressions for the cutoff constraints, derived in our article, hold six quantities: rh;threshold (the critical cavity size), Xthreshold (the mole fraction of sites occupied by the anesthetics), fll;site;i ; fll;pure;i (the work of making spaces that can hold the agent), fsl;pure;i ; and fsl;site;i (the free energies of adsorption). This shows that many causes, not just one, might lead to the result that is called ``cutoff.'' Such an outcome defies the temptation of many to attribute all cutoff events to the same cause (Fan and Weight, 1994; Li et al., 1994; Dildy-Mayfield et al., 1996; Godden et al., 2001). We will show below that despite the drawbacks that follow from being dependent on many factors, cutoff results can be revealing and clarifying if one looks at cases where the number of parameters involved can be reduced. 4.1. Cutoff results can be revealing and clarifying From all cutoff cases, a most revealing and the simplest one to evaluate is the cutoff of the noble gases series. The smaller entities in the series (helium and neon) do not produce an anesthetic effect, while the larger ones (argon, krypton, and xenon) do (Daniels, 1998; Trudell et al., 1998). In this case we can neglect Xthreshold ; fll;pure;i ; and fsl;pure;i ; since at room temperature all of these gases are above their critical points and helium is found inactive even at very large partial pressures (Koblin et al., 1998; Halsey, 1982). The effect of fsl;i can also be disregarded, since this effect can always be compensated by an increase in the partial pressure of the gas. The rest of the parameters, rh;threshold ; fll;site;i ; depend just on the molecular diameter s: (The gas to site interaction is determined by just two van der Waals factors of the agent, the molecular diameter s and the force constant e (Hirschfelder et al., 1954; Trudell et al., 1998). e affects only the attraction energy, fsl ; of the agent.) It follows then that the cutoff in the noble gas series occurs because helium and neon are too small to generate a useful perturbation in the site of action. The nice thing here is that the reduction in the number of parameters involved provides a way to estimate the size of the cavity in which the anesthetic perturbation takes place. Such a cavity should have a size that is

Thus, some binding and perturbation may occur even by molecules that under usual conditions are not anesthetics. Anesthesia will then occur, according to this result, when a ``real'' anesthetic agent, such as isoflurane, will be added to occupy the rest of the Xthreshold À Xsite;i sites. An increase in the fll term of the site to a value above, or a decrease in its fsl term to a value below the corresponding value for the pure condensed phase, will lower the point of the cutoff.

3. The cutoff effect and the Meyer­Overton correlation To determine if the cutoff notion embodies in it some information about the validity or failure of the Meyer­ Overton rule is of interest because it is common to identify the cutoff with a ``collapse'' of the rule (Mihic et al., 1994; Forman and Raines, 1998). To compare the two we transform the common form of the Meyer­ Overton rule into a free energy expression. Thus, rather than writing the rule as a logistic correlation of the anesthetic partial pressure to the concentration that is attained at that given pressure in a reference solvent we write it in the equivalent form Dmo ¼ ZDmo i;site i;reference þ r; ð6Þ

o where Dmo i;site and Dmi;reference are the standard free energies of the agent i: Z is the slope of the Meyer­ Overton line and r is its intercept. A comparison of Eq. (6) to Eq. (5) shows that there is no connection between the cutoff and the Meyer­ Overton rule. The Meyer­Overton parameters depend on the features of the reference solvent, while the cutoff depends on the properties of the condensed phase of the pure agent. The potency (which is the Meyer­Overton measure of the strength of the interaction between agent and site) and the point of cutoff are not correlated. So, a very high potency may still happen at the point of cutoff. This means that the Meyer­Overton correlation is not able even to hint when a cutoff will occur. It is important to note in this context that a discovery of lipid-soluble inhaled compounds that lack an anesthetic effect has raised doubts if the Meyer­Overton rule is valid (Eger et al., 1999a, b). According to this analysis, the doubts are not founded and the cutoff does not follow from a violation of the Meyer­Overton rule.

ARTICLE IN PRESS
Y. Katz / Journal of Theoretical Biology 225 (2003) 341­349 345

larger than that of neon (s ¼ 2:75 A, nonanesthetic) but smaller than the size of argon (s ¼ 3:4 A, anesthetic). We also learn that those atoms in the site, that the gas displaces, are involved directly in the anesthetic process. Interesting results emerge from the comparison of the cutoff for alcohols with that for the alkanes. The cutoff for alcohols is higher than that for alkanes, despite the fact that the formers have lower vapor pressures than the corresponding alkanes (Eckenhoff et al., 1999). Insertion of these data into Eq. (3a) shows that the higher cutoff point follows from a larger affinity, Dmo ; of the alcohols to the site. Thus, it arises either from a larger energy of binding, fsl ; or from a lower perturbation energy, fll : To simplify further this result, we use the fact that the alcohols and the corresponding alkanes have a similar geometry, which means that they have similar fll terms. Hence, the larger affinity of the alcohols arises from their stronger binding (i.e., larger fsl ) to the site. The difference in fsl values has to follow from the fact that alcohols have a polar group and alkanes have not. Also, polar groups have a significant effect on fsl only when they can interact with other polar groups, otherwise their effect is quite similar to that of nonpolar groups (Hirschfelder et al., 1954; Hildebrand and Scott, 1964). This leads us to the remarkable conclusion that the site must have, at least, one polar group. (The same conclusion has been reached using a different and independent line of reasoning. Katz and Simon, 1977, reached the same conclusion by the use of the Meyer­Overton rule.) It is also useful to compare the cutoff of the perfluorocarbons with that of the aliphatic alcohols. The cutoff of the perfluorocarbons, occurs with ``a sudden break'' at the C2 member, while the cutoff of the aliphatic alcohols is ``smooth'' and it occurs at C12 (Liu et al., 1993). The vapor pressures of the former are higher than the ones of the corresponding alcohols. Thus, it follows from Eq. (3a) that the low cutoff for the perfluorocarbons is due to the higher Dmo ¼ fll À fsl values of these compounds at the site. To see if this follows from a small interaction, fsl ; or from a larger energy of perturbation, fll ; we refer to the ``hard sphere'' properties, e and s; of the two compounds. These two features, the force constant e and the diameter s determine, respectively, the values of fsl and fll : Inspection of e and s values then shows that the lower cutoff value of the perfluorocarbons is the result of two effects: a weak interaction, fsl ; with the site, and of a larger energy of perturbation, fll (for CF4 e=k ¼ 152 K and s ¼ 4:70 A; for C2H6 e=k ¼ 236 K and s ¼ 4:38 A; for ethanol e=k ¼ 415 K and s ¼ 4:37 A). The site of anesthetic action thus appears to be located in a ``narrow'' and rather ``rigid'' cavity. The interaction between the C2F6 and the site is too small to push the cavity apart and to make a perturbation of the needed

size. The alcohols and alkanes, with their larger interaction and their smaller size, manage to activate the site and cause anesthesia. An interesting simple case is found when comparing two sites that have the same binding capacity, fsl ; but different tendencies, fll ; to be perturbed by alcohols. In such a case, the cutoff in the site with the larger propensity to be perturbed will occur at a longer chain length (see Eq. (3a). Note that Dmo ¼ fll À fsl and that fsl and Xthreshold are assumed to be the same for both sites. Thus, a lower partial pressure is needed to perturb the site that demands less investment of perturbation energy, fll ). The largest chain length for cutoff reached under such conditions, is for a site that is purely adsorptive (i.e., fll ¼ 0). This finding can be used to rationalize why for the n-alcohol series the cutoff in firefly luciferase occurs at C14­C16 (Franks and Lieb, 1985) while in the ligand-gated receptors tested (Godden et al., 2001) it occurs at shorter chain lengths. The cutoff for GABAA and glycine receptors is at C10­C12 and the cutoff for NMDA and kainate receptors is at C7­C8 level (Dildy-Mayfield et al., 1996; Wick et al., 1998). The comparison of cutoff points of the wild-type site with one of its point mutation versions also falls into this setting. According to Eq. (3a), the mutant with the lower cutoff point will be the one where the gain in free energy upon binding of an agent to the site is smaller (i.e., where dDmo ¼ dðfll À fsl Þ > 0). An example for which this kind of analysis is relevant appears in the case of GABA r1 receptor when Ile-307 or Trp-328 are mutated to smaller residues. In this case, it is the smaller mutations that shows a larger value for the cutoff point for alcohols, which means that ðfll;wt À fll;mutant Þ > ðfsl;wt À fsl;mutant Þ (Wick et al., 1998). (Similar tendency is seen in the case of the Gly a1 receptor upon comparison of the wild type to the mutant Ser267Glu. In this case, the higher cutoff occurs with the wild type (Wick et al., 1998).) These results support two distinct cases. One is that the alcohols bind to the mentioned amino acid residues. It is also possible, however, that the mutations mentioned are inserted at a location that is remote from the binding site. In the first case, the mutation affects both, the energy of perturbation fll ; and the energy of binding fsl ; but not to the same extent. We should then expect to find a large difference in the cutoff values of alcohols and alkanes when the polar mutant I307S will be compared to the nonpolar mutant I307A. (The interaction of alcohols with polar groups is much stronger than their interaction with nonpolar groups. The interaction of alkanes with polar groups is about equal to their interaction with nonpolar groups.) In the second case, the mutation will affect only the fll term and the difference in the effects between the I307S and the I307A mutant will not be too large.

ARTICLE IN PRESS
346 Y. Katz / Journal of Theoretical Biology 225 (2003) 341­349

4.2. Toward a molecular interpretation of cutoff effects The result that emerges from the discussion is that cutoff data can furnish important clues to the structure of anesthetic sites. We highlight these by reference to the ``weighted average site'' of the rat. This hypothetical site is the site that if existed would have produced all the in vivo cutoff results found for rats. The cutoff for the noble gases would have occurred with neon, the cutoff for alcohols would have been higher than that of the alkanes, and the one for the perfluorocarbons would have been much lower and much sharper than that of the alcohols (Liu et al., 1993, 1994; Koblin et al., 1998). We refer to this site for two reasons. First, it may allow to assess how consistent with the in vivo results is a structure of a given specific receptor. A similarity in the structures would suggest that the former plays a pronounced role in the anesthetic action. Another reason is that we could not find enough cutoff data for specific receptor sites, such as the GABAA receptor. However, the fact that we deal with a hypothetical site and not with actual receptor sites makes little difference here. What we get for the hypothetical site show the kind of information that cutoff results can yield when they are applied to specific receptor sites. For the in vivo ``site,'' the noble gas results disclose that only those few atoms that surround the adsorbed gas can be involved directly in the anesthetic action. For an anesthetic perturbation to take place these atoms must be displaced by at least 0.3 A, but not more than 1.7 A, from their equilibrium positions. (This follows from the fact that argon with a diameter s ¼ 3:4 A is anesthetic while neon with a diameter of s ¼ 2:75 A is not.) The comparison of cutoff points of the n-alcohols and the n-alkanes shows that at least some of the atoms

of the site are polar atoms. (This explains why the site binds alcohol molecules stronger than it bind alkanes and why the cutoff point of the n-alcohols are higher than that of the n-alkanes.) It also shows that the polar atoms of the site take part in the anesthetic perturbation. (Otherwise, the potency of methanol would not differ that much from the potency of methane and ethane.) We learn from the difference in the features of the cutoff of perfluorocarbons and that of n-alkanes that the site of anesthetic action has a ``narrow'' and rather ``rigid'' space. (Interactions of the fluorocarbons with the site fail to supply the amount of energy which the change in its geometry requires.) We learn that the CHF2(CF2)nCH2OH compounds exert anesthetic actions that reach their maximum effect when n ¼ 3 (Eger et al., 1999a). This means that these compounds, in contrast to the perfluorocarbons, have enough ``battery power'' to ``push apart'' some of the atoms of the site. Since the end to end distance of a five carbon chain molecule is about 5 A, we may conclude that the narrow space in which anesthetic agents reside is at least 5 A long. However, the fact that even molecules as small as argon are anesthetics, shows that the atoms of the site that actually take part in the anesthetic process comprise just a fraction of those atoms ``pushed apart.'' The description of the site is depicted in Fig. 2. It follows from the above discussion, that this should also be the structure of GABAA receptor if the premise, that the later is the receptor most involved in the anesthetic process, were correct (Franks and Lieb, 1994). In conclusion, the article was set to evaluate how good and useful is the cutoff criterion. For this purpose, we augmented the existing definitions of the cutoff through the use of thermodynamics and by reference to two constraints. We show that this procedure introduces

5.0A

(A)

(B)

Fig. 2. Cartoon showing the adsorption of a solute molecule (shaded) 5 A long into a site (depicted as two empty spaces). The dark spaces represent polar groups, one in the solute and the other on the site. The comparison between Figs. 2A and B shows that the adsorption of the solute takes place in a crevice on the site that is at least 5 A long. It also shows that the adsorption is accompanied by displacement of elements of the site. The anesthetic perturbation takes place at the ``head'' of the solute, i.e., where the polar group of the site lies. At this place, the distance between the walls of the crevice when an effective anesthetic action occurs is B3A. The ``tail'' of the solute is used to energize the adsorption of the solute into the site.

ARTICLE IN PRESS
Y. Katz / Journal of Theoretical Biology 225 (2003) 341­349 347

economy of thought (it allows to relate to all cutoff data from a unified point of view) and new ways of looking at familiar cases. In this way, we refute the idea that the cutoff results from the failure of the Meyer­Overton rule. The conclusion that follows from this article is that the cutoff is a powerful tool for assessing the anesthetic state. And, if used properly it can be used to find the molecular features of specific target sites. (We showed that cutoff data can reveal key features of the hypothetical in vivo anesthetic site. This result is of interest because it is thought that anesthetic actions at a single receptor parallel the in vivo action (Mascia et al., 2000).)

Acknowledgements The author is very grateful to Dr. S. A. Simon of Duke University for his most rewarding remarks and suggestions.

Appendix A Only the larger members of the noble gases set and the smaller members of the others sets are anesthetics (Daniels, 1998; Trudell et al., 1998; Liu et al., 1994; Eger et al., 1999c). A cutoff that occurs when agents fail to obey the demand rh Xrh;threshold ; is found in the case of the noble gases. These gases are above their critical point when at room temperature, and this allows to gather the amount of gas needed to saturate the binding sites and thus to fulfil the condition of Eq. (3). (Below the critical point, the agents can form a pure condensed phase. This limits the value of the partial gas pressures and hence of the amounts of absorbed agent molecules that can be attained.) The alcohols, alkanes, and fluorcarbons show a cutoff because there are agents in these sets that fail to obey the demands of Eq. (3). It is the higher members of those series that are not anesthetics and this rules out the existence of a cutoff of the type found for the noble gases. Their failure to fulfill the condition of Eq. (3) occurs because at room temperature they are below their critical points. To see what our definition offers, we compare it to five other definitions that are found in the literature. The classical definition of the cutoff point deals only with series of n-aliphatic compounds, such as the alcohols, esters or paraffins and the term ``cutoff point'' denotes the first member in the series that has no effect (Ferguson, 1939; Franks and Lieb, 1987). It does not refer to other sets of compounds and it neglects the ability of agents beyond the point of cutoff to affect anesthetic requirements. Notice that our definition has a much broader scope.

Another definition of the cutoff defines it as a complete loss of activity. And, any agent that can enhance the effects of other agents is seen as active (Liu et al., 1994). We do not accept this strict demand, because Eq. (3a) shows that any post-cutoff member in a series should have the ability to cause a partial influence of the kind mentioned. Thus, we recognize the cutoff for the n-alkanes as a real cutoff despite the fact that all nalkanes do decrease the requirement for isoflurane. The other definition does not (Liu et al., 1993). Eq. (3a) asserts that the cutoff is set by the inequality condition while the extent of the partial influence depends on the vapor pressures of the agents and on the strength of their interaction with the site. A third definition defines the cutoff as the case where the potency levels off with the increase of chain length (i.e., with the volume) of the agent (Wick et al., 1998). It is easy to see that this definition, sees the cutoff as a point that satisfies the condition Dmo ¼ Dmo site;i site;iþ1 : This condition differs, of course, profoundly from the one that we introduce in Eq. (3). Thus, we exclude this case from the discussion of the cutoff. The fourth definition sees the cutoff as a case where the potency of a series reaches a maximum (Peoples and Weight, 1995). The fifth definition sees the cutoff as a case where the potency of a series reaches a minimum (Eckenhoff et al., 1999). We exclude both cases from the realm of the discussion of the cutoff. At a maximum (minimum) point there is a change from an inequality dfll =dxodfsl =dxðdfll =dx > dfsl =dxÞ to another inequality dfll =dx > dfsl =dxðdfll =dxodfsl =dxÞ: (The independent variable x is the factor in whose change we are interested, be it lipophilicity, chain length, or the number of fluorine atoms per molecule.) And, as with the third definition mentioned, these definitions differ profoundly from the one that we introduce in Eq. (3). While we reject the relevance of asymptotic, maximum, and minimum points as points of cutoff, we notice that such points have special features that make them useful indicators. In a series of agents, they would appear before the cutoff point is noticed and they would disclose physical conditions that are strange to the cutoff but that may be as helpful in analysis (Katz and Aharon, 2000). None of the five mentioned definitions pays any attention to the fact that the condition rh Xrh;threshold may also lead to a cutoff. In this, they ignore the occurrence of a valid and meaningful cutoff in the series of the noble gases. From the above discussion, it is clear that our definition of the cutoff is broader in scope and more consistent than the above definitions. We also notice that an indiscriminate use of the definitions may lead to false conclusions. Trustful conclusions will ensue, only when the comparison will be made between cutoff values that are defined in the same way. This is of special

ARTICLE IN PRESS
348 Y. Katz / Journal of Theoretical Biology 225 (2003) 341­349 Relevant concentrations of inhaled anesthetics for in vitro studies of anesthetic mechanisms. Anesthesiology 94, 915­921. Eley, D.D., 1939. On the solubility of gases. Trans. Faraday Soc. 35, 1281­1293. Fan, P., Weight, F.F., 1994. Alcohols exhibit a cutoff effect for the potentiation of 5-HT3 receptor-activated current. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 20, 1127. Ferguson, J., 1939. The use of chemical potentials as indices of toxicity. Proc. R. Soc. B 127, 387­404. Forman, S.A., Miller, K.W., 1989. Molecular sites in postsynaptic nicotinic membranes. TIPS 10, 447­452. Forman, S.A., Raines, D.E., 1998. Nonanesthetic volatile drugs obey the Meyer­Overton correlation in two molecular protein site models. Anesthesiology 88, 1535­1548. Franks, N.P., Lieb, W.R., 1985. Mapping of general anesthetic target sites provides a molecular basis for cutoff effects. Nature 316, 349­351. Franks, N.P., Lieb, W.R., 1987. What is the molecular nature of general anesthetic target sites? Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 8, 169­174. Franks, N.P., Lieb, W.R., 1994. Molecular and cellular mechanisms of general anaesthesia. Nature 367, 607­614. Godden, E.L., Harris, R.A., Dunwiddie, T.V., 2001. Correlation between molecular volume and effects of n-alcohols on human neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors expressed in Xenopus oocytes. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 296 (3), 716­722. Halsey, M.J., 1982. Effects of high pressure on the CNS. Physiol. Rev. 62, 1341­1377. Hildebrand, J.L., Scott, R.L., 1964. The Solubility of Nonelectrolytes. Dover Publications, New York. Hirschfelder, J.D., Curtiss, C.F., Bird, R.E., 1954. Molecular Theory of Gases and Liquids. Wiley, New York. Katz, Y., 1985. Thermodynamics of transfer of noble gases in hydrophobic solvents and in phospholipid membranes. J. Chem. Soc. Trans. Faraday Soc. I 81, 579­596. Katz, Y., 1994a. Anesthesia and the Meyer­Overton rule I. J. Theor. Biol. 167, 93­97. Katz, Y., 1994b. Anesthesia and the Meyer­Overton rule II. A solution theory view of anesthesia and perturbations. J. Theor. Biol. 167, 99­105. Katz, Y., Aharon, I., 2000. Four applications of the anesthetic cutoff effect. Bull. Math. Biol. 62 (1), 1­16. Katz, Y., Simon, S.A., 1977. Physical parameters of the anesthetic site. BBA 471, 1­15. Koblin, D.D., Fang, Z., Eger II, E.I., Laster, M.J., Gong, D., Ionescu, P., Halsey, M.T., Trudell, J.R., 1998. Minimum alveolar concentrations of noble gases, nitrogen, and sulfur hexafluoride in rats: helium and neon as nonimmobilizers (nonanesthetics). Anesth. Analg. 87, 419­424. Krasowski, M.D., Harrison, N.L., 1999. General anaesthetic actions on ligand-gated ion channels. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 55, 1278­1303. Li, C., Peoples, R.W., Weight, F.F., 1994. Alcohol action on a neuronal membrane receptor: evidence for a direct interaction with the receptor protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 8200­8204. Liu, J., Laster, M.J., Taheri, S., Eger II, E.I., Koblin, D.D., Halsey, M., 1993. Is there a cutoff in anesthetic potency for the normal alkanes? Anesth. Analg. 77, 12­18. Liu, J., Laster, M.J., Koblin, D.D., Eger II, E.I., Halsey, M.J., Taheri, S., Chortkoff, B., 1994. A cutoff in potency exists in the perfluoroalkanes. Anesth. Analg. 79, 238­244. Mascia, M.P., Gong, D.H., Eger II, E.I., Harris, R.A., 2000. The anesthetic potency of propannol and butanol versus propanethiol and butanethiol in a1 wild type and a1(S267Q) glycine receptors. Anesth. Analg. 91, 1289­1293.

importance given the wide assortment of ``cutoff'' points of alcohols that can be found in the literature (Godden et al., 2001). Finally, we learn from the above discussion that the number of pharmacological criterions that are used in the study of anesthesia can be very much increased if attention will be paid to points of maximum, minimum, or asymptotic potency. Eq. (3a) has outcomes that stand at variance with existing notions that have their origins in the days of Meyer and Overton. It shows that the existence of cutoff events is not connected to the solubility of the agents in water or in any other reference solvent. We can see that helium has no effect because it has a small size (see below), and not because of its low affinity to water (Koblin et al., 1998). We also see that the cutoff in alcohols is affected by the vapor pressure they have in the pure condensed phase but not by their low solubility in aqueous solutions (Eckenhoff et al., 1999). Likewise, the cutoff for alcohols is higher than that for alkanes because they have a larger affinity to the site and not because of their higher solubility in the aqueous phase (Eckenhoff et al., 1999).

References
Cantor, R.S., 1997. The lateral pressure profile in membranes: a physical mechanism of general anesthesia. Biochemistry 36 (9), 2339­2344. Curry, S., Moss, G.W.J., Dickinson, R., Lieb, W.R., Franks, N.P., 1991. Probing the molecular dimensions of general anaesthetic target sites in tadpoles (xenopus laevis) and model systems using cycloalcohols. Br. J. Pharmacol. 102, 167­173. Daniels, S., 1998. Interaction between general anaesthesia and high pressure. In: Smith, E.B., Daniels, S. (Eds.), Gases in Medicine. Royal Society of Chemistry. Dildy-Mayfield, J.E., Mihic, S.J., Liu, Y., Deitrich, R.A., Harris, R.A., 1996. Actions of long chain alcohols on GABAA and glutamate receptors: relation to in vivo effects. Br. J. Pharmacol. 118, 378­384. Eckenhoff, R.G., Johansson, J.S., 1999. On the relevance of ``clinically relevant concentrations'' of inhaled anesthetics in in vitro experiments. Anesthesiology 91, 856­860. Eckenhoff, R.G., Tanner, J.W., Johansson, J.S., 1999. Steric hindrance is not required for n-alkanol cutoff in soluble proteins. Mol. Pharmacol. 56, 414­418. Eger, E.I., Ionescu, P., Laster, M.J., Gong, D., Hudlicky, T., Kendig, J.J., Harris, R.A., Trudell, J.R., Pohorille, A., 1999a. Minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration of florinated alkanols in rats: relevance to theories of narcosis. Anesth. Analg. 88, 867­876. Eger, E.I., Koblin, D.D., Sonner, J., Gong, D., Laster, M.J., Ionescu, P., Halsey, M.J., Hudlicky, T., 1999b. Nonimmobilizers and transitional compounds may produce convulsions by two mechanisms. Anesth. Analg. 88, 884­892. Eger, E.I., Halsey, M.J., Harris, R.A., Koblin, D.D., Pohorille, A., Sewell, J.C., Sonner, J.M., Trudell, J.R., 1999c. Hypothesis: volatile anesthetics produce immobility by acting on two sites approximately five carbon atoms apart. Anesth. Analg. 88, 1395­1400. Eger, E.I., Dilger, D.M.P., Sonner, J.M., Even, A., Frank, N.P., Harris, R.A., Kendig, J.J., Lieb, W.R., Yamakora, T., 2001.

ARTICLE IN PRESS
Y. Katz / Journal of Theoretical Biology 225 (2003) 341­349 Mihic, S.J., Mcquilkin, S.J., Eger II, E.I., Ionescu, P., Harris, R.A., 1994. Potentiation of g-aminobutyric acid type A receptormediated chloride currents by novel halogenated compounds correlates with their abilities to induce general anesthesia. Mol. Pharmacol. 46, 851­857. Peoples, R.W., Weight, F.F., 1995. Cutoff in potency implicates alcohol inhibition of N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors in alcohol intoxication. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 92, 2825­2829. Peoples, R.W., Li, C., Weight, F.E., 1996. Lipid versus protein theories of alcohol action in the nervous system. Ann. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 36, 185­201. Pierotti, R.A., 1963. The solubility of gases in liquids. J. Phys. Chem. 67, 1840­1845. 349 Roth, S.A., 1979. Physical mechanisms of anesthesia. Ann. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 19, 159­178. Trudell, J.R., Koblin, D.D., Eger II, E.I., 1998. A molecular description of how noble gases and nitrogen bind to a model site of anesthetic action. Anesth. Analg. 87, 411­418. Uhlig, H.H., 1937. Solubilities of gases and surface tension. J. Phys. Chem. 41, 121. Wick, M.J., Mihic, S.J., Ueno, S., Mascia, M.P., Trudell, J.R., Brozowski, S.J., Ye, Q., Harrison, N.L., Harris, R.A., 1998. Mutations of GABA and glycine receptors change alcohol cutoff: evidence for an alcohol receptor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 6504­6509.

