doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2004.08.044

J. Mol. Biol. (2004) 343, 547­557

Conformational Changes Induced by Nucleotide Binding in Cdc6/ORC From Aeropyrum pernix
Martin R. Singleton1, Renaud Morales1, Ian Grainge1, Nicola Cook1 Michail N. Isupov2 and Dale B. Wigley1*
Cancer Research UK Clare Hall Laboratories, The London Research Institute, Blanche Lane South Mimms, Potters Bar Herts EN6 3LD, UK School of Chemistry University of Exeter, Stocker Road, Exeter EX4 4QD, UK
2 1

Archaea contain one or more proteins with homology to eukaryotic ORC/Cdc6 proteins. Sequence analysis suggests the existence of at least two subfamilies of these proteins, for which we propose the nomenclature ORC1 and ORC2. We have determined crystal structures of the ORC2 protein from the archaeon Aeropyrum pernix in complexes with ADP or a non-hydrolysable ATP analogue, ADPNP. Between two crystal forms, there are three crystallographically independent views of the ADP complex and two of the ADPNP complex. The protein molecules in the three complexes with ADP adopt very different conformations, while the two complexes with ADPNP are the same. These structures indicate that there is considerable conformational flexibility in ORC2 but that ATP binding stabilises a single conformation. We show that the ORC2 protein can bind DNA, and that this activity is associated with the C-terminal domain of the protein. We present a model for the interaction of the winged helix (WH) domain of ORC2 with DNA that differs from that proposed previously for Pyrobaculum aerophilum ORC/Cdc6.
q 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

*Corresponding author

Keywords: Cdc6; ORC; replication origin; AAACproteins

Introduction
In eukaryotes, replication occurs once, and only once, per cell-cycle. It is clear that DNA replication is a very tightly controlled process. Replication bubbles emanate from distinct DNA regions and it is at these replication origins that all the factors for replication are laid down in a temporally controlled way. The first step in activating an origin is a process called licensing, in which the pre-replication complex (pre-RC) is localised to the origin. The licensing reaction culminates with the loading of the mini chromosome maintenance (MCM) complex, probably the replicative helicase, onto the origin DNA but involves many other protein factors to achieve this goal.1 In budding yeast, origins are relatively small and well characterised. Throughout the cell-cycle, the origin recognition complex (ORC) remains bound at
 M R.S., R.M. & I.G. contributed equally to this work. Abbreviations used: pre-RC, pre-replication complex; MCM, mini chromosome maintenance; ORB, origin recognition box; ORC, origin recognition complex; WH, winged helix. E-mail address of the corresponding author: dale.wigley@cancer.org.uk

the origin and acts as a scaffold to recruit other factors during licensing. Two other proteins, Cdc6 and Tah11 (Cdt1 in some other organisms), associate with ORC and are required for the subsequent loading of the MCM complex. The AAAC family of proteins are involved in many cellular processes, including DNA replication.2 Although proteins of this family, which includes the Cdc6, ORC and MCM proteins, are all presumed ATPases on the basis of conserved sequence motifs, the role(s) of ATP binding and/or hydrolysis in these proteins is not always well understood. For example, although the role of ATP hydrolysis in MCM is clear, namely to drive the helicase reaction, the requirement for ATP by Cdc6 and ORC proteins is less obvious. However, a likely role for ATP hydrolysis in these proteins is in the temporal control of the initiation of replication, including the loading of other proteins at origins.3 In archaea, the replication, repair and transcriptional apparatus are related to eukaryotes more closely than to eubacteria. DNA replication appears to be initiated from a single origin in Pyrococcus and Halobacterium species,4,5 but from at least two origins in Sulfolobus.6 Paradoxically, however, the organisation of these origins appears to be more reminiscent of those in Eubacteria (e.g. oriC) than of

0022-2836/$ - see front matter q 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

548

Nucleotide Binding in Aeropyrum pernix Cdc6/ORC

Figure 1. Sequence alignment of archaeal ORC/Cdc6 proteins showing the division between class I and class II proteins. The secondary structure of the winged helix region is shown at the top (helix as open rectangle, beta-strands as arrows). Conserved identical residues are highlighted in green and those conserved in the majority of proteins are shown in yellow. Archaeal species: Sso, Solfolobus solfataricus; Ape, Aeropyrum pernix; Pfu, Pyrococcus furiosus; Tac, Thermoplasma acidophilum; Tvo, Thermoplasma volcanium; Mth, Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum; Pae, Pyrobaculum aerophilum.

budding yeast, with several regions of inverted repeat sequences located either side of an AT-rich region. With regard to proteins, in most archaea there is a single gene encoding the MCM helicase, which then forms a homohexamer (or sometimes a double hexamer) in solution,7­12 although a heptameric ring form has been reported for Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum MCM.13 For the ORC proteins and Cdc6, the situation is again simplified in most archaea, even to the extent that several species encode a single gene with homology both to yeast Orc1 and Cdc6 proteins.14 However, in many other species there are two genes, one with greatest sequence homology to the yeast Cdc6 gene and the other more like the Orc1 protein. The homology between these genes, however, makes ab initio assignment difficult. Furthermore, neither gene product has been characterised very well to date. To complicate the issue further, genome sequencing suggests that other archaeal species appear to have three or even as many as ten ORC/Cdc6 homologues. Homologues of other proteins involved in pre-RC formation in eukaryotes appear to be absent from archaea. Here, we present the crystal structures of Aeropyrum pernix gene product APE0152, a member of the ORC/Cdc6 protein family. We have determined structures in two different crystal forms, one grown in the absence of added nucleotide and the other grown in the presence of the non-hydrolysable ATP analogue, ADPNP. Between these two crystal forms, we have five crystallographically independent views of the protein. Three of these have ADP bound to the protein, despite ADP not being added

to the crystallisation conditions. These three molecules all show different conformations, which in turn are all different from the ADP complex of the Pyrobaculum aerophilum ORC/Cdc6 protein.15 The remaining two molecules have bound ADPNP. These molecules share a similar conformation, but one that is different from any of the ADP complexes. These structures reveal a conformational flexibility of the ADP complex that is altered to a single conformation when ATP replaces the ADP. A model for DNA binding is presented that suggests a mechanism for interaction between bound protein molecules and/or other components of the prereplication complex.

Results and Discussion
Sequence homology analysis A. pernix encodes two ORC/Cdc6 proteins (genes APE0152 and APE0475). In order to classify the proteins, we aligned sequences of ORC/Cdc6 proteins from a variety of archaeal species (Figure 1). These analyses revealed that two subfamilies can be delineated, which we refer to as ORC1 and ORC2. The basis for the division of the families is a conserved motif that may be a DNA recognition helix (see below). This region is highly conserved in ORC1 proteins but not in ORC2. As part of a study to understand the initiation of DNA replication in archaea, we have overexpressed and purified ORC1 and ORC2 from A. pernix for biochemical analysis. We have also determined the

Nucleotide Binding in Aeropyrum pernix Cdc6/ORC

549 similar to that of P. aerophilum ORC/Cdc6.15 The protein consists of three structural domains (Figure 2). Domain I comprises residues 23­213, domain II is in two parts (residues 1­22 and 214­ 299), and domain III consists of residues 300­409. Domains I and II have a fold that is found in a variety of proteins of the AAAC family, including several proteins involved in DNA metabolism.2 Domain III has a winged helix (WH) fold that is found in a number of DNA-binding proteins, including several sequence-specific transcription factors.16 However, the wing motif of the structure is disordered in all five crystallographically independent molecules. This region is disordered also in P. aerophilum ORC/Cdc6.15 Nucleotide-binding site Despite the absence of ADP during crystallisation and purification, the electron density in crystal form 1 revealed clearly the presence of bound ADP in both molecules in the asymmetric unit (Figure 3A). A similar result was obtained with ORC/Cdc6 from P. aerophilum,15 and is presumably an indication that these proteins form a very tight complex with ADP, as suggested previously.17 The nucleotide-binding site is located principally within domain I, but at the interface with domain II. Several conserved contacts are observed between the nucleotide and the protein as described for P. aerophilum ORC/Cdc6.15 In order to investigate the effects of bound ADP on the protein, we prepared ORC2 in which the ADP had been removed. Protein prepared in this way crystallised under the same conditions as the ADP complex. X-ray data were collected from these crystals for analysis (data not shown). The electron density revealed that the nucleotide binding site was now unoccupied. Other than this difference, the protein structure was indistinguishable from the ADP complex.

Figure 2. Ribbon diagram showing the overall fold of A. pernix ORC2 and the three structural domains, I (blue), II (green) and III (red). The molecule shown is of the complex with bound ADPNP (magenta).

crystal structure of the ORC2 protein which is discussed below. Overall fold of ORC2 As expected from the sequence homology (26% identity), the overall fold of A. pernix ORC2 is

Figure 3. Diagrams showing the residues that contact the bound nucleotide in the different complexes, (A) the ADP complex and (B) the ADPNP complex. The protein backbone is shown as a grey ribbon, the ADP is in magenta and ADPNP in orange with the side-chains that contact the nucleotide in cyan. Ordered water molecules are shown as red spheres and the bound magnesium ion is shown as a grey sphere.

550 For crystal form 2 (grown in the presence of ADPNP), we observe two molecules that are complexed with ADPNP (Figure 3B) but the third molecule in the asymmetric unit contains a bound ADP molecule. This suggests that ADPNP is not very effective at replacing ADP in the ORC2 structure, presumably due to a higher affinity of ORC2 for ADP compared to ADPNP, because the concentration of ADPNP during crystallisation was 1 mM while that of the ADP was no greater than stoichiometric (!0.1 mM). Contacts with the bound ADP (Figure 3A) are much the same as observed for P. aerophilum ORC/ Cdc6.15 The ADPNP complex (Figure 3B) retains these contacts and has some additional contacts. A bound magnesium ion is coordinated by both the b and g-phosphate groups. There is an additional contact with Lys65, which contacts both terminal phosphate moieties in the ADPNP complex. Some additional ordered water molecules are present in the ADPNP complex. Although the reason why ORC2 binds to ADP so tightly compared with many other AAAC family proteins is not evident from the crystal structure, it is likely that there is some biological significance to this observation. We find that apo protein can undergo a single turnover of ATP hydrolysis and then suffers from extreme product inhibition due to the tight binding of ADP (data not shown) and no further ATPase activity can be detected. Similarly, protein isolated without the denaturation step is devoid of ATPase activity due to ADP that is bound to the protein. One implication of this observation is that ATP turnover controls the activity of ORC2 and that some additional factor is required to facilitate the release of ADP from the protein, presumably as a part of the process(es) controlling origin firing in archaea. It has been shown that ORC/Cdc6 homologues from M. thermoautotrophicum, P. aerophilum and Sulfolobus solfataricus are capable of autophosphorylation. 17,18 We observe a low level of autophosphorylation of A. pernix ORC2, although ATPase assays reveal that greater than 95% of ATP hydrolysis is uncoupled from autophosphorylation, instead releasing ADP and inorganic phosphate (data not shown). The phosphorylation of M. thermoautotrophicum ORC/Cdc6 was shown to be at serine residues, although the precise location of the phosphorylation site(s) is unknown. However, the crystal structure of P. aerophilum ORC/Cdc6 did not show any electron density that could be attributed to phosphorylation.15 Likewise, we do not observe electron density at any serine residues of A. pernix ORC2 that could be interpreted as phosphorylation in any of the five crystallographically independent molecules. Conformation of the protein The structure of P. aerophilum ORC/Cdc6 contains bound ADP molecules in both complexes in the asymmetric unit and the protein complexes are

Nucleotide Binding in Aeropyrum pernix Cdc6/ORC

very similar in each case.15 However, the two molecules in crystal form 1 of the A. pernix ORC2 reveal a rather different situation. Although domains I and II can be superimposed, the relative disposition of domain III is quite different in each of the two complexes and each is different again from the P. aerophilum ADP complex (Figure 4). These conformations of A. pernix ORC2 are observed in both the presence and absence of bound ADP (data not shown). For crystal form 2, the situation is even more surprising. Domains I and II of each of the three molecules superimpose well with the structures of all ORC2 molecules. However, the disposition of domain III is more complex. For the molecule with a bound ADP, the conformation of domain III reveals yet another position for this domain, different from any of the other ADP complexes. Domain III for the two molecules that are complexed with ADPNP is in a similar location ° in each case (0.35 A RMSD for Ca atoms), but different again from all of the ADP complexes. It is likely that this represents a preferred conformer of the protein when ADPNP and, by inference, when ATP, is bound to ORC2. By contrast, it would appear that in the ADP complex of the protein, domain III is extremely conformationally mobile (Figure 4). When domains I and II are superimposed, the positions of domain III in each structure fall on an arc between the extremes (in both cases, complexes with ADP), suggesting that these conformations relate to a rigid-body rotation of domain III compared to the rest of the protein. If the binding of ATP does stabilise the conformation we observe for the ADPNP complexes one might expect additional interactions between different domains of the protein and or interactions with the bound nucleoside triphosphate that might explain this. However, we are unable to identify any additional interactions that might explain the stabilisation of the observed conformation of the ADPNP complex compared with any of the ADP complexes. It should be noted, however, that although the apo protein can be crystallised in crystal form 1, it cannot be crystallised in crystal form 2 even when ADPNP is added. A likely explanation is that if all three molecules in the asymmetric unit are able to bind ADPNP then the third molecule will be stabilised in a conformation that is different from that seen in the crystals, presumably the same as in the other two ADPNP complexes. The conformation of the third molecule (containing ADP in crystal form 2) is disfavoured, thereby preventing crystallisation in form 2. That being said, the reason for the apparent stabilisation of one conformation over any other is unclear. It is unlikely that crystal packing interactions account for the observed conformations, since they do not appear to be constraining the position of domain 3, which adopts the same position in molecules 1 and 2, despite their differing crystallographic environments.

Nucleotide Binding in Aeropyrum pernix Cdc6/ORC

551

Figure 4. Stereo views of the four different conformations of ORC2 that are presented here are superimposed along with that of ORC2 from P. aerophilum (accession code 1FNN15). The structures were fitted by a least squares procedure using domains I and II as reference. The ADPNP complex is coloured red and the ADP complexes are in green, yellow and blue. P. aerophilum ORC2 is shown in magenta.

Figure 5. Gel mobility-shift assays of full-length ORC2 (wt), full-length ORC2 after treatment to remove bound ADP (wt (Apo)), a truncated protein comprising domains ICII (D1C2) and domain III alone (D3) using a forked DNA (as shown on the right) as substrate. The position of free DNA substrate is indicated by an arrow. Bands running higher up the gel are protein/DNA complexes.

552

Nucleotide Binding in Aeropyrum pernix Cdc6/ORC

Figure 6. A, Sequence alignment of RFX1 family proteins with archaeal ORC1 and ORC2 proteins, illustrating basic residues in the winged helix region in blue. The bar represents the helix and the arrows represent the two b-strands of the wing. This Figure is modified from that shown by Gajiwala & Burley.16 B, DNA-binding model with domain III of ORC2 (red) superimposed upon the structure of the complex of RFX1 (cyan) bound to DNA (yellow). The long b-hairpin or

Nucleotide Binding in Aeropyrum pernix Cdc6/ORC

553 idea of which mode of binding to DNA is adopted by the WH protein of interest. With this in mind, we examined the sequences of the Cdc6/ORC proteins from archaeal species. Several things were immediately apparent. One subgroup of proteins (class I) showed very good sequence homology within the region corresponding to the recognition helix, while this sequence was very variable in another group of proteins (class II) (Figure 1). It has been reported recently that the S. solfataricus chromosome has at least two replication origins.6 There are three ORC/Cdc6 homologues in this organism and combinations of these three proteins bind at the origins. One of the proteins (Cdc6-1, a class I ORC) recognises a specific sequence referred to as an origin recognition box (ORB). Genome analysis revealed the presence of ORB sequences in several other archaeal species. Furthermore, the S. solfataricus class I protein is able to bind to the ORB sequences at the Pyrococcus furiosus replication origin.6 We note that there is an apparent correlation between the identification of ORB sequences in the genome and the presence of an ORC1 protein with a conserved recognition helix. Organisms lacking an ORC1 protein (such as P. aerophilum) do not appear to have readily identifiable ORB sequences either. Furthermore, we have shown that the A. pernix ORC1 protein interacts with the ORB sequences (data not shown) at a putative origin in this organism.6 By contrast, the ORC2 protein from A. pernix does not bind to ORB sequences but does bind specifically to a different DNA sequence (data not shown). If the model for DNA binding by P. aerophilum ORC/Cdc6 proposed by Liu et al. is correct,15 then recognition of ORB sequences could be via the conserved recognition helix of ORC1 proteins in the manner they propose. However, since the ORB sequences are conserved, one might expect the recognition helix to be similarly conserved if interaction with the DNA were by the canonical mechanism. Consequently, for the class II proteins, in which this helix is not conserved, an alternative mode of binding is a possibility. Consistent with this proposal, the number of positively charged residues is greater in the wing region than in the helix for class II proteins (Figure 6A). These observations suggest that binding of these proteins could be more similar to the RFX1 mode of binding than to the canonical mode of recognition of DNA by WH proteins. This leads us to propose the model for DNA binding shown in Figure 6B. This model was prepared by superimposing domain III of each ORC2 molecule onto the structure of an RFX1 monomer bound to DNA. The model shows how the hairpin in ORC2 could fit into the major groove of the DNA, although it is disordered in the crystal structures in the absence of DNA. This model has

DNA-binding surface When reporting the structure of P. aerophilum ORC/Cdc6, Liu et al. noted a similarity between domain III and the DNA-binding domain of winged helix (WH) proteins, suggesting that the protein would be able to bind DNA. 15 This suggestion has been confirmed experimentally for ORC1 of Archaeoglobus fulgidus,11 and for all three ORC/Cdc6 homologues in S. solfataricus.6,18 We have confirmed this activity for the A. pernix ORC1 and ORC2 proteins using gel mobility-shift assays (Figure 5 and our unpublished results). Furthermore, in order to determine which domain of ORC2 is able to interact with DNA, we made constructs to express domains I and II (residues 1­297) and domain III (residues 298­412), separately. These proteins were purified and tested in gel mobility-shift assays (Figure 5). We found that, although the fragment comprising domains I and II was unable to interact with DNA, domain III was able to form a stable complex, albeit with lower affinity than that of the full-length protein. This observation is consistent with the proposal that domain III might be the DNA-binding site on the basis of the structural similarity between this region of ORC2 and other known DNA-binding proteins that contain the WH motif.15 There are two modes of interaction between WH domains and DNA.16 The canonical WH proteins (e.g. HNF-3g, E2F) recognize DNA sequence in a manner similar to helix-turn-helix proteins; namely, by inserting the recognition helix into the major groove of DNA, while the b-hairpin "wing" interacts with the phosphodiester backbone. However, there is a subfamily of WH proteins that interact differently with DNA that was first illustrated by the crystal structure of human RFX1 bound to its DNA target.19 In the RFX sub-family it is the wing that is inserted into the major groove, analogous to the b-ribbon transcription factor family or TATAbinding protein, while the helix of the WH motif makes a phosphate-backbone contact. Although it is not straightforward to assign different WH proteins to each of these families, Gajiwala & Burley do make some proposals.16 They observe that interaction between WH proteins and their DNA targets is via their most positively charged surfaces that interact with the phosphodiester backbone. For canonical WH proteins, this is the so-called recognition helix that precedes the wing in the structure, but for the RFX1 family it is the wing rather than the helix that contains the positively charged residues. In addition, one interaction is observed between the end of the helix and the DNA backbone (Arg48 in RFX1). Therefore, examination of the amino acid sequence of WH domains in this region may give an

"wing" of RFX1 can be seen extending across the major groove of the target DNA. The wing is disordered in both the P. aerophilum ORC/Cdc6 and A. pernix ORC2 crystal structures. C, Stereo view of all five ORC2 structures superimposed on domain III modelled bound to DNA as shown in B. The ADPNP complex is shown in red, and the ADP complexes are shown in green, yellow and blue. P. aerophilum ORC/Cdc6 is in magenta and DNA is shown in yellow.

554 implications for the conformations that we observe for ORC2, which can be regarded as rigid-body movements of domains I and II relative to domain III when it is bound to DNA (Figure 6). None of the conformations of ORC2 appears to preclude binding to duplex DNA, at least on steric grounds. Interestingly, a number of non-sequence-specific contacts between the protein and the DNA backbone are conserved or replaced by residues that could make similar contacts. By contrast, residues that make sequence-specific contacts in the major groove of the DNA in the RFX1/DNA complex are not conserved in ORC2. Potential for cooperative binding at ORB sites The DNA-binding sites recognised by RFX1 contain two inverted repeats of six bases each (half-sites) separated by a gap of two bases. For example, the oligonucleotide sequence used to crystallise RFX1 was: CGTTACCATGGTAACG (half sites underlined).19 The consensus sequence for ORBs determined recently for archaea also comprises two half-sites but with a three base-pair gap between them:6 ATTTTCCAGAGGAAACA The spacings of the half-sites are similar in the ORB and RFX consensus sequences and even the sequences themselves are remarkably similar. We therefore propose that both class I and class II Orc proteins may bind DNA containing two inverted half-sites. The RFX1/DNA complex appears, therefore, to be a good model on which to base the interaction between ORC proteins and DNA. The RFX1 protein binds as a monomer to each of the half-sites in the binding site.19 Binding is cooperative despite a complete lack of contacts between the two protein monomers. It is proposed that cooperativity arises from distortion of the DNA by one protein molecule such that binding of the second is favoured. By analogy, we would predict that two ORC proteins could also bind to each ORB site at an origin. Our model of the binding of ORC to an ORB (Figure 7) raises some interesting consequences when the various conformations of the proteins are considered. As for the RFX1 structure, the DNA-binding regions of the ORC monomers in the model do not contact each other. However, some of the different conformations of the protein that we observe in our crystals place domains I and II of the two bound molecules in close proximity when modelled on an ORB site, while others place them far apart. It is noteworthy that the closest proximity of these molecules arises with the conformation observed for the ADPNP complexes (Figure 7). Our preliminary data suggest that binding of ORC2 to the A. pernix origin is tighter to DNA containing more than one ORB sequence than for isolated ORB

Nucleotide Binding in Aeropyrum pernix Cdc6/ORC

Figure 7. Model of ORC2 binding to an ORB sequence. This model was derived by overlaying domain III of two ORC2 molecules upon the two molecules of RFX1 in the crystal structure of the complex bound to its recognition sequence, but with an additional base inserted in the central region between the inverted repeats. The conformation of ORC2 shown is that with ADPNP bound, but other conformations could be equally appropriate.

sequences, suggesting a higher order of cooperativity between proteins bound at separate ORB sequences (data not shown). How this might be affected by the conformations that we describe here is not clear. Furthermore, although it is also quite plausible that these different conformations may influence interactions with other proteins during pre-RC assembly and/or origin firing, the details of any such interactions are unclear at this time.

Experimental Procedures
Protein expression and purification The gene APE0152 of A. pernix was amplified by PCR from genomic DNA using the oligonucleotide primers: 5 0 GCATGCCATGGAAGTGCTGAGGCACGG CCTC 3 0 and: 5 0 AGCCCGGATCCTATTACTCGTAGCCTGAG GCCATTTTAGC 3 0 The PCR product was cut with NcoI and BamHI, and inserted into the same sites in pET28a. The resultant plasmid was transformed into Escherichia coli strain BL21(DE3) containing a plasmid encoding rare tRNAs (pSJS1240, a gift from S. J. Sandler).23 Cells were grown in LB at 37 8C to an A600 of 0.5 and then induced with 1 mM IPTG at 30 8C for four hours. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 20% (w/v) sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 140 ng/ml of pepstatin, 400 ng/ml of leupeptin, 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 1 mM dithtiothreitol (DTT). Cells were disrupted by passaging through a homogeniser

Nucleotide Binding in Aeropyrum pernix Cdc6/ORC

555 blue-Sepharose column, washed with several column volumes of buffer and then eluted with buffer AC1 M NaCl. Saturated ammonium sulphate solution was added to the protein to bring the final concentration of ammonium sulphate to 1 M. The protein was then loaded onto a low-substitution phenyl column (Pharmacia) in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 M ammonium sulphate, and eluted with a linear gradient to buffer A. Eluate was run on a HiLoad 16/60 Superdex 75 gel-filtration column (Pharmacia) equilibrated in 20 mM Tris (pH7.5), 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT. The yield was about 25 mg of pure protein per litre of cell culture. Domain III was amplified using the reverse primer for the wild-type gene and: 5 0 GCATGCCATGGCAATACAAACCCACGAG CTTGAGG as a forward primer. The product was cloned and expressed as for the wild-type gene, and the early stages of purification were identical up to resuspension of the ammonium sulphate pellet. The resuspended protein was loaded onto a 5 ml Hi-trap heparin column in buffer A and eluted with a linear gradient to buffer AC1 M NaCl. Eluate was diluted with low-salt buffer to conductivity w15 mS/cm and loaded onto a Source 30S column in buffer A, washed with several column volumes of buffer and eluted with a linear gradient of NaCl to buffer AC 1 M NaCl. The yield was about 9 mg of pure protein per litre of cell culture. Gel mobility-shift assay Oligonucleotide DNA (10 pmol) was labeled using phage T4 PNK (New England BioLabs) and [g-32P]ATP. Labeled DNA was annealed to a partly complementary oligonucleotide to produce a flayed duplex substrate.11 Binding reactions were set up using 10 fmol of DNA and protein as indicated in a buffer containing 20 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA. After five minutes incubation at room temperature, reactions were electrophoresed through 6% (w/v) polyacrylamide gel in TBE buffer (90 mM Tris­borate, 1 mM EDTA), at 60 V for 60 minutes. Gels were dried and visualised on a phosphorimager. Crystallisation, data collection and structure determination Crystals of ADP-ORC2 (form 1) were grown by the hanging-drop, vapour-diffusion method. ORC2 protein was concentrated to 4 mg/ml in 10 mM Tris­HCl (pH 7.5), 400 mM NaCl, 1 mM dithiothreitol and drops (2 ml protein:2 ml reservoir) were equilibrated against a reservoir solution containing 100 mM Tris­HCl (pH 7.0), 200 mM Li2SO4, 15% (w/v) PEG 5K MME. Small crystals appeared after one day and were used as seeds to grow larger rectangular blocks of approximately 80 mm!

(Stansted Fluid Instruments) at 15,000 psi (1 psiz6.9 kPa). The lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 20,000g for 20 minutes, followed by heat treatment at 55 8C for ten minutes, then re-centrifugation. 0.4 g/ml of ammonium sulphate was added to the resulting supernatant, followed by re-centrifugation. The pellet was then resuspended in 20 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT so that the conductivity was around 15 mS/cm, and protein was loaded onto a Cibacron blue-Sepharose column equilibrated with buffer A (20 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT), washed with several column volumes of buffer and then eluted with buffer AC1 M NaCl. The resultant protein was diluted in buffer A to a conductivity of 20 mS/cm and loaded onto a 5 ml HiTrap heparin column (Pharmacia) equilibrated in buffer A, washed with several column volumes of buffer A and then eluted with a linear gradient of NaCl up to buffer AC1 M NaCl. The eluate was passed through a HiLoad 16/60 Superdex 75 gelfiltration column (Pharmacia) equilibrated in 20 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT. The yield was about 8 mg protein/l of cells grown up. For concentration prior to crystallisation, protein was diluted with buffer until the conductivity was around 20 mS/cm and then loaded onto a 1 ml Mono S column (Pharmacia) in buffer A and eluted by a linear gradient of NaCl to buffer AC1 M NaCl. Purification of the apo-enzyme Full-length protein was expressed and purified as described above up to elution from the Cibacron blue column. Pooled fractions from elution were concentrated and dialysed overnight against 2 l of 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 6 M guanidine hydrochloride containing activated charcoal. The dialysed protein was then diluted with an equal volume of low-salt buffer (50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 1 mM EDTA), followed by slow addition of ten volumes of 1 M MgCl2. The resulting protein was concentrated then diluted with low-salt buffer to a conductivity of around 20 mS/cm and loaded onto a 5 ml Hi-Trap heparin column in buffer A. Elution was with a linear gradient of NaCl to buffer AC1 M NaCl. Cloning, expression and purification of ORC2 domains Domain ICII was amplified by PCR using the same forward primer as with the wild-type enzyme and the reverse primer: 5 0 AGCCCGGATCCTTACTAACTGGCCGCCTC GTTCTCGG The product was cloned and expressed as described for the wild-type (see above). Purification proceeded as for the wild-type up to resuspension of the ammonium sulphate pellet. The protein was then loaded onto a higher substitution Cibacron

556
Table 1. Crystallographic statistics
Form 1 A. Data collection ° Resolution (A) Completeness (%) Rsymm (%) Rderiv (%) No. sites Phasing power Overall mean figure of merit B. Final models ADP complex (form 1) R-factora (%) Rfreeb (%) ° rmsd bond lengths (A) rmsd bond angles (deg.)
a b

Nucleotide Binding in Aeropyrum pernix Cdc6/ORC

Hg 20­3.3 90.2 3.4 16.7 2 0.4

Se 20­4 90.1 21.7 33.0 9 1.0

Form 2 20­2.4 97.0 10.5 ­ ­

20­2.4 98.6 3.1 ­ ­ ­ 0.23

ADPNP complex (form 2) 21.2 28.6 0.020 1.86 R-factora (%) Rfreeb (%) ° rmsd bond lengths (A) rmsd bond angles (deg.) 21.1 27.9 0.017 1.78

All data. For 5% of the data.

50 mm!30 mm under the same conditions as before, but with 8% polyethylene glycol 5000, monomethylether (PEG 5K MME) as a precipitant. Crystals were of the orthorhombic spacegroup C2221 with unit ° ° ° cell dimensions aZ67.5 A, bZ101.9 A, cZ255.8 A. There are two protein monomers in the asymmetric unit. Crystals of ADPNP-ORC2 (form 2) were grown against a reservoir containing 100 mM Tris­HCl (pH 8.0), 200 mM calcium acetate, 10% PEG 4000 and with the addition of 1 mM ADPNP, 5 mM MgCl2 to the protein solution prior to setting up the drops. Crystals appeared in one day and were used as seeds to obtain rhomboid plates of 60 mm! 60 mm!20 mm under the same conditions. The crystals were of the trigonal spacegroup P31, with ° ° unit cell dimensions aZbZ61.5 A, cZ267.9 A, and contained three molecules in the asymmetric unit. For data collection, the form 1 crystals were cryprotected by slow transfer (increasing in steps of 5%) to the reservoir solutionC20% (v/v) 2methyl-2,4-pentanediol (MPD) before flash-cooling in liquid nitrogen. The form 2 crystals were cryprotected by slow transfer to the reservoir solutionC30% (v/v) glycerol. Data were collected from flash-frozen crystals at 100 K either on beamline 14.2 SRS Daresbury (form 1), or on ESRF Grenoble beamline 14.4 (form 2), and processed using the HKL programs (Table 1).20 The structure was solved using multiple isomorphous replacement with the derivatives described in Table 1. Unless otherwise stated, the CCP4 program suite was used for the structure determination and subsequent manipulations.21 The low level of sequence homology between the P. aerophilum and A. pernix proteins (26% identity) precluded the use of molecular replacement. Initial phasing from the heavy-atom derivatives was followed by solvent flattening and averaging with DM. At this stage, the electron density was of sufficient quality to manually place domains I and II of the P. aerophilum ORC/Cdc6 structure; PDB entry 1FNN.15 The improved phasing then allowed domain III of one molecule to be

positioned manually and the final domain III was placed using FFFEAR.24 Model building was undertaken using TURBO-FRODO.22 Model refinement was undertaken with REFMAC interspersed with rounds of model building. The final model comprised residues 7­409 with the exclusion of loops between residues 294 and 299 (molecule A), and between 374 and 380. Statistics concerning the quality of the final model are presented in Table 1. Analysis of the intensity statistics for the form 2 data suggested the presence of merohedral twinning. Further analysis using the DETWIN program showed the presence of a second lattice with a twin fraction of 0.2 related to the main lattice by the operator hCk, Kk, Kl and allowed successful detwinning of the data. The form 2 structure was solved using domains I and II of the form 1 structure as a search model. Model building was undertaken using TURBO-FRODO.22 Rounds of model rebuilding and refinement revealed the location of domain III in all three monomers and showed clear density for ADPNP in two of the molecules but ADP in the third molecule. With the exception of a loop containing residues 374­380, that is disordered in all three molecules, the final model accounts for residues 7­293, 296­409 (molecule A), 7­409 (molecule B) and 7­294, 298­409 (molecule C). Statistics concerning the quality of the final model are presented in Table 1. Protein Data Bank accession codes Coordinates have been deposited in the RCSB Protein Data Bank under accession codes 1W5S (form 1, ADP complex), and 1W5T (form 2, ADPNP/ADP complexes).

Acknowledgements
We thank N. Raven for providing A. pernix cells, S. Sandler for plasmid pSJS1240, J. Diffley for

Nucleotide Binding in Aeropyrum pernix Cdc6/ORC

557
11. Grainge, I., Scaife, S. C. & Wigley, D. B. (2003). Biochemical analysis of components of the prereplication complex of Archaeaoglobus fulgidus. Nucl. Acids Res. 31, 4888­4898. 12. Pape, T., Meka, H., Chen, S., Vicentini, G., van Heel, M. & Onesti, S. (2003). Hexameric ring structure of the full-length archaeal MCM protein complex. EMBO Rep. 11, 1079­1083. 13. Yu, X., VanLoock, M. S., Poplawski, A., Kelman, Z., Xiang, T., Tye, B. K. & Egelman, E. H. (2002). The Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum MCM protein can form heptameric rings. EMBO Rep. 8, 792­797. 14. Grabowski, B. & Kelman, Z. (2003). Archaeal DNA replication: eukaryal proteins in a bacterial context. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 57, 487­516. 15. Liu, J., Smith, C. L., DeRyckere, D., DeAngelis, K., Martin, G. S. & Berger, J. M. (2000). Structure and function of cdc6/Cdc18: implications for origin recognition and checkpoint control. Mol. Cell, 6, 637­648. 16. Gajiwala, K. S. & Burley, S. K. (2000). Winged helix proteins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 10, 110­116. 17. Grabowski, B. & Kelman, Z. (2001). Autophosphorylation of archaeal Cdc6 homologues is regulated by DNA. J. Bacteriol. 183, 5459­5464. 18. De Felice, M., Esposito, L., Pucci, B., Carpentieri, F., De Falco, M., Rossi, M. & Pisani, F. M. (2003). Biochemical characterisation of a CDC6-like protein from the crenarchaeon Sulpholobus solfataricus. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 46424­46431. 19. Gajiwala, K. S., Chen, H., Cornille, F., Roques, B. P., Reith, W., Mach, B. & Burley, S. K. (2000). Structure of the winged-helix protein hRFX1 reveals a new mode of DNA binding. Nature, 403, 916­921. 20. Otwinowski, Z. & Minor, W. (1997). Processing of X-ray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode. Methods Enzymol. 276, 307­326. 21. Collaborative Computing Project Number 4. (1994). The CCP4 suite: programs for protein crystallography. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 50, 760­763. 22. Roussel, A. & Cambillau, C. (1989). TURBO-FRODO. Silicon Graphics Geometry Partner Directory, Silicon Graphics, Mountain View, CA pp. 77­78. 23. Del Tito, B. J., Jr, Ward, J. M., Hodgson, J., Gershater, C. J., Edwards, H., Wysocki, L. A. et al. (1995). Effects of a minor isoleucyl tRNA on heterologous protein translation in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 177, 7086­7091. 24. Cowtan, K. (1998). Modified phased translation functions and their application to molecular fragment location. Acta Crystallog sect. D, 54, 750­756.

helpful discussions, and the ESRF, Grenoble for data collection facilities. This work was supported by Cancer Research UK.

References
1. Diffley, J. F. X. (1998). Replication control: choreographing replication origins. Curr. Biol. 8, R771­R773. 2. Neuwald, A. F., Aravind, L., Spouge, J. L. & Koonin, E. V. (1999). AAAC: a class of chaperone-like ATPases associated with the assembly, operation, and disassembly of protein complexes. Genome Res. 9, 27­43. 3. DeRyckere, D., Smith, C. L. & Martin, G. S. (1999). The role of nucleotide binding and hydrolysis in the function of the fission yeast Cdc18(C) gene product. Genetics, 151, 1445­1457. 4. Myllykallio, H., Lopez, P., Lopez-Garcia, P., Heilig, R., Saurin, W., Zivanovic, Y. et al. (2000). Bacterial mode of replication with eukaryotic-like machinery in a hyperthermophilic archaeon. Science, 288, 2212­2215. 5. Berquist, B. R. & DasSarma, S. (2003). An archaeal chromosomal autonomously replicating sequence element from an extreme halophile, Halobacterium sp. strain NRC-1. J. Bacteriol. 185, 5959­5966. 6. Robinson, N. P., Dionne, I., Lundgren, M., Marsh, V. L., Bernander, R. & Bell, S. D. (2004). Identification of two origins of replication in the single chromosome of the archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus. Cell, 116, 25­38. 7. Kelman, Z., Lee, J. K. & Hurwitz, J. (1999). The single minichromosome maintenance protein of Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum DeltaH contains DNA helicase activity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 96, 14783­14788. 8. Chong, J. P., Hayashi, M. K., Simon, M. N., Xu, R. M. & Stillman, B. (2000). A double-hexamer archaeal minichromosome maintenance protein is an ATPdependent DNA helicase. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 97, 1530­1535. 9. Schechter, D. F., Ying, C. Y. & Gautier, J. (2000). The intrinsic DNA helicase activity of Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum delta H minichromosome maintenance protein. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 15049­15059. 10. Carpentieri, F., De Felice, M., De Falco, M., Rossi, M. & Pisani, F. (2002). Physical and functional interaction between the mini-chromosome maintenance-like DNA helicase and the single-stranded DNA binding protein from the crenarchaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 12118­12127.

Edited by R. Huber (Received 22 March 2004; received in revised form 12 August 2004; accepted 12 August 2004)

