Poster abstracts / Nitric Oxide 19 (2008) S43­S72 can be selectively analyzed by electrochemical techniques at platinized carbon microelectrodes. Based on these results, the decomposition of Angeli's salt solutions was studied in order to characterize the nature of species it effectively produces. Series of voltammetric studies carried out in anaerobic and aerobic conditions showed that Angeli's Salt solutions near physiological pH display at least three anodic waves corresponding to the oxidation of nitroxyl, nitric oxide and nitrite species. In alkaline solution, a condition for which Angeli's Salt is nearly stable, the voltammograms exhibit only two oxidation waves corresponding to the detection of peroxynitrite anion and nitric oxide. Their formation was clearly vanished in anaerobic conditions. Consequently, our present results support the hypothesis of HNO and NO concomitant production during decomposition of Angeli's salt in physiological conditions. References

S51

[1] J.M. Fukuto, M.D. Bartbeger, A.S. Dutton, N. Paolocci, D.A. Wink, K.N. Houk, Chem. Res. Toxicol. 18 (2005) 790. [2] I. Stefan Liochev, I. Fridovich, Free. Radic. Biol. Med. 34 (11) (2003) 1399. [3] C. Amatore, S. Arbault, C. Ducrocq, S. Hu, I. Tapsoba, Chem. Med. Chem. 2 (6) (2007) 898­903. doi:10.1016/j.niox.2008.06.130

Nitrite and Nitrate
P35. Intraluminal instillation and intravenous infusion of nitrite induce vasodilation in a manner independent on the circulating pool of NO bound to hemoglobin Andrey V. Kozlov a, Peter Dungel b, Asmita Banerjee b, Daniela Dopler b, Oleh Andrukhov b, Christian Benisch b, Astrid Feder b, Heinz Redl b, Soheyl Bahrami b a Molecular Base Organ Failure, L. Boltzmann Institute of Experimental and Clinical Traumatology b L. Boltzmann Institute of Experimental and Clinical Traumatology Vienna, Austria We found that the concentration of nitric oxide (NO) hemoglobin (Hb) complexes (NO­Hb) gradually increases with the increase of nitrite concentration in intestinal lumen. However, blood pressure dropped down only after NO­Hb reached a threshold concentration of approx. 10 lM. Intravenous infusion of nitrite in rats resulted in systemic vasodilation, but already at 3 lM of NO­Hb. However, ex vivo saturation of red blood cells (RBC) with gaseous NO and reinfusion did not induce vasodilation neither at 3 nor at 20 lM levels of Hb­NO in blood suggesting that circulating NO pool is not directly involved in vasodilation. In vitro incubation of RBC alone with nitrite results in the formation of NO­Hb complexes as previously shown. When RBC were co-incubated with cardiomyocytes (HL-1 cells), formation of NO­Hb complexes significantly increased. Fluorescent microscopy revealed intracellular NO formation, which was partially co-localized with mitochondria suggesting intracellular pathways of NO2À bioactivation. Intracellular myoglobin, mitochondria, xanthine oxidase, and eNOS are the candidates for intracellular bioactivation of nitrite. Our data suggests that nitrite diffuses into cardiomyocytes being reduced to NO inside the cells. NO formed inside the cells either induces vasodilation or diffuses back to blood and binds to Hb elevating blood NO­Hb levels. Another portion of NO, which is formed from nitrite directly in RBC contributing to increased NO­Hb levels, but not to vasodilation effect of nitrite at least in this experimental model. The pathway(s) described here seems to be a complementary pathway to the RBC-dependent pathway of nitrite-mediated vasodilatation. doi:10.1016/j.niox.2008.06.131 mechanism of vasodilatation with nitrite infusion: we demonstrate that after nitrite addition even normoxic red blood cells produce and liberate measurable quantities of free NOÅ into the surrounding solution, despite the large quantities of reactive red cell hemoglobin. This is direct evidence that nitrite vasodilatation can act directly through nitrite reduction to NOÅ by deoxyHb and not by some other red cell-related mechanisms. doi:10.1016/j.niox.2008.06.132

P37. Radioprotective and immunomodulatory effects of Mentha piperita leaf extract in Swiss albino mice Ravindra M. Samartha, Meenakshi Samartha Radiation and Cancer Biology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, University of Rajasthan, Jaipur-302 055, India E-mail address: rmsamarth@yahoo.co.in (R.M. Samartha) Mentha piperita Linn commonly called as peppermint, belonging to the family Labiatae is considered aromatic, stimulant, and carminative. Recently, we reported radioprotective effects of Mentha piperita leaf extract in Swiss albino mice. The radioprotective and antioxidant activity of leaf extract of M. piperita was assigned to different chemical constituents present in plant extracts. The extract of M. piperita showed excellent percent inhibition of DPPH activity (93.9 ± 1.68%) and was the most effective DPPH radical scavenger, IC50 = 273 lg/ml. The extract of M. piperita was found to be the most active as it nearly fully scavenged ABTS+. The methanolic extract of M. piperita showed high amount of phenolic content (32.88 ± 1.2), significant amount of flavonoids content (4.18 ± 0.6) and the total concentration of flavonols was found to be 0.8 ± 0.1. In the present study immunomodulatory effects of M. piperita leaf extract has been evaluated by assessing the nitric oxide (NO) and b-glucosonidase activity. M. piperita leaf extract treatment showed an increase in NO release and b-glucosonidase activity within macrophages, thereby generating a powerful antimicrobial system. Increased amount of NO production indicates activation of macrophages. The activated macrophages produce more enzymes inducing efficient killing mechanisms of macrophages. Thus, the immunomodulatory action of M. piperita leaf extract could be used for prophylactic purposes and also in conditions demanding the stimulation of cellular response mechanisms to cope up more efficiently against a wide array of pathogens or toxicants including radiations. The results of the present study suggests that leaf extract of M. piperita has significant radioprotective and immunomodulatory effects and the amount of phenolic compounds, flavonoids and flavonols as well as radical scavenging activity of extract of M. piperita may be held responsible for its radioprotective and immunomodulatory effects. doi:10.1016/j.niox.2008.06.133

P36. A model to describe the reaction of oxyhemoglobin solutions with nitrite ions Barbora Piknova a, Agnes Keszler b, Neil Hogg b, Alan N. Schechter a NIDDK/MMB, NIH b Biophysics, Medical College of Wisconsin

a

Nitric oxide (NOÅ) regulates a wide array of biological processes and its deficit may contribute to the severity of certain diseases, especially those with increased levels of cell-free hemoglobin. The discovery of nitrite reductase activity of deoxyHb opened the path to the possibility of nitrite-infusion based therapies to correct NOÅ deficits. In limited clinical studies, nitrite infusions have led to vasodilatation. However, a wide array of possibly damaging reactive radical species is created in the reaction of oxyHb with nitrite, which could complicate nitrite use as therapeutic agent in patients. To determine if free radical chain formation occurs at physiological and/or pharmacological conditions, we studied the reaction oxyHb solutions with nitrite at a wide range of concentrations. On this basis we propose a new model of the nitrite and oxyHb reaction with separate initiation and propagation phases; this model explains the observations at both high and low nitrite regimes. We find that a simple reaction without free radical chain formation prevails at both physiological and pharmacological conditions. Also, we observed that plasma has efficient mechanisms for free radical destruction should the conditions of their generation occur, i.e., physiological levels of common antioxidants, such as ascorbic or uric acid, abolished completely free radical chain formation. Further, we have initiated a study of the

P38. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase acts as a nitrite reductase in human endothelial cells Alexandra B. Milsom a, Adrain J Hobbs b, Amrita Ahluwalia a Clinical Pharmacology, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts & The London Medical School b Department of Pharmacology, University College London

a

Until recently nitrite was regarded as an inactive metabolite of endogenous NO generation. However, a substantial body of evidence now supports a functional role for this anion via its reduction to NO; a phenomenon particularly prevalent in hypoxia and/or acidosis. The reduction of nitrite can be facilitated by xanthine oxidoreductase, deoxyhaemoglobin and deoxymyoglobin (Lundberg et al. [2008] Nat. Rev. Drug Dis., 7, 156). Additionally, it has been suggested that endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) might

S52

Poster abstracts / Nitric Oxide 19 (2008) S43­S72 NOÀ has been reported to be the exclusive product under neutral and alkaline 2 conditions, with N2O3 as the predominant hydrolyzing intermediate. The concentrations of NO in these studies were much higher than those in biological systems and sealed vessels were used. Under such conditions, NO reacted with excess NO to 2 form N2O3 (reaction 3) and N2O4 could not accumulate sufficiently to yield NOÀ 3 (reaction 5). When a continuous gas injection at slow flow into a buffer solution in an open vessel is used, most of the NO (>90%) escapes from the solution and the transient  NO concentration is very low ($10À7 M/s). Then reactions 3 and 4 are partially suppressed and appreciable quantities of NOÀ are formed (reaction 5). The ratio 3 ½NOÀ =½NOÀ  increases with the gas flow. Both the yields of NOÀ and NOÀ and 2 3 2 3 ½NOÀ =½NOÀ  increases with the partial pressure of NO. The NOÀ =NOÀ ratio decreases, 2 3 2 3 and the yields of NOÀ and NOÀ increases with a decrease of pH from 7.4 to 3.3. 2 3 The products from the autoxidation of NO in aqueous solution depend strongly  on [NO ] and on pH. This explains why the damage of NO to DNA and cells depends on whether the gas was introduced over or below the surface of the solution. The finding that toxicity and mutagenicity of NO increases with decreasing generation rate is also consistent with our observations. It is therefore crucial to choose in vitro conditions that match those in vivo. doi:10.1016/j.niox.2008.06.137

also act as a nitrite reductase (Vanin et al. [2006] Cell Mol. Life Sci., 64, 96; Gautier et al. [2006] BBRC, 341, 816). Herein, we used human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) to investigate whether eNOS might contribute to vascular nitrite reduction. The capacity of cultured HUVECs to reduce nitrite (0.1­1000 lM; 30 min treatment) to NO, with measurement of cGMP as a functional index of NO generation, was determined in normoxia and hypoxia (5%O2; 30 min pretreatment). HUVECs were treated with the calcium ionophore A23187 (10 lM; 10 min prior to nitrite) to activate eNOS. A23187 raised cGMP levels in HUVECs under normoxic (control: 12.2 ± 1.7 fmol, n = 5; +A23187: 17.1 ± 1.2 fmol, n = 8) and hypoxic (control: 4.4 ± 2.7 fmol, n = 3; +A23187: 10.3 ± 2.8 fmol, n = 6) conditions. In hypoxia nitrite induced concentration-dependent elevation of cGMP (EC50 = 2.0 ± 0.6 lM, max = 37.0 ± 4.0 fmol [$4-fold increase], n = 4-7), an effect peaking at 10 lM and decreasing with further increasing nitrite concentration (100, 1000 lM). Under normoxia nitrite caused modest elevation of cGMP levels ($1.8-fold). The NOS inhibitor L-NG-methylarginine (500 lM) abolished nitrite (10 lM)-induced elevations of cGMP under normoxic (n = 5, P < 0.05) and hypoxic conditions (n = 6, P < 0.001). These findings demonstrate that within the vascular compartment the endothelium is likely to play a major role in facilitating nitrite reduction under hypoxic conditions and to a lesser extent under normal physiological conditions. Moreover, eNOS plays a major role in mediating the nitrite reductase activity of the endothelium. AJH is a Wellcome Trust Senior Research Fellow doi:10.1016/j.niox.2008.06.134

P41. Nitrite reductase activity of myoglobin regulates respiration and cellular viability in myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury P39. NO-upregulating and cytokine-stimulating activity of antiviral nucleotide analogues ´ Zdenek Zídek a, Antonín Holy b, Eva Kmonícková a Department Pharmacology, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academic Science b Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Academic Science Tienush Rassaf a, Ulrike Hendgen-Cotta a, Marc Merx a, Joel Schmitz a, Sruti Shiva b, Johann Klare c, Axel Goedecke d, Jürgen Schrader d, Mark T. Gladwin b, Malte Kelm a a Dept. of Cardiology, Pulmonology, Angiology, University Hopsital Aachen b NIH c University Osnabrück d University of Duesseldorf The nitrite anion is reduced to nitric oxide (NOÅ) as oxygen tension decreases. While this pathway modulates hypoxic NOÅ signalling and mitochondrial respiration and limits myocardial infarction in mammalian species, the pathways to nitrite bioactivation remain uncertain. Studies suggest that hemoglobin and myoglobin may subserve a fundamental physiological function as hypoxia dependent nitrite reductases. Using myoglobin wild type (+/+) and knockout (À/À) mice, we here test the central role of myoglobin as a functional nitrite reductase that regulates hypoxic NOÅ generation, controls cellular respiration, and therefore confirms a cytoprotective response to cardiac ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury. We find that myoglobin is responsible for nitrite-dependent NOÅ generation and cardiomyocyte protein iron-nitrosylation. Nitrite reduction to NOÅ by myoglobin dynamically inhibits cellular respiration and limits reactive oxygen species generation and mitochondrial enzyme oxidative inactivation after I/R injury. In isolated myoglobin+/+ but not in myoglobinÀ/Àhearts nitrite treatment resulted in an improved recovery of post-ischemic left-ventricular developed pressure of 29%. In vivo administration of nitrite reduced myocardial infarction by 61% in myoglobin+/+ mice, whereas in myoglobinÀ/À mice nitrite had no protective effects. These data support an emerging paradigm that myoglobin subserves a critical function as an intrinsic nitrite reductase that regulates responses to cellular hypoxia and reoxygenation. doi:10.1016/j.niox.2008.06.138 The work was supported by grant 1M0508. doi:10.1016/j.niox.2008.06.135 P42. Lessons from water ferns: Involvement of reactive nitrogen species in root abscission response of plants Sushma Gurung a, Hideo Yamasaki b a Faculty of Science, University of the Ryukyus b Faculty of Science, University of the Ryukyus Nishihara, Okinawa 903-0213 Plants sense multiple environmental stimuli with neither specific sensors nor nerve systems as in animals. Here we report that the formation of reactive nitrogen species (RNS) may account for such universal sensing mechanisms in plants. As a model system, we investigated Azolla which is a free floating water fern. The fern shows rapid root abscission that can be induced by a variety of environmental stimuli. We found that nitrite ðNOÀ Þ, a known precursor of nitric oxide (NO) in plants, induced 2 a rapid root abscission in Azolla pinnata. To explore a possible involvement of NO, the root abscission inducing activity of chemical NO donors were investigated. Spermine NONOate (SNN) did induce root abscission but S-nitro-N-actylpenicillamine (SNAP) did not. Interestingly, the polyamine (PA) spermine or spermidine showed the induction of root abscission but putrescine had no effect. PAs-induced abscission proceeded with a significant time lag which was not observed in the case of NOÀ or SNN, sug2 gesting indirect involvement of PAs in the abscission process. PA degradation

a

Acyclic nucleotide analogues or acyclic nucleoside phosphonates (ANPs) are a novel class of antivirals effective against replication of both DNA-viruses and retroviruses, some of them being broadly used against hepatitis B and HIV infections. The major mechanism of their antiviral action is the inhibition of virus-induced reverse transcriptases and DNA polymerases. The effectiveness of 9-(2-phosphonomethoxyethyl)adenine (tenofovir) to protect against simian immunodeficiency virus infection suggested that the prophylactic effect might be due to an enhancement of activity of immune system. We have investigated this compound and a series of newly developed ANPs for possible immunomodulatory properties that could participate in their effectiveness to reduce the virus replication and/or penetration in cells. Studies were done under in vitro conditions using mouse peritoneal cells. Despite their inability to produce NO when applied alone, a number of ANPs upregulated the NO biosynthesis triggered primarily by IFN-c. All compounds augmenting production of NO proved to be potent activators of cytokine and chemokine secretion including TNF-a, IL-10, RANTES, -1a and MCP-1. Importantly, the NO-increasing activity of ANPs which was found in animal cells can be with high degree of fidelity extrapolated to the cytokine-stimulatory effects in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. The NO assay can thus be employed as a relatively reliable pivotal biomarker indicating the immunostimulatory potential of investigational drugs. Acknowledgment

P40. Evidence for nitrate formation during autoxidation of dilute nitrogen monoxide in aqueous solution Willem Hendrik Koppenol, Hongping Zhu, Dustin Hofstetter, Reinhard kissner Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology The mechanism of NO autoxidation in aqueous solution has been frequently studied. 2NO þ O2 ! N2 O4 N2 O4 Ð 2NO 2 NO þ NO Ð N2 O3 2 N2 O3 þ H2 O ! 2NOÀ þ 2Hþ 2 N2 O4 þ H2 O ! NOÀ þ NOÀ þ 2Hþ 2 3 ð1Þ ð2Þ ð3Þ ð4Þ ð5Þ

