Gen. Pharmac. Vol. 26, No. 7, pp. 1625-1626, 1995
Pergamon Copyright © 1995 Elsevier Science Inc. Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved. 0306-3623/95 $9.50 + 0.00

BOOK REVIEWS

Pharmacology of Smooth Muscle--Edited by L. Szekeres and J. G. Papp. 727 pp. 1994. Springer Verlag, Berlin. DM 528. [Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, Vol. 111] Bulbring, Brading, Jones and Tomita published their volume on "Smooth Muscle" in 1981. Since then there have been many interesting developments in the pharmacology of smooth muscle (SM), and this volume describes most of them. It deals with: structure of SM; ionic channels; excitation-contraction coupling in visceral SM; eicosanoids and SM function; angiotensin and the kinins; effect of histamine; angio-hypotension; effects of neuropeptides (neurokinins, bombesin, neurotensin, CCKs, opioids); serotonin; excitation-contraction coupling in gastrointestinal SM; airway SM; uterine SM electrophysiology and pharmacology; effect of potassium modulating drugs on isolated SM; male reproductive tract SM; urinary tract SM; mechanism of action of antihypertensive agents, Ca-antagonists and K channel openers on vascular SM; drug effects on coronary SM; drug effects on cerebrovascular SM; altered responsiveness of vascular SM to drugs in diabetes. Conjogation-Deconjugation Reactions in Drug Metabolism and Toxicity-Edited by F. C. Kauffman. 530 pp. 1994. Springer Verlag, Berlin DM 486. [Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, Vol. 112] Synthetic and hydrolytic enzymes can determine the net production and utilization of xenobiotic and biotic conjugates. Multiple gene families have evolved for most of the enzymes involved in these reactions. The systems are much more dynamic than had previously been appreciated. This book deals with: uridine-diphosphate glucuronyltransferase (UDP-UGT) multi gene family function and regulation; sulfotransferase enzymes; regulation of expression of rat liver glutathione S-transferases, induction of the Ya subunit gene; human N-acetyltransferases; genetic regulation of the subcellular localization and expression of glucuronidase; microsomal amidases and carboxylesterases; O-, N- and $-methyltransferases; cofactor supply as a rate limiting determinant of hepatic conjugation reactions; regulation of drug conjugation production by futile cycling in intact cells; pharmacokinetic modeling of drug conjugates; regulation of drug conjugate processing by hepatocellular transport systems; biologically active conjugates of drugs and toxic chemicals; acyl glucuronides; UDPUGT in carcinogenesis; sulfonation in carcinogenesis; glutathione conjugated mediated toxicities; challenges and directions for future research. Simian Immunodeficiency V i r u s - Edited by N. L. Levin and R. C. Desrosiers. 241 pp. 1994. Springer Verlag, Berlin. DM 182. [Current Topics in Microbiology and lmmunology, Vol. 1881 The simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) provides a good model system for the study of HIV. SIV has many common characteristics with HIV such as Mg 2+dependent reverse transcriptase activity, tropism for CD4 ÷and a virion morphology with a cylindrical nucleoid. SIV and HIC belong to a large

group of primate lentoviruses. The topics of this book are: survey of SIV in nonhuman primate populations; SIV of African green monkeys; SIVsmmPBj~4 an atypical lentovirus; pathology of SIV induced disease; conserved framework of envelope glycoproteins; mucosal transmission of SIV; regulatory features among primate lentoviruses; MHC of nonhuman primates; SIVmac specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes response in acutely infected Rhesus monkey; envelope sequence variation, neutralising antibodies and primate lentovirus persistence; towards a vaccine against AIDS; lessons from SIV vaccines. Regulation of Breathing (2nd edn revised and expanded)Edited by J. A. Dempsey and A. I. Pack. 1219 pp. 1994. Marcell Dekker, New York. $195. The first edition of this book appeared in 1982, and since then considerable advances have been made in our understanding of the mechanisms of respiratory control. The "black boxes" in the spinal cord and brain have become less opaque. There have been developments in most branches of respiratory control including hypothalamic control to respiratory motor output, the role of the phrenic afferents in ventilatory control, and neurotransmitter regulation of the activity of medullary respiratory neurons. There are also chapters on glutamate, GABA and serotonin in respiratory control; carotid body chemoreception; central chemoreception; effects of hypoxia; sinus arrhythmia and other cardiovascular neural periodicities; and the influence of sex steroids on ventilation control. The new edition will be a valuable source of information to all those interested in respiration. Taurine in Health and Disease- Edited by R. J. Huxtahle and D. Michalk. 458 pp. 1994. Plenum Press, New York. $120. Taurine (2-aminoethane sulfonic acid) besides being a break down product of sulfur containing amino acids also has physiological and pharmacological roles in the body. This symposium volume discusses: taurine {T) derivatives and ketimines; inhibitory effects of T on protein phosphorylation; T antioxidant free radical scavenging; T metabolic response to cytokines; reactivity of T with aldehydes; T transport in the kidney; T protects against hypoxic cell damage in renal tubules; T and myocardial calcium transport; antihypertensive effects of T; effects of T on muscle membrane conductances; T in the CNS; T release by neurones; T and volume regulation in neurones; breast milk T; T in diabetes; T and heart failure; T in epilepsy. Peptide Antigens: A Practical Approach - Edited by G. B. Wisdom. 252 pp. 1994. IRL/Oxford University Press, Oxford. £50. Peptide antigens have been used to measure peptide hormones. More recently they have been used to develop anti-peptide antibodies, which are used to identify and characterize proteins, antibodies and T cell receptors. This volume deals with: peptide antigens and anti-peptide antibodies; epitope predictions

1625

1626

Book Reviews
Molecular Biology of Mitoehondrial Transport Systems Edited by M. Forte and M. Colombini. 408 pp. 1994. Springer Verlag, Berlin. DM 248.

from the primary structure of proteins; solid phase peptide synthesis; immunization with peptide carrier complexes; preparative immu~toaffinitytechniques; immunoassays of proteins and anti-peptide antibodies; epitope mapping using synthetic peptides; epitope mapping using libraries of random peptides displayed on phage; DNA encoded amino acids.

Progress in Iron Research-Edited by C. Hershko, A. M. Konijn and P. Aisen. 402 pp. 1994. Plenum Press, New York. $110.

The continued interest in the role of iron in the body is reflected in this account of the 4th International Conference on Hernochromatosis and iron and iron proteins. The main topics are: biophysical aspects of iron compounds; transferrins and transferrin receptor physiology; iron absorption and uptake; control of iron protein gene expression; ferritin metabolism; erthyroid iron regulation; pathophysiology of iron disorders; epidemiology and genetics of hemochromatosis; development and applications of iron chelators.

In brown fat the adipocytes have an uncoupling protein (UCP) that uncouples mitochondrial ATP synthesis from the respiratory chain and is responsible for heat production by brown fat. UCP is a proton (H ÷) membranous transporter and is also able to transport C1- ions. Cl- transport is inhibited by purine nucleotides while free fatty acids facilitate H ÷ translocation. UCP belongs to a family which includes the adenine nucleotide translocator, the phosphate carrier and the oxoglutarate carrier. They have a polypeptide chain of about 100 amino acids in three repeated sequences, probably derived by triplication from an ancestral gene. This volume deals with: UCP and ATPase; carriers and transporters; mitochondrial ion channels; voltage sensitive VDAC channel; VDAC, peripheral kinases and energy utilization; mitochondrial channels in humans in relation to disease.
A Practical Guide to Membrane Protein Purification; Separation, Detection and Characterization of Biological Maeromolecules--Edited by G. von Jagow and H. Schagger. 166 pp. 1994. Academic Press, San Diego. PB $49.95.

Flow Cytometry (2nd edn)--Edited by Z. Darzynkiewicz, J. P. Robinson and H. A. Crissman. Part A. Methods in Cell Biology, 'Col. 41. 586 pp. 1994. Academic Press, San Diego. HB $110; PB $59.95. Part B. Methods in Cell Biology, Vol. 42. 692 pp. 1994. Academic Press, San Diego. HB $110; PB $59.95.

Membrane proteins are more difficult to purify than are water soluble proteins. This book provides practical details how to separate membrane proteins at low cost. The chapters deal with: purification strategies; chromatographic techniques; denaturing electrophoresis; native gel electrophoresis; isolation of complex III, subcomplexes and protein subunits from bovine heart; purification of F~Fo ATPase and Complex I from heart mitochondria; isolation of ubiquinol: cytochrome c oxidoreductase; isolation of Wolinella hydrogenase; isolation in crystalline form by preparation isoelectric focusing of photosystem I. Full practical details and the theories behind them are provided.
Physicochemical Methods in the Study of BiomembranesEdited by H. J. Hildren and G. B. Ralston. 509 pp. 1994. Plenum Press, New York. $120. [SubcellularBiochemistry, Vol. 23]

Flow cytometry of isolated cells enables the mechanical automatic sorting of cells at the rate of several thousand a second into different classes and subclasses. Rare cells can be detected. It can also can be used to define the epitopes on cells using forward light scatter, and side scatter of several antibodies, labelled with different colored fluorochromes. The first edition of this book was published in 1990, and since then, the technique has been widely used and applied to in situ hybridization; mRNA species detection; chromosome sorting; detection of intracellular viruses and virus proteins; analysis of cell proliferation; multivariate analysis of DNA vs protein or DNA vs RNA; BrdUrd and IdUrd incorporation; GI and (32 cyclin proteins; somatic mutations; micronuclei; DNA repair; lymphocyte phenotyping; reticulocyte and platelet analysis; hematopoietic stem cell sorting; DNA ploidy; cells in tumors; HIV infection; drug resistant cells. The techniques open up a whole new world of understanding what the different cells and cell components are doing in a multicellular organ.

Although it is necessary to test drugs on whole animals, the study of drug action on cell membranes from different organs can be of great value. This volume provides details of some of the methods used in studying the properties of biomembranes. They include intracelhilar lipid distribution, transport and sorting; cytoskeleton proteins; monomolecular layers; differential scanning and dynamic calorimetry; ektacytometry of red cells; spin label ESR of lipid/protein dynamics; NMR measurement of membrane transport; Fourier Transform infra red spectrosopy; X-ray diffraction of lipids. The main emphasis is on the methodology and the value and importance of the results obtained by the different techniques.

