230

Review

TRENDS in Biochemical Sciences Vol.26 No.4 April 2001

Recognition of antigens by singledomain antibody fragments: the superfluous luxury of paired domains
Serge Muyldermans, Christian Cambillau and Lode Wyns
The antigen-binding site of antibodies from vertebrates is formed by combining the variable domains of a heavy chain (VH) and a light chain (VL). However, antibodies from camels and llamas are an important exception to this in that their sera contain, in addition, a unique kind of antibody that is formed by heavy chains only. The antigen-binding site of these antibodies consists of one single domain, referred to as VHH. This article reviews the mutations and structural adaptations that have taken place to reshape a VH of a VH­VL pair into a single-domain VHH with retention of a sufficient variability. The VHH has a potent antigen-binding capacity and provides the advantage of interacting with novel epitopes that are inaccessible to conventional VH­VL pairs.

Probably the fastest and most efficient proteinengineering task is performed daily by the immune system of vertebrates. The immune system produces large amounts of highly specific adapter molecules ­ known as immunoglobulins or antibodies ­ that are raised to virtually all possible foreign molecules, either small or large.
The antigen-binding site of antibodies

Serge Muyldermans* Lode Wyns Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Vlaams Interuniversitair Instituut Biotechnologie, Paardenstraat 65, B-1640 Sint Genesius Rode, Belgium. *e-mail: svmuylde@vub.ac.be Christian Cambillau Architecture et Fonction des Macromolecules Biologiques, UMR 6098, CNRS and Université de la Méditerranée, 31 Chemin Joseph Aiguier, 13402 Marseille Cedex 20, France.

The efficient design of such `emergency' molecules relies on the possibility of generating an enormous number of different antibody molecules as B-cell receptors. The B cells carrying an antibody that recognizes the antigen through surface and charge complementarity will proliferate and evolve into cells that produce soluble antibodies. Despite having the capacity to produce a nearly unlimited variation in antigen-binding surfaces, the antibody molecules have a composition and overall structure that is remarkably well conserved throughout the vertebrate phylum. Antibodies are formed by two identical heavy and two identical light polypeptide chains, folded in four and two domains, respectively1 (Fig. 1a). The N-terminal domain of each chain is more variable in sequence than the others. Sequence variations in the variable domain of the heavy and light chain (VH and VL, respectively) can be introduced at any of the multiple stages of antibody formation2 (Box 1). Sequence comparison of the various VH or VL domains indicated that there are six regions [three in VH (Fig. 2) and three in VL] in which the amino acid sequence is more variable than the remainder of the sequence. It was immediately hypothesized that these hypervariable regions would interact with the antigen, and they were therefore named CDRs, for

complementarity determining regions. (Within each domain, the CDRs are numbered 1­3 following their occurrence in sequence.) Indeed, crystallographic data confirmed that the folded VH and VL domains associate so that the six hypervariable loops juxtapose at one end of the molecule to form a continuous surface of ~1000 Å². Antibody­antigen complexes showed that 190­350 Å² or 400­900 Å² of this surface actually interacts with haptens or proteinaceous antigens, respectively3. All CDRs can potentially make contact with the antigen, although very seldom all at the same time for anti-hapten or anti-peptide antibodies. The antigen contacts made by CDR3 are generally more extensive. These C-terminally located hypervariable regions are the most variable in sequence and length4 because they contain amino acids encoded by codons that are generated by V(D)J recombination, including its imprecise joinings [see Box 1 for V(D)J recombination]. An `antigen-eye view' of the antigenbinding site reveals that the highest variability is at the centre of the site, where the CDR3 loops of VH and VL cluster. Most likely, these loops will dictate the antigen specificity. The somatic mutations introduced at a later stage, during the affinity maturation towards a specific antigen, seem to occur preferentially at the periphery of the antigen-binding site5. The size of the third hypervariable loop of VH, in conjunction with the flexible association of VH and VL at various angles and distances, generates a structural diversity of binding sites that can be grouped into three major classes. These are schematically described as cavities, grooves and planar sites, and they correspond to the size and type (hapten, peptide and protein, respectively) of the antigen6.
Canonical loop structures

At a structural level, the CDRs fold into one of a limited number of so-called canonical structures7. On the basis of the sequence similarity of key sites in the CDR, it was proposed that the same canonical structures would also shape the antigen-binding site of the cartilaginous fish antibodies8. These fish are the most distantly related species to human (of those species that are known to have an immune system), which indicates that the canonical loop structures arose early in the evolution of the immune system and

http://tibs.trends.com 0968-0004/01/$ ­ see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. PII: S0968-0004(01)01790-X

Review

TRENDS in Biochemical Sciences Vol.26 No.4 April 2001

231

(a)

Light chain

(b)
Heavy chain

VL VH CL CH1 VHH

that allow the prediction of the conformation of five out of the six hypervariable loops10,11; the CDR3 of VH, the most variable CDR in length and amino acid composition, is more difficult to predict. New crystallographic data has provided novel insights into this loop structure12,13, but it remains inadvisable to make sweeping generalizations regarding CDR3 loop conformations given that there are ~109 different antibody specificities of which only very few complexes have been investigated so far3.
Heavy-chain antibodies

CH2

CH2

CH3 Classical Ab

CH3 Heavy-chain Ab

(c)
VL VH Fv

(d)
VHH

VHH
Ti BS

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of (a) a classical antibody, (b) a heavy-chain antibody of camelids, and (c and d) their respective antigen-binding fragments. The antigen-binding site of the VH­VL pair or of the VHH is denoted by the red boxes. The yellow bars in b and d indicate a frequently occurring inter-loop disulphide bond within the VHH. Abbreviations: Ab, antibody; CH1­3, first, second and third constant heavy-chain domains; CL, constant light-chain domain; Fv, variable fragment; VH, variable domain of heavy chain; VHH, variable domain of heavy chain of heavy-chain antibody; VL, variable domain of light chain.

In the natural world, the generation of functional antibody genes and the final composition of antibodies are seemingly so adequate that it is difficult to imagine improvements to, or even deviations from, the natural state. But surprisingly, the Tylopoda (camels, dromedaries and llamas) have developed an additional antibody molecule with a homodimeric heavy-chain composition that is devoid of light chains14; such immunoglobulins are called `heavy chain antibodies' (Fig. 1b). Consequently, the antigen-binding fragment of these heavy-chain antibodies is confined to one single domain (i.e. the variable domain referred to as VHH for variable domain of the heavy chain of a heavy-chain antibody) (Fig. 1d), instead of the paired VH and VL domains (Fig. 1c). The immunization of camelids showed that the response in conventional or heavy-chain IgG depended on the type of antigen15.
VH and VHH sequence difference

were conserved thereafter. The canonical loop structures were defined originally by the C positions, but later analysis also considered the peptide backbone and this led to the subdivision of some canonical structures into subtypes9. The comparison between the sequence and crystallographic structures resulted in algorithms

Obviously, the amino acid sequences of the variable domain of the naturally occurring heavy-chain antibodies would be expected to acquire important adaptations to compensate for the absence of association with the light-chain variable domain. Nevertheless, the VH and VHH amino acid sequences

Box 1. Major mechanisms to build up the diversity of antigen-binding sites
A quasi-infinite number of different antibodies can be generated, each having a unique antigen-binding site formed by the N-terminal domain of the heavy and light chainsa. Several distinct mechanisms are at the origin of this antigen-binding site diversity. First, a recombinatorial diversity is obtained by random selection of one variable heavy-chain gene (VH), one diversity gene (D) and one heavy joining (JH) minigene, or one variable light-chain gene (VL) and one light joining (JL) gene segment out of a pool, to constitute the VH and VL domains, respectively. Second, a junctional diversity is added by the imprecise joining mechanisms and by deletion or addition of random nucleotides at the borders of the recombining VH­D­JH minigenes. Third, a combinatorial diversity created by the assembly of the VH and the VL domain completes the antigen-binding site. Fourth, the architecture of the antigen-binding site is enlarged by adjusting the angle between the associated VL and VH domainsa. The primary antigen-binding site then benefits from a specific maturation event by the acquisition of somatic hypermutations that improve the shape complementarity of the antibody with the target antigen. The underlying mechanism of the somatic hypermutation is still unclear; however, it is well established that it is dictated by DNA hotspots such as AGY and TAY (Ref. b). The human immune system is also harnessed with a powerful selection mechanism so that only the cells producing the best binders survive.
References a Padlan, E.A. (1994) Anatomy of the antibody molecule. Mol. Immunol. 31, 169­217 b Milstein, C. et al. (1998) Both DNA strands of antibody genes are hypermutation targets. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95, 8791­8794

http://tibs.trends.com

232

Review

TRENDS in Biochemical Sciences Vol.26 No.4 April 2001

RR6-R2 RR6-R9 hCG-H14 cAb-LYS3 cAb-RN05 cAb-CA05 AMYL 07 AMYL D10 Pot VH RR6-R2 RR6-R9 hCG-H14 cAb-Lys3 cAb-RN05 cAb-CA05 AMYL 07 AMYL D10 Pot VH

10 20 30 abc 40 50 abcdef 60 QVQLQESGGGLVQAGGSLRLSCAASGRATSGHGHYGMGWFRQVPGKEREFVAAIRW-----SGKETWYKDS QVQLQESGGGLVQAGESLKLSCAASGNTFSG---GFMGWYRQAPGKQRELVATIN------SRGITNYADF QVQLQESGGGLVQAGGSLRLSCAASGRTGST---YDMGWFRQAPGKERESVAAINW-----DSARTYYASS DVQLQASGGGSVQAGGSLRLSCAASGYTIGP---YCMGWFRQAPGKEREGVAAINM-----GGGITYYADS QVQLVESGGGLVQAGGSLRLSCAASGYAYTY---IYMGWFRQAPGKEREGVAAMDS-----GGGGTLYADS QVQLVESGGGSVQAGGSLRLSCAASGYTVST---YCMGWFRQAPGKEREGVATIL-------GGSTYYGDS QVQLVESGGGSVQAGGSLRLSCAASGYTFSS---YPMGWYRQAPGKECELVSRIF------SDGSANYAGS DVQLVESGGGTVPAGGSLRLSCAASGNTLCT---YDMSWYRRAPGKGRDFVSGID------NDGTTTYVDS EVHLLESGGNLVQPGGSLRLSCAASGFTFNI---FVMSWVRQAPGKGLEWVSGVFG-----SGGNTDYADA 70 80 abc 90 100 abcdefghijklmnop 110 VKGRFTISRDNAKTTVYLQMNSLKPEDTAVYYCAARPVRVDDISLPVGF--------DYWGQGTQVTVSS VKGRFTISRDNAKKTVYLEMNSLEPEDTAVYYCYTHYFR------------------SYWGQGTQVTVSS VRGRFTISRDNAKKTVYLQMNSLKPEDTAVYTCGAGEGGTW----------------DSWGQGTQVTVSS VKGRFTISQDNAKNTVYLLMNSLEPEDTAIYYCAADSTIYASYYECGHGLSTGGYGYDSWGQGTQVTVSS VKGRFTISRDKGKNTVYLQMDSLKPEDTATYYCAAGGYELRDRTY------------GQWGQGTQVTVSS VKGRFTISQDNAKNTVYLQMNSLKPEDTAIYYCAGSTVASTGWCSRLRPYDY-----HYRGQGTQVTVSS VKGRFTISRDNAKNTAYLQMDSLKPEDTAVYYCAAGPGSGKLVVAGRTCYGP-----NYWGQGTQVTVSS VKGRFTISQGNAKNTAYLQMDSLKPDDTAMYYCKPSLRYGLPGCPI-----------IPWGQGTQVTVSS VKGRFTITRDNSKNTLYLQMNSLRAEDTAIYYCAKHRVSYVLTGF------------DSWGQGTLVTVSS
Ti BS

in all VH germline genes including those of the dromedary19. In addition, a second Cys, in the VHH CDR3, is introduced exclusively during the recombination of the VHH­D­JH genes. These additional Cys residues form an inter-loop disulphide bond that stabilizes the VHH domain21. Furthermore, this bond is expected to impose conformational restraints on the loop flexibility in the absence of antigen so that the entropic penalty upon antigen binding is minimized.
VHH structure

Fig. 2. Alignment of VHH sequences with known crystallographic structure and of one human variable domain of heavy chain (VH) (Pot VH). The hypervariable regions are shown in red, green and blue. The VHH hallmark amino acids are in pink, and the Cys residues involved in either an intradomain (C22 and C92) or an inter-loop disulphide bond are highlighted in yellow. The two sequences at the top are against a hapten (azo-dye Reactive Red, RR6); all other VHHs are directed against proteins. Abbreviations: AMYL, amylase; CA, carbonic anhydrase; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin hormone; LYS, lysozyme; RN, RNase A.

share a high degree of identity (Fig. 2) and are most similar (~80%) to the human VH of family III (Ref. 16), the most common human VH family in terms of both expression and genome complexity17. The amino acids at positions that determine the typical immunoglobulin fold18 are all well conserved in the VHH. However, four amino acids that are extremely well conserved in all VHs are constitutively substituted in the VHH. These residues [Val37Phe (or Tyr), Gly44Glu (or Gln), Leu45Arg (or Cys) and Trp47Gly (or Ser, Leu, Phe) (Fig. 2)] discriminate the conventional VH from the heavy-chain specific VHH. Three hypervariable regions can be clearly distinguished in the VHH sequences, although the average variability of the remaining parts is increased relative to that in human or mouse VH (Ref. 19). In addition, the CDR3 is longer in VHH, on average, than in VHs (17, 12 and 9 amino acids in dromedary VHHs, human VH and mouse VH, respectively16).
Dromedary HCAbs are generated from a limited number of diverse VHH germline segments

Polymerase chain reaction and phage display are routine techniques used to clone the antigen-binding modules (VH­VL pairs or VHHs; Figs 1c,d) from antibodies and to select antigen-specific binders22. It has been shown repeatedly that the selected VHH fragments can be expressed extremely well as soluble proteins in bacteria and yeast23. Several of these recombinant VHHs directed against haptens or various proteins were crystallized with or without their antigen. This structural information confirmed

The unique, functional, heavy-chain IgG antibodies occur (to the best of our knowledge) exclusively within the Tylopoda. It is expected that their appearance must be paralleled by gene adaptations, and altered gene organization and usage. Indeed, it seems that new and dedicated sets of immunoglobulin genes arose in the common ancestor of the camelids. Separate VH and VHH germline genes, probably residing within the same locus, recombine with common D and JH gene segments to form a VH or VHH domain, respectively19. A limited number of VHH germline genes (~40) have been identified in the dromedary genome; this number is approximately half that of functional human VH genes20. However, the repertoire of the primary VHH domains is apparently further diversified by active somatic mutation mechanisms19. The dromedary VHH germline genes encode a Cys residue in CDR1 (or in the framework region at position 45). Cys residues at these positions are absent
http://tibs.trends.com

Fig. 3. The immunoglobulin fold of a VHH (R2­VHH)27. The scaffold is in yellow (arrows are  strands), and the CDRs 1, 2 and 3 are in red, green and blue, respectively. The hydrophobic cluster of Phe37, Phe47, Tyr91, Trp103 and the Phe100h (g on fig) at three amino acids upstream from Trp103 are shown in purple. The VHH hallmark amino acids Arg45 and Glu44 at the `VL-side' of the VHH domain are shown in cyan and red, respectively.

Review

TRENDS in Biochemical Sciences Vol.26 No.4 April 2001

233

that the VHH scaffold adopts the typical immunoglobulin fold (Fig. 3) and superimposes perfectly on the conventional VH structure24­27. Furthermore, the crystal structures clarify the necessary adaptations that took place in the VHH domain to cope with the absence of a VL domain. These adaptations are concentrated in two areas: the `side' of the domain that corresponds to the VH-side contacting the VL, and the CDRs themselves.
`VL side'

The amino acids that constitute the VH­VL interface consist of both conserved residues and hypervariable residues1. It is suggested that the latter modulate the relative position of the VH and VL, potentially altering the specificity of the antibody. Removing the VL domain exposes a large hydrophobic patch of the VH to the aqueous solvent. The side chains of Val37, Gln39, Gly44, Leu45, Trp47, Tyr91 and Trp103, residues of the conserved framework, have fixed positions in all VH­VL pairs and provide an interacting surface of ~700 Å² (Ref. 1). As expected, the exposure of such a large hydrophobic region to solvent leads to aggregation or stickiness of an isolated VH domain28. The VHH-specific amino acid substitutions cluster in this region and render the area much more hydrophilic than it would be otherwise. This hydrophilicity is augmented further by rotation of the side chains of adjacent residues without deforming the C backbone. For example, the Trp103 side chain rotates over its C­C bond to expose its most polar part, the N, to the

environment. Phe37 fills a hydrophobic pocket created by the side chains of Phe47, Tyr91, Trp103 and the CDR3, where the Phe residue three amino acids upstream of Trp103 plays a central role (Fig. 3). In addition, the VHH CDR3 folds over this part of the domain, and covers some of the amino acids that are buried by the VL partner in a typical VH­VL dimer. This reshaped surface explains both the failure of a VHH to associate with a VL domain and the increased solubility of an isolated VHH domain29. Riechmann described the nuclear magnetic resonance structure of a partial `camelised' human VH (i.e. a few amino acids were substituted into framework two of a human VH to mimic a camel VHH; Ref. 30). Mutation of the Leu45 into Arg (and Trp47 into Ile to improve expression levels) rendered the isolated human VH domain more soluble. However, these mutations induced unexpected backbone deformations at positions 37­38 and 45­47, and the side chain of Trp103 took a completely new position. Thus, it appears that the backbone scaffold of the original VH and VHH are superimposable, whereas the partial `camelisation' of a human VH by Ile47Gly and Val37Phe mutations introduces bulges and side-chain deformations at adjacent  strands.
Antigen-binding loops

Fig. 4. (a) The structure of the single-domain VHH in complex with lysozyme (yellow). The VHH is shown with its complementarity determining region (CDR)1, CDR2 and CDR3 in red, green and blue respectively. The shape complementarity between the convex paratope and the active site of lysozyme is striking. (b) A C representation of the structure of the azo-dye Reactive-Red (RR6)-binder in complex with its hapten (space fillings). The cavity between the CDR1 (red) and CDR2 (green) provides a pocket for the hapten. The CDR3 (blue) serves mainly to cover the `VL-side' of the VHH domain. The presence of the two copper ions, Cu1 and Cu2, is indicated.

In the absence of the VH­VL combinatorial diversity, new mechanisms have to be introduced to increase the diversity of the antigen-binding loops within one domain. In addition, there needs to be compensation for the loss of antigen-interacting surface contributed by the hypervariable loops of the VL. Apparently, this has been achieved largely because of distinct differences in the organization of the hypervariable loops. First, the CDR1 of VHHs is extended towards the N-terminal end (Fig. 2). These amino acids form a loop connecting two  strands of adjacent sheets in the immunoglobulin domain. In VHHs this region is more variable in sequence than in VHs, probably because of the acquisition of somatic mutations that are selected during the affinity maturation process. Indeed, DNA mutational hotspots (i.e. DNA sequences that are more susceptible to mutation31) are imprinted in this region of the VHH germline genes but not in VHs (Ref. 19), and the amino acids encoded by these hotspot sequences were proven to interact directly with antigen24,25. Second, the conformation of the CDR1 and CDR2 in a VHH often deviates from canonical structures in human or mouse VHs (Ref. 32). However, there is no a priori reason why the CDR1 and CDR2 of conventional VHs could not adopt these alternative conformations. Third, the CDR3 of a VHH is, on average, longer than that of VHs, and is also more accessible to solvent, thus creating a larger surface area available for antigen interaction.
VHH-antigen binding

The presence of an enlarged CDR1 and CDR3 in VHHs, and loops that exhibit alternative canonical

http://tibs.trends.com

234

Review

TRENDS in Biochemical Sciences Vol.26 No.4 April 2001

Acknowledgements We thank our colleagues S. Spinelli, M. Tegoni, A. Desmyter, T. Transue and K. Decanniere for crystallography, M.A. Ghahroudi, M. Lauwereys, L. Frenken and V.K. Nguyen for VHH identification and ontogenic studies, and E. Blanc for help with the figures. The work in our laboratories was supported by `Biotechnology' EEC programmes and by the ESA grant.

structures, increases the structural repertoire of the antigen-binding site in the single-domain VHH and compensates for the absence of the three VL CDRs. Altogether, the architecture of the antigen-binding site (paratope), and the antigen interaction mode, of VHHs are very diverse. As expected, planar paratopes are observed to interact with a proteinaceous antigen. But surprisingly, in an RNase A-binder, the contacts are only made with two loops24, CDR1 and CDR3, whereas in the carbonic anhydrase-binder only one single loop, CDR3, is involved in antigen interaction. In another example, ten consecutive amino acids of the CDR3 protrude from the antigen-binding site and penetrate into the active site of lysozyme where they mimic the natural substrate of the enzyme33 (Fig. 4a). Such a striking formation of a large convex paratope by a protruding CDR loop has not yet been observed in conventional antibodies. Furthermore, it provides an antigen­VHH interface area of ~1700 Å², which is as large as the interface between antigens and a VH­VL pair34. Finally, a third paratope architecture was observed for a hapten binder. Haptens are normally captured in a groove or cavity at the VH­VL interface3,6. Despite the absence of the VL, a llama VHH was able to form a cavity with its three CDRs to accommodate the hapten27 (Fig. 4b); however, the importance of CDR3 in the interaction was reduced.
Concluding remarks

The recombinant VHH is a minimal-sized, intact antigen-binding domain derived from in vivo matured camel or llama heavy-chain antibodies. It is extremely stable and binds antigen with affinities in the nanomolar range. The absence of a VL domain permits the VHHs many structural variations that are not permissible in VH domains associated with VLs. Some of the amino acids within the VH CDRs participate in the VH­VL contact, and mutations at

these spots are consequently forbidden or at least limited. Such a restraint is not an issue for the amino acids within the CDRs of VHHs. The subtle substitutions and structural rearrangements that occur between the VL-interacting surface of a VH and the corresponding side of the VHH provide an example of natural protein engineering converting a heterodimeric protein into a monomeric protein. The absence of VL-antigen contacts is compensated for in a VHH by an extended CDR1 and a more exposed CDR3. The structural repertoire of the antigen-binding site of VHHs is therefore diverse, and new canonical structures have been identified. Besides the standard architectures such as cavities and planar surfaces, the antigen-binding site of VHH also includes protruding loops. Thus, a monomeric domain that interacts with antigens also has advantages. Indeed, the absence of the VL domain means that the paratope is concentrated over a smaller area so that small, hidden epitopes can still be targeted. It seems that heavy-chain antibodies or conventional antibodies recognize different antigenic sites. For example, in contrast to conventional antibodies, the camel heavy-chain antibodies interact preferentially with the active site of enzymes35. Hence the VHHs directed against enzymes often appear to be potent inhibitors. The design of small enzyme inhibitors derived from the antigen-binding site of the VHHs will be simplified owing to the reduced complexity of the VHH paratope, which will have three instead of six antigen-binding loops. However, it is expected that single-domain antibodies of camelids will find their way into many more biotechnological applications, especially whenever large quantities are needed at low cost, and when immunofusions, immunomodulation or robust molecular recognition units in affinity adsorbents, or in antibody-based protein chips, are envisaged36­38.
18 Chothia C. et al. (1998) Structural determinants in the sequences of immunoglobulin variable domain J. Mol. Biol. 278, 457­479 19 Nguyen, V.K. et al. (2000) Camel heavy-chain antibodies: diverse germline VHH and specific mechanisms enlarge the antigen-binding repertoire. EMBO J. 19, 921­931 20 Cook, G.P. and Tomlinson, I.M. (1995) The human immunoglobulin VH repertoire. Immunol. Today 16, 237­242 21 Davies, J. and Riechmann, L. (1996) Single antibody domains as small recognition units: design and in vitro antigen selection of camelised, human VH domains with improved protein stability. Protein Eng. 9, 531­537 22 Hoogenboom, H.R. and Chames, P. (2000) Natural and designer binding sites made by phage display technology. Immunol. Today 21, 371­378 23 Frenken, L. et al. (2000) Isolation of antigen specific llama VHH antibody fragments and their high level secretion by S. cerevisiae. J. Biotechnol. 78, 11­21 24 Decanniere, K. et al. (1999) A single-domain antibody fragment in complex with RNase A: noncanonical loop structures and nanomolar affinity using two CDR loops. Structure 7, 361­370

References 1 Padlan, E.A. (1994) Anatomy of the antibody molecule. Mol. Immunol. 31, 169­217 2 Tonegawa, S. (1983) Somatic generation of antibody diversity. Nature 302, 575­581 3 Padlan, E.A. (1996) X-ray crystallography of antibodies. Adv. Protein Chem. 49, 57­133 4 Wu, T.T. et al. (1993) Length distribution of CDR H3 in antibodies. Protein Struct. Funct. Genet. 16, 1­7 5 Tomlinson, I.M. et al. (1996) The imprint of somatic hypermutation on the repertoire of human germline V genes. J. Mol. Biol. 256, 813­817 6 Webster, D.M. et al. (1994) Antibody­antigen interactions. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 4, 123­129 7 Chothia, C. and Lesk, A.M. (1987) Canonical structures for the hypervariable regions of immunoglobulins. J. Mol. Biol. 196, 901­917 8 Barré, S. et al. (1994) Structural conservation of hypervariable regions in immunoglobulin evolution. Nat. Struct. Biol. 1, 915­920 9 Al-Lazikani, B. et al. (1997) Standard conformations for the canonical structures of immunoglobulins. J. Mol. Biol. 273, 927­948 10 Chothia, C. et al. (1989) Conformations of immunoglobulin variable regions. Nature 342, 877­883
http://tibs.trends.com

11 Martin, A.C.R. and Thornton, J.M. (1996) Structural families in loops of homologous proteins: automatic classification, modelling and application to antibodies. J. Mol. Biol. 263, 800­815 12 Morea, V. et al. (1998) Conformations of the third hypervariable region in the VH domain of immunoglobulins. J. Mol. Biol. 275, 269­294 13 Shirai, H. et al. (1999) H3-rules: identification of CDR3-H3 structures in antibodies. FEBS Lett. 455, 188­197 14 Hamers-Casterman, C. et al. (1993) Naturally occurring antibodies devoid of light chains. Nature 363, 446­448 15 van der Linden, R. et al. (2000) Induction of immune reponses and molecular cloning of the heavy chain antibody repertoire of Lama glama. J. lmmunol. Methods 240, 185­195 16 Vu, K.B. et al. (1997) Comparison of llama VH sequences from conventional and heavy chain antibodies. Mol. Immunol. 34, 1121­1131 17 Tomlinson, I.M. et al. (1992) The repertoire of human germline VH sequences reveals about fifty groups of VH segments with different hypervariable loops. J. Mol. Biol. 227, 776­798

Review

TRENDS in Biochemical Sciences Vol.26 No.4 April 2001

235

25 Desmyter, A. et al. (1996) Crystal structure of a camel single-domain VH antibody fragment in complex with lysozyme. Nat. Struct. Biol. 3, 803­811 26 Spinelli, S. et al. (1996) The crystal structure of a llama heavy chain variable domain. Nat. Struct. Biol. 3, 752­757 27 Spinelli, S. et al. (2000) Camelid heavy-chain variable domains provide efficient combining sites to haptens. Biochemistry 39, 1217­1222 28 Ward, E.S. et al. (1989) Binding activities of a repertoire of single immunoglobulin variable domains secreted from E. coli. Nature 341, 544­546 29 Davies, J. and Riechmann, L. (1994) Camelising human antibody fragments: NMR studies on VH domains. FEBS Lett. 339, 285­290

30 Riechmann, L. (1996) Rearrangement of the former VL interface in the solution structure of a camelised, single domain VH antibody. J. Mol. Biol. 259, 957­969 31 Milstein, C. et al. (1998) Both DNA strands of antibody genes are hypermutation targets. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95, 8791­8794 32 Decanniere, K. et al. (2000) Canonical antigen binding loop structures: more structures, more canonical classes? J. Mol. Biol. 300, 83­91 33 Transue, T.R. et al. (1998) Camel single domain antibody inhibits enzyme by mimicking carbohydrate substrate. Protein Struct. Funct. Genet. 32, 515­522

34 Lo Conte, L. et al. (1999) The atomic structure of protein­protein recognition sites. J. Mol. Biol. 285, 2177­2198 35 Lauwereys, M. et al. (1998) Potent enzyme inhibitors derived from dromedary heavy-chain antibodies. EMBO J. 17, 3512­3120 36 Sheriff, S. and Constantine, K.L. (1996) Redefining the minimal antigen-binding fragment. Nat. Struct. Biol. 3, 733­736 37 Nygren, P-A. and Uhlén, M. (1997) Scaffolds for engineering novel binding sites in proteins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 7, 463­469 38 Hudson, P. (1998) Recombinant antibody fragments. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 9, 395­402

Interactions between prion protein isoforms: the kiss of death?
Byron Caughey
Direct interactions between the normal and aberrant forms of prion protein appear to be crucial in the transmission and pathogenesis of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) or prion diseases. Recent studies of such interactions in vitro have provided mechanistic insight into how TSE-associated prion protein might promote its own propagation in a manner that is specific enough to account, at least in part, for TSE strains and species barriers.

between the normal and aberrant forms of PrP in TSEagent propagation, transmission and pathogenesis1,4,6. Exciting recent advances in the understanding of TSE neuropathogenesis have been reviewed elsewhere1. This review will focus on the molecular interactions between the different PrP isoforms and how they might relate to TSE pathobiology.
PrP isoforms: normal versus abnormal

Byron Caughey Laboratory of Persistent Viral Diseases, NIAID, NIH, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, 903 S. 4th St, Hamilton, MT 59840, USA. e-mail: bcaughey@nih.gov

In its normal state, prion protein (PrP) seems innocent enough ­ a cell-surface glycoprotein that is present in most mammalian tissues. Occasionally, however, things go wrong with this protein and it accumulates in abnormal forms that cause devastating neurodegenerative diseases called transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) or prion diseases1,2. TSE diseases include scrapie of sheep and goats, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE or mad cow disease), human Creutzfeldt­ Jakob disease (CJD), and chronic wasting disease (CWD) of deer and elk. A key feature of these diseases, besides the accumulation of abnormal PrP isoforms, is their transmissibility. Although the infectious agent, or prion, is not fully understood3, substantial evidence suggests that it requires an abnormal, usually protease-resistant, form of PrP (Refs 2,4). Thus, Stanley Prusiner's proposal2 that an abnormal form of PrP is the main component of the infectious agent remains a predominant, but controversial, working hypothesis in the TSE field. J.S. Griffith originally proposed that a protein alone could serve as the infectious TSE agent if it were an abnormal, pathogenic form of a host protein that could induce its normal counterpart to convert to the abnormal form5. Since the discovery of PrP, evidence has mounted in favor of the importance of precise interactions

Normally, in its mature form after removal of N- and C-terminal signal sequences, cellular PrP (PrPC) contains ~210 amino acid residues, two Asn-linked
Glycans

Cu2+

NH3+

Octapeptide repeats

GPI anchor Membrane
Ti BS

Fig. 1. Model of PrPC structural domains. The folded C-terminal portion of PrPC that contains the short -sheet strands (yellow arrows) and the  helices (pink) is based on a model derived from the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)-based coordinates of residues 124­228 of hamster PrP (Ref. 36). The remainder of the molecule appears, by NMR, to be flexibly disordered. Abbreviations: GPI, glycophosphatidylinositol moiety; PrPC, cellular prion protein.

http://tibs.trends.com 0968-0004/01/$ ­ see front matter. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. PII: S0968-0004(01)01792-3

