Molecular Cell 2

unique program of muscle gene expression (Molkentin et al., 1995). Thus, although the transcription and accessory factors differ, the overall strategy of combinatorial control of muscle gene expression by MADS box proteins is similar in the two striated muscle lineages. Cardiogenesis Does myocardin play critical roles in early cardiogenesis? Detection of myocardin mRNA in the cardiac crescent of E7.75 mouse embryos, the same stage and region in which the earliest known cardiogenic specification marker, NKX2.5, is first expressed (Harvey et al., 1999), led Wang et al. to investigate whether myocardin plays a role in early cardiogenesis. In these studies, single blastomeres of eight-cell Xenopus embryos were injected with mRNA encoding a dominant-negative myocardin mutant lacking the C-terminal transcriptional activation domain. Because these blastomeres give rise to cardiac tissue located on only one side or the other of the ventral midline, cardiac development and gene expression can be directly compared between experimental and control heart regions in the same embryos. As anticipated, high levels of dominant-negative myocardin caused a dramatic reduction in left- or right-sided cardiac expression of CArG box/SRF-regulated muscle structural genes, presumably by titrating out the limited numbers of endogenous SRF molecules, thereby limiting the frequency of productive interactions between SRF and endogenous myocardin. But importantly, these embryos also exhibited greatly reduced expression of the key cardiac regulatory gene NKX2.5. Thus, SRF and its early tissue-specific accessory factor, myocardin, could participate in initiating the cardiogenic lineage via affecting the expression of NKX2.5. Clearly, much remains to be learned regarding myocardin function in cardiac development and gene regulation. For example, while myocardin is a potent transactivator of cardiac genes, whether it can induce expression of endogenous cardiac genes in nonmuscle cells (i.e., analogous to the induction of skeletal muscle genes by MyoD) has yet to be tested. In addition, myocardin's

role in smooth muscle remains unexplored. Finally, the discovery of myocardin raises the possibility of additional myocardin family members that might affect SRF's regulation of SRE-containing genes in other tissues. Intriguingly, while dominant-negative myocardin inhibited cardiac -actin and -tropomyosin expression in Xenopus embryo hearts, expression of the same genes was unaltered in somite skeletal muscle, even though somitic cells express SRF and should also have contained high levels of the dominant-negative myocardin. It will be interesting to determine whether skeletal muscle expresses its own version of myocardin that effectively competes for SRF binding or whether the regulatory signals in somites fail to mediate protein modifications essential for SRF-myocardin interaction. Stephen D. Hauschka Department of Biochemistry University of Washington Seattle, Washington 98195
Selected Reading Aravind, L., and Koonin, E.V. (2000). Trends. Biochem. Sci. 25, 112­114. Chen, C.Y., and Schwartz, R.J. (1996). Mol. Cell. Biol. 16, 6372­6384. Croissant, J.D., Kim, J.H., Eichele, G., Goering, L., Lough, J., Prywes, R., and Schwartz, R.J. (1996). Dev. Biol. 177, 250­264. Harvey, R.P., Biben, C., and Elliott, D.A. (1999). In Heart Development, R.P. Harvey and N. Rosenthal, eds. (NY: Academic Press, Inc.), pp. 111­129. Molkentin, J.D., Black, B.L., Martin, J.F., and Olson, E.N. (1995). Cell 83, 1125­1136. Pellegrini, L., Tan, S., and Richmond, J.S. (1995). Nature 376, 490­498. Reecy, J.M., Belaguli, N.S., and Schwartz, R.J. (1999). In Heart Development, R.P. Harvey and N. Rosenthal, eds. (NY: Academic Press, Inc.), pp. 273­290. Treisman, R., Alberts, A.S., and Sahai, E. (1998). Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 63, 643­651. Wang, D.-Z., Chang, P S., Wang, Z., Sutherland, L., Richardson, J.A., Small, E., Kreig, P.A., and Olson, E.N. (2001). Cell 105, 851­862.

A First Step toward Understanding Membrane Fusion Induced by Herpes Simplex Virus

In this issue of Molecular Cell, Carfi et al. present the ´ X-ray structure of the N-terminal domains of HveA, a TNF receptor family member, in complex with herpes simplex virus gD, providing a first step to understanding the herpesvirus mode of membrane fusion. Carfi et al. (2001 [this issue of Molecular Cell]) provide ´ the first glimpse, at the atomic level, of a receptor-ligand interaction that can lead to membrane fusion mediated by herpes simplex virus (HSV). The authors determined the X-ray structures of the ectodomain of HSV-1 glycoprotein D (gD) crystallized in the absence or presence

of the ectodomain of one of its receptors, HveA (herpesvirus entry mediator A), a member of the TNF receptor family also known as HVEM (Montgomery et al., 1996; Whitbeck et al., 1997). The results were surprising in several respects. First, although the primary amino acid sequence of gD has no discernable similarity to any other protein (except for forms of gD encoded by other herpesviruses), the threedimensional structure revealed a V-like immunoglobulin (Ig) fold flanked by large N-terminal and C-terminal extensions. The closest matches to the V-like threedimensional structure of gD are those exhibited by the N-terminal domains of the cell surface adhesion molecules, CD2, CD58, CD80, and CAR, the Coxsackie virus/ adenovirus receptor. Second, only two short segments of the gD N-terminal extension (amino acids 7­15 and 24­32) were engaged in the interface with HveA, raising the possibility that this extension might be modified to interact with other receptors of choice. Third, the N-ter-

Previews 3

Table 1. Human Cell Surface Receptors Active for Entry of Selected Alphaherpesviruses1 Can Mediate the Entry of gD Receptors HveA HveB HveC 3-O-S HS3
1 2

Also Known As HVEM Nectin-2 Nectin-1

HSV-1 Yes No Yes Yes

HSV-1(Rid)2 No Yes Yes No

HSV-2 Yes Yes (weak activity) Yes No

PRV No Yes Yes No

BHV-1 No No Yes No

Reviewed by Spear et al. (2000). Mutants of HSV-1 selected for resistance to interference with entry mediated by expression of wild-type gD; they have amino acid substitutions at positions 25 or 27 of gD (Brandimarti et al., 1994; Dean et al., 1994). 3 Specific sites in heparan sulfate generated by the action of 3-O-sulfotransferase-3 (Shukla et al., 1999).

minal extension of gD formed a hairpin in the complex with HveA but was extended and partially disordered when gD was crystallized alone, suggesting that the N terminus of gD is conformationally flexible. Because gD can engage multiple receptors (see table), and for other reasons mentioned in their paper, the authors suggest that the N terminus could assume different conformations when gD is bound to different receptors. The three-dimensional structure of gD has been long awaited, in part because there is some reason to believe that the membrane-fusing machinery specified by HSV and other herpesviruses may be different from that used by members of other virus families. At least four different viral glycoproteins (gB, gD, gH, and gL) and a gD receptor are required for the HSV-induced membrane fusion that enables viral entry and cell fusion (reviewed by Spear et al., 2000). For viral entry, interactions of gB and a fifth glycoprotein, gC, with cell surface heparan sulfate can facilitate virus binding to the cell and subsequent interaction of gD with one of its receptors. Binding of gD to a receptor then triggers the events leading to membrane fusion, which requires the concerted action of oligomers of gB and heterodimers of gH-gL as well as gD and its receptor. None of these HSV glycoproteins exhibits features similar to those of influenza virus hemagglutinin or HIV gp120-gp41, such as a hydrophobic N-terminal fusion peptide generated by proteolytic cleavage of a larger precursor. HSV-induced membrane fusion occurs at physiological pH and is presumably triggered by protein-protein interactions. Although the interaction of gD with a receptor is required for membrane fusion, gD is probably not the viral fusogen, and perhaps not even an essential component of the actual fusion machinery. This argument is made in part on the basis of reasoning that within the larger herpesvirus family, the basic fusion machinery has probably been conserved, although means of triggering fusion activity might differ, and in part on emerging but fragmentary experimental data. Although herpesviruses belonging to all three subfamilies encode homologs of gB and the heterodimer gH-gL, only members of the alphaherpesvirus subfamily (the neurotropic branch) encode homologs of gD. Moreover, certain members of this subfamily, such as varicella-zoster virus (VZV), do not encode a gD homolog, and other members, such as pseudorabies virus (PRV), require gD for viral entry but not for cell fusion. Finally, under certain conditions, expression of VZV gH-gL alone (Duus et al., 1995) or

expression of PRV gB plus gH-gL (Klupp et al., 2000) can induce cell fusion, provided the cells are susceptible to virus and therefore express some kind of receptor (unidentified) for membrane fusion. Thus, either gB or gH-gL or both are candidates for the actual fusogenic glycoprotein(s) whereas gD, after binding to a receptor, could serve to activate fusogenic activity, perhaps by interactions with gB or gH-gL. In cases where gD is not expressed or not required for membrane fusion, some other viral glycoprotein could bind to a cell surface receptor, thereby triggering fusogenic activity. The exciting results presented in the study by Carfi ´ et al. whet the appetite for additional structural studies that could define the interaction of gD with its other receptors. The molecules that can bind HSV-1 gD to serve as entry receptors include HveA, HveC (a cell adhesion molecule more commonly called nectin-1), and heparan sulfate modified by the action of specific 3-O-sulfotransferases (table). HveA is a receptor for the TNF family members, LIGHT and lymphotoxin- (Mauri et al., 1998). HveC (nectin-1), HveB (nectin-2), nectin-3 and the poliovirus receptor are related members of a subfamily of the immunoglobulin superfamily. The nectins localize to sites of cadherin-based adherens junctions in certain cell types, including epithelial cells (Satoh-Horikawa et al., 2000). The fact that at least three structurally diverse molecules can engage in functional interactions with HSV-1 gD is astonishing. The interfaces of gD with each receptor are undoubtedly different but perhaps adjacent or overlapping. Amino acid substitutions at positions 25 or 27 in gD prevent binding to HveA (consistent with the contact sites identified in the X-ray structure of the gDHveA complex) but not to HveC. These substitutions also prevent the use of 3-O-sulfated heparan sulfate as a receptor for entry while conferring ability to use HveB as an entry receptor (Table 1). Certain anti-gD monoclonal antibodies can block the binding of both HveA and HveC to gD whereas others inhibit the binding of only HveA or only HveC (Krummenacher et al., 1998; Nicola et al., 1998). Carfi et al. speculate about potential ´ sites for the binding of 3-O-sulfated heparan sulfate to gD. Anions, probably sulfate ions, were found to be bound to two basic regions, one of which is adjacent to the N-terminal hairpin. The authors raise the possibility that a single small molecule capable of blocking the binding of gD to all of its receptors might be identified. Such a molecule could be an effective therapeutic agent.

Molecular Cell 4

The two serotypes of HSV (HSV-1 and HSV-2) and the animal herpesviruses, pseudorabies virus (PRV) and bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1), specify forms of gD that are quite divergent in primary amino acid sequence. As shown in Table 1, these viruses can all use human HveC for entry into cells but otherwise differ in their ability to use some of the other human receptors (differences in HveA usage being explainable by divergence in the N-terminal sequences). Thus, these natural variants of gD, as well as mutant forms of gD, can be used to define the common three-dimensional structural features required for interaction with a common receptor. Because membrane fusion triggered by binding of different forms of gD to a common receptor requires participation of other glycoproteins from the same virus, the natural variants of gD also provide a means to define domains of gD required for postbinding interactions leading to membrane fusion. Challenges for the future include definition of the herpesvirus fusion machinery and determination of the role of gD-receptor interactions in initiating the events that lead to HSV-induced membrane fusion.

Selected Reading Brandimarti, R., Huang, T., Roizman, B., and Campadelli-Fiume, G. (1994). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 5406­5410. Carfi, A., Willis, S.H., Whitbeck, J.C., Krummenacher, C., Cohen, ´ G.H., Eisenberg, R.J., and Wiley, D.C. (2001). Mol. Cell 8, 169­179. Dean, H.J., Terhune, S., Shieh, M.-T., Susmarski, N., and Spear, P.G. (1994). Virology 199, 67­80. Duus, K.M., Hatfield, C., and Grose, C. (1995). Virology 210, 429­440. Klupp, B.G., Nixdorf, R., and Mettenleiter, T.C. (2000). J. Virol. 74, 6760­6768. Krummenacher, C., Nicola, A.V., Whitbeck, J.C., Lou, H., Hou, W., Lambris, J.D., Geraghty, R.J., Spear, P.G., Cohen, G.H., and Eisenberg, R.J. (1998). J. Virol. 72, 7064­7074. Mauri, D.N., Ebner, R., Montgomery, R.I., Kochel, K.D., Cheung, T.C., Yu, G.-L., Ruben, S., Murphy, M., Eisenberg, R.J., Cohen, G.H., et al. (1998). Immunity 8, 21­30. Montgomery, R.I., Warner, M.S., Lum, B.J., and Spear, P.G. (1996). Cell 87, 427­436. Nicola, A.V., Ponce de Leon, M., Xu, R., Hou, W., Whitbeck, J.C., Krummenacher, C., Montgomery, R.I., Spear, P.G., Eisenberg, R.J., and Cohen, G.H. (1998). J. Virol. 72, 3595­3601. Satoh-Horikawa, K., Nakanishi, H., Takahashi, K., Miyahara, M., Nishimura, M., Tachibana, K., Mizoguchi, A., and Takai, Y. (2000). J. Biol. Chem. 275, 10291­10299. Shukla, D., Liu, J., Blaiklock, P., Shworak, N.W., Bai, X., Esko, J.D., Cohen, G.H., Eisenberg, R.J., Rosenberg, R.D., and Spear, P.G. (1999). Cell 99, 13­22. Spear, P.G., Eisenberg, R.J., and Cohen, G.H. (2000). Virology 275, 1­8. Whitbeck, J.C., Peng, C., Lou, H., Xu, R., Willis, S.H., Ponce de Leon, M., Peng, T., Nicola, A.V., Montgomery, R.I., Warner, M.S., et al. (1997). J. Virol. 71, 6083­6093.

Patricia G. Spear Department of Microbiology-Immunology Northwestern University Medical School Chicago, Illinois 60611

The Importance of Being Cleaved: An Essential Step in Killing by Enzymatic Colicins
In this issue, de Zamaroczy et al. show that cleavage of the bacterial toxin colicin D is required for its ability to kill cells. Surprisingly, the cleavage requires the inner membrane peptidase LepB that normally functions in protein secretion. Microorganisms in nature have developed a variety of mechanisms to help them compete for scarce resources in their environment. One mechanism that bacteria have evolved to kill off their competition is the production of bacteriocins. Thus, many E. coli produce one type of colicin. These plasmid-encoded protein toxins are released into the surrounding medium and kill closely related sensitive bacteria. In natural populations, around 30% of all E. coli produce a colicin, so colicin production clearly confers a selective advantage to the producing cells (Riley, 1999). All bacteria that produce a colicin are immune to the effects of that particular toxin by virtue of their production of another plasmid-encoded protective protein, the immunity protein (Cramer et al., 1999). Various colicins have appropriated a relatively small number of different E. coli outer membrane nutrient binding proteins as receptors for attaching to target cells. Receptor binding is mediated by the middle part

of the colicin polypeptide chain. After binding to the outer membrane, all colicins use either of two sets of E. coli proteins, the Tol proteins (TolA, B, Q, and R) or the TonB group (TonB, ExbB, and D), for translocation across the outer membrane and periplasm to their targets inside the cell (Braun et al., 1994). The N-terminal part of the colicin molecule is involved in this second set of steps in the killing process. Finally, the lethal activity is found in the C-terminal third of the protein. Colicin killing mechanisms can be divided into two basic groups. One large group makes voltage-dependent channels in the inner membrane of sensitive cells and kills them by collapsing the electrochemical gradient across the membrane. The other large group acts as nucleases, either DNases or very specific RNases, in the cytoplasm of the target cell (see figure). Colicin aficionados have long postulated the existence of target cell mutations that could distinguish between pore-forming colicins and nuclease colicins sharing common receptor and translocation pathways. The colicins that act in the cytoplasm must cross a second membrane and therefore presumably require additional steps to do that. In addition, unlike the pore formers, whose immunity proteins reside in the inner membrane of the producing cell, the immunity proteins of nuclease colicins bind with extremely high affinity to their cognate colicin and leave the producing cell as a 1:1 complex with the toxin (Jakes and Lazdunski, 1992). The immunity protein must therefore be removed at some point before the colicin enters the cytoplasm of its target. Exactly when and how that takes place has been an open ques-

