194

Active transport of iron and siderophore antibiotics Volkmar Braun* and Michael Braun
Bacteria solubilize iron (Fe3+) with secreted siderophores, which are then taken up as Fe3+­siderophore complexes. Some bacteria also use iron in heme, hemoglobin, hemopexin, transferrin and lactoferrin of eukaryotic hosts. Crystal structures of two outer membrane transport proteins, FhuA and FepA, and biochemical data reveal strong long-range conformational changes of the proteins upon binding of Fe3+­siderophore complexes and in response to energy transfer from the cytoplasmic membrane into the outer membrane via the TonB­ExbB­ExbD protein complex. The crystal structure of the periplasmic binding protein FhuD strongly deviates from the uniform overall structure of binding proteins hitherto determined. Sideromycins, antibiotics that contain Fe3+­siderophore complexes as carriers, are highly effective, as they enter cells via Fe3+­siderophore transport systems. In this review, recently published data is discussed to demonstrate the state of understanding of iron transport across the outer membrane and the cytoplasmic membrane.
Addresses Mikrobiologie/Membranphysiologie, Universität Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle 28, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany *e-mail: volkmar.braun@mikrobio.uni-tuebingen.de Current Opinion in Microbiology 2002, 5:194­201 1369-5274/02/$ -- see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. Published online 27 February 2002 Abbreviation fhuA ferric hydroxamate uptake

membrane. An assumed energy-transducing device consisting of the proteins TonB, ExbB and ExbD is required for active transport of iron, heme and Fe3+­siderophore complexes (and vitamin B12) across the outer membrane. This transport has mainly been studied in Escherichia coli K-12, but similar transport systems have been identified in many bacterial species, in particular those that infect humans and plants [2­5]. TonB activity has only been related to outer membrane transport of Fe3+, Fe3+­siderophore complexes, heme and vitamin B12. However, various gene identification methods, such as BLAST, of the sequenced genome of Pseudomonas aeruginosa [6] and of Caulobacter crescentus [7] predict 34 and 65 TonB-dependent outer membrane transport proteins, respectively. Both organisms can live in natural environments with a very low nutrient content. It is therefore likely that nutrients other than iron and vitamin B12 are adsorbed to specific sites of outer membrane transport proteins and actively transported into the periplasm. A preliminary determination of the outer-membrane-protein profile of C. crescentus revealed virtually no protein bands at the positions where the bands of E. coli porins are located, but strong protein bands near the molecular mass (80 kDa) of outer membrane transport proteins were observed (V Braun, unpublished data). The same transport systems through which Fe3+­siderophore complexes are taken up by bacteria are used to take up certain naturally occurring antibiotics, termed sideromycins because they consist of a Fe3+­siderophore group linked to an antibiotic. The Fe3+­siderophore complexes serve as carriers for the antibiotics. The outer membrane therefore no longer serves as a permeability barrier for the entry of these antibiotics, but increases the rate of entry, through active transport, beyond the diffusion rate. Active transport decreases the minimal inhibitory concentration of these antibiotics several hundredfold [8]. In this review, recently published data is discussed to demonstrate the state of understanding of iron transport across the outer membrane and the cytoplasmic membrane. Regulation by iron of the synthesis of the iron-transport proteins and the siderophore biosynthesis enzymes has recently been reviewed [9,10] and are not considered.

Introduction: iron transport into Gram-negative bacteria involves unique mechanisms
Throughout the living world, iron is contained in the active centers of most redox enzymes. Because it occurs in the Fe3+ form under oxic conditions and is insoluble (10­9 M Fe3+ in soil and water) under these conditions [1], it is made biologically available by being bound to proteins and siderophores. The relevant eukaryotic iron-carrying protein sources for microbes are hemoglobin, hemopexin, transferrin and lactoferrin. Siderophores are iron-complexing chemicals that are synthesized by bacteria and fungi, secreted and then taken up as iron complexes by cells via specific active transport systems. Gram-negative bacteria that can use Fe3+ bound to proteins, heme and siderophores contain highly specific transport proteins in their outer membranes. The outer membrane transport proteins extract the iron sources from the surroundings of the bacteria, concentrate them on the bacterial cell surface, release Fe3+ and heme from the proteins, and transport heme, iron and Fe3+­siderophore complexes across the outer membrane. No energy source exists in the outer membrane. Energy is provided by the proton-motive force of the cytoplasmic

Active transport across the outer membrane
FhuA transport protein

FhuA is the E. coli outer membrane transport protein for ferrichrome, a siderophore of the hydroxamate type, which is synthesized by the fungus Ustilago sphaerogena. Ferrichrome is one of the examples of siderophore crossfeeding between fungi and bacteria, and between various bacteria, through which iron withdrawal from the Fe3+­siderophore recipient organism by the siderophore donor organism is avoided. FhuA is a multifunctional protein; it transports ferrichrome

Active transport of iron and siderophore antibiotics Braun and Braun

195

Figure 1

Ferrichrome-binding site FhuA

Outer membrane

Fh

uD

160

C2 C1 C

160

Gallichrome

C N

TonB1

FhuB

TonB2

ExbD

ExbB

Inner membrane N

uC

Fh

N

N C

Illustration of the FhuA ligands and the proteins involved in ferrichrome transport. In the crystal structure of FhuA, -strands in the front were removed to better visualize the globular domain. The TonB box of FhuA (marked by a yellow dotted line) is located in the amino-terminal end and binds to the region around residue 160 of TonB (marked 160). The crystal structure of the dimeric TonB fragment 164­239 is shown; the green and blue interrupted lines reflect the unknown parts of the structure. C1 (in green) indicates the carboxy-terminal end of one TonB monomer, C2 (in blue) indicates the carboxy-terminal end of the other monomer in the TonB dimer fragment. The orientation of the TonB fragment in the periplasm is not known. The crystal structure of FhuD shows the surface-exposed gallichrome in FhuD, which contrasts to the ferrichrome in the interior of FhuA. Iron in ferrichrome was isomorphously replaced by gallium, which was used for synchroton light analysis as a

and the antibiotics albomycin and rifamycin CGP 4832, and serves as a receptor for the protein toxin colicin M, the peptide toxin microcin J25, and the unrelated phages T1, T5, 80 and UC-1 (Figure 1). Because FhuA transports this large variety of low-molecular-weight compounds and biopolymers, it has been intensively studied using biochemical and genetic methods. Before the gene fhuA was shown to be involved in ferric hydroxamate uptake, it was called tonA (for phage T one) because mutations in it conferred resistance to phage T1. A second such locus was also identified and termed tonB. These very early studies, dating back to the

Fh uC

Current Opinion in Microbiology

center for multiwavelength anomalous dispersion phasing. The crystal structure of FhuA provides a static picture of the protein but does not reflect the highly dynamic structure alterations that take place upon binding and release of ferrichrome and during ferrichrome transport. A structural transition can also be predicted for FhuD when it binds to FhuB and ferrichrome is transferred from FhuD to FhuB. FhuC is the ATPase that energizes ferrichrome transport across the cytoplasmic membrane. The predicted transmembrane arrangements of the energytransducing protein complex TonB­ExbB­ExbD is illustrated without meaning to imply a 1:1 stoichiometry of the proteins. In fact, SDS-PAGE reveals more ExbB than ExbD and more ExbD than TonB [2­4] and formaldehyde crosslinking indicates ExbB and ExbD multimers [35]. In FhuB, the areas in red and the red dots correspond to areas that bind to FhuD, as demonstrated with synthetic FhuB peptides.

origins of molecular biology, make the FhuA (TonA) protein the right type of protein for studying the mode of TonBdependent active transport across the outer membrane. It was expected that the crystal structure would explain all the hitherto collected data and precisely point to further experiments to understand how FhuA and all of the many active transporters in the outer membrane function. The predicted -barrel and the major surface loop 4, which serves as the principal phage-binding site, and the location of the amino terminus in the periplasm, were confirmed by the crystal structure published at the end of 1998 [11,12]. However, the

196

Cell regulation

Figure 2

FhuA
T

L5
D

405

N V P N Y F D

L

L4
N P L A D A
325

714

T10

S Y A A A C Q K F L L3 N K P A 258 A N G V P K L8 G N H C S D S D P 555 L R K Y D P V L9 D T P L L G A L10 L6 F G D 601 S E A L7 N Y N Y L11 647 464 E G T V E P Y K R F S G 508 E G P L P A A V K T K 695 T G F N G W Y P F N D D K G R G T Y P W V A G S S G T F G D Y A N V Y A N D S K Y L2 V V C N G M L T F G V N R N T N T 205 E Y Q D S S I C L D Q I K P T Y I A G N S K F G K Q F N E D L D A Y S G V V T S T S W R G Q A R Q N E N N T Q E E Y Y E E S G D G P P T D A S D K K R K A V I S P E A S D A E K N 171 L1 L F Q M S N R G P D R E E E K W K K F A T Q L D E Y T K T R A N N Q G S S L Q D Q N S T OUT N R A T H Y Y M R E Q R N K E R F Y Q L F N T G F V R M T G F K F Y A Q S R Y T V S G D F V A R V G A Y V M Y A L V Y W G Y Q V H V K V L D G S S V E V S A I E R G F G A D L T F Y G N A L T G I G L A G G S L V T G A T L T Q Q V G W V E T Y F G P T G L T Q Y A OM Q R F V V L V A V A L S T A P V R V V V L T D N R D L V E D N T K F F F N T L K V Y F F Q Q T S K T Y L Y V A D N T I V Y S V Y S S R A H D G L F G A S T H T W Y L P K Q D V G D K F L A T P 160 F S L E K R A P R F V S N F M A D W I S L IN D F F D P A D G L D E 443 R D N D G P 579 D T 487 D D 531 G V 291 T5 G 224 T8 D T6 669 625

L

T9

T7

368

T3

T4

T2

186

T1

FepA
L11
696

L5
390

G G T A L L8 L4 A L7 N L3 D L2 327 547 A I 491 T K G 214 A 270 G N D L10 F G N A Y E A R V S D G 642 T G S N G T I Q A T Y G S T P Q V T E L G A A G T S A N Y T G C S Q K S Y G A G Y G R A Q T D V A A K V T K Q Y C A S L A N H T A L9 G L G N T T T Y L G L K Q G I G T 596 Q V Y G Q P N D N T G Q Y Y L Q A Q Y A D N E N Y S DG E R D G P G Y W G I T P R T K F S G R P A S D D D N A N T T L1 W V L I A K G W K L D N P E Q T E 167 Y D K D R Y A D R T E L Y Y V P I L S L6 I L E E K K S N N S N D S L P I 437 K K R Q I G E D N E R M K H A N E K V I P N A K S Q G L I G R A V L Q E R S S A P A G R E A P D Q I P Q D E K P T K Y T N H G K V Y T F G A N T D K Y Q R E I L R H H V N R D Y S L K S N D Y K Q S N V Y M F E A D E N W OUT I N T R M D L W I F S T N W Y Y Y F R G S R N W D T L L I N L T Y G V E Q T Y R A L P F K Y V A H N G N A G F A N F I T V L A E I W E M G D S G F L T A E G L Y N S W G G L G T I S G E S W T S L L E L V N T N T P S M N OM V G V Q S L T A N L V E V R T T W S L T K G I L N L M N G R T T L L F N N S W N T V L S A E T S S G L H M W S S W T M G W T I Q V L T F H L V P D P W D E Q G Q F Q V V T G P F W K 153 F I F L A N L D N E V L G W S IN V T D L G R 724 A D K T D G V E R N D P D D T D G E S F 185 667 243 617 519 L 299 422 454 576 G

T10

T9

T8

T7

T6

T5

358

T4

T3

T2

T1
Current Opinion in Microbiology

Comparison of the transmembrane -strands of the -barrels of FhuA and FepA. Note the large extension of the -barrels beyond the outer membrane bilayer, the large surface loops and the short periplasmic turns. Insertion of FhuA in the outer membrane is precisely known because of the bound lipopolysaccharide molecule [11], whose fatty acid residues are inserted in the outer leaflet of the outer membrane and thus define the lipid bilayer. The models do not include the

globular domains that start at residue 159 in FhuA and at residue 152 in FepA. Residues that are predicted to bind ferrichrome in FhuA are shown in black. Residues in FepA that were not seen in the crystal structure are shown in grey. Pink boxed sequences in FhuA and FepA form -strands. The green boxed residues in FhuA are predicted to form a short -helix in which one of the two disulfide bridges is localized (shown in red). OM, outer membrane.

Active transport of iron and siderophore antibiotics Braun and Braun

197

unique structure of the 160 N-proximal residues (mature FhuA contains 714 residues) was an unexpected finding. FhuA consists of 22 antiparallel -strands that form a -barrel (Figure 2). -barrels have been found in all outer membrane proteins studied by X-ray analysis. FhuA contains a globular domain that inserts into the -barrel from the periplasmic side and tightly closes the channel formed by the -barrel. More than half of the molecule is located above the outer-membrane lipid bilayer, where the ferrichrome-binding site is found (Figure 1). Ten aminoacid residues (R81, G99, Q100, Y116, Y244, W246, Y313, Y315, F391 and F693), four from the globular domain and six from the -barrel, are within a distance of 4 Å from the ferrichrome atoms and form hydrogen bonds and van der Waals contacts to ferrichrome. Binding of ferrichrome causes small (less than 2 Å) translations of amino-acid residues towards ferrichrome, and 50° and 90° side-chain rotations, which are accompanied by large structural transitions at the opposite, periplasmic side of the outer membrane. There, a short helix is unwound and residues E19, S20 and W22 are translated by 17 Å from their former -carbon positions. This conformational change might facilitate interaction of FhuA with the TonB protein, which is located in the periplasm with the amino-terminal end inserted in the cytoplasmic membrane. The mutations I9P (isoleucineproline) and V11D (valineaspartate) result in an inactive FhuA ferrichrome transporter. The mutation Q160K (glutamatelysine) in TonB partially restores transport of ferrichrome by FhuA(I9P). Residues 6­11 of FhuA are homologous to sequences contained close to the amino-terminal end of all TonB-dependent outer membrane transport proteins, and this sequence is called the TonB box. Similar mutations in the TonB box of the BtuB protein for vitamin B12 transport and the Cir protein for linear Fe3+­catecholate transport inactivate the transporters, and transport is restored by the mutations Q160K and Q160L (glutamateleucine) in TonB. Random PCR mutagenesis of the fepA transport gene, which encodes the outer membrane transport protein of Fe3+ enterobactin, gave rise to the TonB box derivatives I14S (isoleucineserine), V16D (valineaspartate) and V16L (valineleucine), which do not transport Fe3+­enterobactin [13]. Site-directed replacement of amino acids in the TonB box of BtuB and the region around residue 160 of TonB to cysteine results in vivo in spontaneous disulfide-crosslinked products that contain one molecule of each protein [14,15]. Specificity of the crosslinked amino-acid pairs indicates a defined orientation of the BtuB TonB box and TonB. Binding of cobalamin to BtuB increases the formation of certain crosslinks to TonB and within the TonB box. A spin label was added to the introduced cysteine residues of the TonB box of BtuB. The data obtained by electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy are consistent with a helical structure of the amino-terminal end of the TonB box, which is fixed to the -barrel. Upon addition of the

substrate, the helix becomes highly flexible [16··]; in FhuA, this is consistent with the strong movement, upon binding of ferrichrome, of the region to which the TonB box is bound. The TonB box is not seen in the crystal of FhuA; this might indicate a flexible structure. TonB preferentially interacts with outer membrane transport proteins that are loaded with substrate, as has been shown for FhuA, FepA and BtuB. Conformational changes of TonB in response to the proton-motive force, ExbB and substrate-loaded FepA have been shown [17]. It is thought that the energized conformation of TonB induced by the proton-motive force causes a conformational change in the transport proteins, which releases the substrates from their binding sites and initiates their translocation into the periplasm. The crystal structures of FhuA and FepA suggest that the globular domain has to be dislocated to open a channel in the -barrels. It is unlikely that the entire globular domain moves out of the -barrel, as more than 60 hydrogen bonds between the globular domain and the -barrel would have to be broken. For transport of ferrichrome and the other low-molecular-weight compounds, a small transition in the globular domain is sufficient to connect the outer cavity, where the substrates reside, with the region that is open to the periplasm. Ferrichrome might diffuse through the open channel along side-chain residues that are conserved among the sequenced FhuA proteins. The proposed side chains are all located in the -barrel (forming a possible transit pathway from N427 to Q429, Q431, D379, D358, Q360, N299 and R297) [18··]. The sequential binding and release of ferrichrome accelerates diffusion and facilitates the unidirectional movement into the periplasm. It is also possible that, in the energized FhuA protein, surface loops fold back into the -barrel and close it; this would prevent escape of the released protein from the cells. Loop 4 above the -barrel undergoes a conformational change, as inferred from the irreversible adsorption of the phages T1 and 80 to loop 4, which induces DNA release from the phage head and occurs only in energized cells [2]. Movement of loop 4 is supported by quenching of the fluorescence of fluorescein maleimide linked to C336 by ferrichrome [19].
Removal of the globular domain of FhuA maintains the transport activity

The globular domain of FhuA (residues 5­160) has been genetically excised, with the expectation that the FhuA deletion derivative would form an open channel that allows diffusion of ferrichrome. Active transport should be abolished, as the TonB box was also removed. Although the amount of the FhuA5­160 protein synthesized by the cells is not as high as that of wild-type FhuA, removal of the globular domain does not result in an unstable protein that is no longer incorporated into the outer membrane. The -barrel is sufficient for the proper folding events that guarantee protein transit from the cytoplasm into the outer membrane. In contrast to the expectation, FhuA5­160 functions as an active transporter for all FhuA ligands

198

Cell regulation

except microcin J25, and it confers the same TonB-dependent sensitivity to the phages and colicin M as wild-type FhuA [20]. These results imply that FhuA not only interacts via the TonB box with TonB, but also via the -barrel, and that this interaction is essential for all FhuA activities, except sensitivity to phage T5, which does not require TonB. Alone and without the globular domain, the -barrel functions as a TonB-dependent and ligand-specific active transporter. The globular domain enhances the binding capacity of ferrichrome, but it is not essential for the binding specificity. Lack of the globular domain may obviate interaction of FhuA via the TonB box with TonB. Because TonB probably interacts at the periplasmic side of the FhuA -barrel, a structural transition has to occur across the entire molecule to the surface-exposed ferrichromebinding site and the phage-binding sites in loop 4. Because ferrichrome binding to FhuA also induces a structural transition in the opposite direction from the surface to the periplasmic side, FhuA is a highly dynamic molecule that displays long-range allosteric conformational changes. FhuA5­160 does have an opening, as ferrichrome at higher concentrations diffuses through FhuA5­160 and supports growth independent of TonB. Sensitivity is increased to antibiotics larger than 700 Da, for which the outer membrane forms a permeability barrier [20]. Exposure of FhuA5­160 to artificial lipid-bilayer membranes resulted in a rapidly changing conductance for the ions of KCl and for other ions, but no stable single-channel conductance was recorded (M Braun, V Braun, H Killmann, E Maier, R Benz, unpublished data). These results indicate that FhuA5­160 forms channels with rapidly changing internal diameters, which may result from the movement of aminoacid side chains exposed to the channel interior that are flexible when the globular domain is absent and that change their position. In addition, the surface loops of the -barrel and the -strands may move without the stabilizing effect of the globular domain. The results obtained with FhuA5­160 of E. coli have been corroborated by results obtained with the FhuA5­160 proteins of Salmonella paratyphi B, Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium and Panthoea agglomerans [21·]. FhuA hybrids consisting of the -barrel of one strain and the globular domain of another strain are active transporters with transport rates higher than those of the -barrels alone.
FepA transport protein

the region exposed to the periplasm. FepA and FhuA have similar crystal structures [23·], making it likely that they represent the typical structure of active import proteins across the outer membrane (Figure 2). Excision of the globular domain of FepA (deletion of residues 3­151 or 17­151) results in deletion derivatives that are less active than FhuA5­160, but transport TonBdependent Fe3+­enterobactin [24·]. The amino-terminal globular domain of FepA that is fused to the -barrel of FhuA5­160 transports ferrichrome. FepA links to the outer membrane OmpF/C and OmpA proteins with a crosslinking agent that does not pass the outer membrane. Addition of Fe3+­enterobactin eliminates crosslinking [24·], which, along with previous electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy and kinetic fluorescence determinations, indicate mobility of surface loops in response to substrate loading. ESR also shows rapid movement of loop 3, which is dependent on the energization of the cells and TonB. However, the claimed conclusion that loop movements force bound Fe3+­enterobactin into the underlying pore has not been shown; that the globular domain plays no role in transport has also not been shown [24·]. On the contrary, wild-type FhuA and FepA contain the globular domain, which has to be dislocated to open a channel for the transit of the substrates. It is not known whether allosteric transitions in the FhuA -barrel move the globular domain. Rather, interaction between the TonB box linked to the globular domain has been welldocumented for five outer membrane transporter proteins studied, including FecA [2,3], and point mutations in the TonB box of these proteins inactivate transport activity. It is therefore highly likely that interaction of TonB with the TonB box of the transporters is essential for transport and that coupled conformational changes induced by TonB in the -barrel and in the globular domain release the substrates bound to both domains and open the channel. In the mutant that lacks the globular domain, interaction of TonB with the -barrel is sufficient to release ferrichrome from the binding sites. Ferrichrome then moves through the -barrel channel.
Novel and unusual crystal structure of a TonB fragment

The crystal structure of a second outer membrane transport protein, FepA, was published a month after the FhuA crystal structure. The FepA crystal structure did not disclose structural transitions induced by Fe3+­enterobactin binding, as it is not clear whether FepA in the crystal was partially occupied with Fe3+­enterobactin [22]. Despite various attempts, no defined FepA structure with bound Fe3+­enterobactin could be obtained. In the FepA crystal structure, the TonB box (residues 12­18) was localized in

To understand the TonB-mediated energy transfer from the cytoplasmic membrane into the outer membrane and the structural transitions induced by TonB in the outer membrane transport proteins, one requires structural information about TonB. Recently, the crystal structure at 1.55 Å resolution of a carboxy-terminal domain of TonB comprising residues 164­239 has been determined [25]. TonB displays a cylinder shape consisting of two intertwined monomers with six -strands that form a large -sheet. Residue 160, discussed earlier as being important for interaction with the TonB box of transport proteins, is highly flexible and may be designed to adapt to TonB boxes that differ in sequence but assume similar conformations. It will be important to co-crystallize TonB with a transport protein or at least a TonB fragment bound to a transport protein.

Active transport of iron and siderophore antibiotics Braun and Braun

199

In contrast to the dimeric structure of the crystallized TonB fragment, crosslinking studies of TonB with FhuA, FepA and BtuB transport proteins have revealed one copy of each protein. Either monomeric TonB binds to the transport proteins, or only one of the TonB monomers binds to the transport proteins and the second TonB monomer is dissociated during SDS-PAGE. In addition, a TonB fragment lacking the cytoplasmic membrane domain is mainly monomeric, adopts a highly asymmetric conformation with an axial ratio of 15:1, and binds in vitro to isolated FhuA and FepA, preferentially when FhuA is loaded with ferrichrome [26]. Furthermore, TonB fragments secreted into the periplasm by a fused signal sequence inhibit transport of ferrichrome and of ferric citrate and prevent transcription initiation of the fec transport genes by ferric citrate bound to the FecA outer membrane transport and signaling protein [27]. Because the TonB fragments cannot respond to the proton-motive force of the cytoplasmic membrane, binding of TonB to the transport proteins does not depend on TonB energization. These data with complete TonB and TonB fragments larger than those used for crystallization argue in favor of a monomeric complete TonB. Moreover, for steric reasons, only one molecule in the TonB dimer would interact with a FhuA molecule, as illustrated in Figure 1. Although this resolves the problem that, in the crystallized fragment, the TonB polypeptides display opposite polarities and thus would interact differently with FhuA, it seems unlikely that only one polypeptide in a dimer interacts with FhuA.

Fe3+ siderophores serve as iron sources. Ammonabactin is a Fe3+­siderophore synthesized by A. hydrophila. Transport of Fe3+­ammonabactin and of other Fe3+­siderophore complexes is inhibited by kinetically inert chromium complexes of the siderophores. Based on these and additional data, an iron-exchange mechanism between the Fe3+­siderophore and the siderophore bound to the transport protein has been proposed. Identification and characterization of the transport protein will be necessary to lend support to this novel transport mechanism.

Transport across the cytoplasmic membrane
Fe3+, Fe3+­siderophore complexes, and heme are transported across the cytoplasmic membrane by ABC (ATP-binding cassette) transporters, as evidenced by the sequence similarity of genes to well-studied ABC transporters and the inactivation of ferrichrome transport by site-directed mutagenesis [2,30,31]. Transport of ferrichrome includes the periplasmic binding protein FhuD, the very hydrophobic cytoplasmic membrane protein FhuB and the cytoplasmic FhuC ATPase that is associated with FhuB (Figure 1; see also [2]). ATP serves as the energy source. Transport involves a periplasmic binding protein, two of which have been crystallized. The crystal structure of the iron-binding protein of Haemophilus influenzae contains two domains connected by a hinge region, which serves to close the substrate-binding cleft upon binding of the substrate. The structure resembles the N- or C-lobe of human transferrin and lactoferrin, from which it can be inferred that the human proteins evolved from bacterial iron-binding proteins. The FhuD ferrichrome-binding protein has a very different folding, and the substrate is not bound in a cleft deeply inside the protein, but is exposed at the protein surface [32··]. This explains the broader substrate specificity of FhuD as compared to FhuA, in which the binding site is located in a cavity buried inside the protein. The two domains are connected by a rigid -helix that restricts their movement. Study of the interaction of FhuD with the insoluble FhuB using synthetic FhuB peptides has revealed that FhuD may insert deeply into the predicted FhuB channel, coming close to the binding site of the FhuC ATPase. This finding suggests that the presumed triggering of ATP hydrolysis by ferrichrome-loaded FhuD occurs via direct contact of FhuD with FhuC, or through a short FhuB linker [30], but not through a transmembrane signal, as assumed for the maltose transport system.

New concepts for the transport of Fe3+­siderophore complexes across the outer membrane
Pyoverdin is a Fe3+­siderophore complex synthesized by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The FpvA outer membrane transport protein is isolated with tightly bound pyoverdin free of Fe3+. This finding prompted an investigation of the Fe3+­pyoverdin transport mechanism taking advantage of the fluorescence of pyoverdin as opposed to the nonfluorescence of Fe3+­pyoverdin. In the postulated mechanism, Fe3+­pyoverdin displaces pyoverdin at FpvA. Subsequently, Fe3+­pyoverdin is transported into the cytoplasm, where Fe3+ is released and pyoverdin cycles back to FpvA [28]. If, however, pyoverdin dissociates from FpvA fast enough, Fe3+­pyoverdin actually binds to free FpvA, and the transport mechanism would then not differ from that proposed for other Fe3+­siderophore complexes. The strong binding of pyoverdin to FpvA results in a faster iron delivery, as pyoverdin bound to FpvA extracts Fe3+ from the medium and immediately transports Fe3+ into the cell, whereas pyoverdin released into the medium must first catch Fe3+ and then diffuse through the medium until it hits FpvA. In contrast to the proposed Fe3+­siderophore exchange mechanism at the outer membrane transporter described earlier, an iron-exchange mechanism was proposed for the uptake of Fe3+ by Aeromonas hydrophila [29··]. A large variety of structurally very different synthetic and natural

Antibiotics actively transported into target cells
Access of target sites for antibiotics may be limited by the permeability of the outer membrane and the cytoplasmic membrane or by active export processes. The permeability barrier is overcome by active transport of antibiotics. For example, albomycin is a structural analogue of ferrichrome and is actively transported by the FhuABCD proteins across both membranes into cells of E. coli. CGP 4832 is a chemically synthesized derivative of rifamycin that is actively transported across the outer membrane by the

200

Cell regulation

FhuA protein, even though CGP 4832 has no structural features in common with Fe3+­siderophore complexes. Active transport decreases the minimal inhibitory concentration of CGP 4832 200- to 400-fold, compared to rifamycin. The crystal structures of FhuA with each of the antibiotics bound have been determined. All 10 binding sites of ferrichrome are also involved in binding of the antibiotics, except for R81, which does not bind CGP 4832 [33··,34··]. The cell-surface-exposed cavity of FhuA is large enough to accommodate the antibiotics, which are larger than ferrichrome, and to provide additional binding sites for the antibiotics. Albomycin in the FhuA crystal even assumes two different conformations -- a compact form and an extended form. Cephalosporin derivatives that contain a vicinal dihydroxybenzene group, as found in Fe3+­siderophore complexes of the catecholate type, are transported into the periplasm by the Fe3+­catecholate transporters Cir and Fiu [8]. Active TonB-dependent transport decreases the minimal inhibitory concentration several hundredfold relative to the unmodified cephalosporins. The capability of the transport proteins to transport siderophore antibiotics reveals their tolerance to different structures. Compounds are tolerated as long as they contain siderophore analogues very similar to the natural substrate siderophores or structures that mimic siderophores through which specific binding to the active sites of the transporters is guaranteed. For these reasons, Fe 3+­siderophore complexes may serve as suitable carriers for antibiotics whose efficacy is limited by poor diffusion into target cells.

Acknowledgements
Critical reading of the manuscript by Karen A Brune and Klaus Hantke is gratefully acknowledged. This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (BR330/2-1) and the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

· of special interest ·· of outstanding interest
1. 2. Ratledge C, Dover LG: Iron metabolism in pathogenic bacteria. Rev Microbiol 2000, 54:881-941. Braun V, Hantke K, Köster W: Bacterial iron transport: mechanisms, genetics, and regulation. In Metal Ions in Biological Systems: Iron Transport and Storage in Microorganisms, vol 35. Edited by Sigel A, Sigel H. New York: Marcel Dekker; 1998:67-145. Braun V, Hantke K: Mechanisms of bacterial iron transport. In Microbial Transport Systems. Edited by Winkelmann G. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH; 2001:289-311. Crichton R, Boelart J, Braun V, Hantke K, Marx JJM, Santos M, Ward R: Inorganic Biochemistry and Iron Metabolism: From Molecular Mechanisms to Clinical Consequences, edn 2. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons; 2001. Expert D: Withholding and exchanging iron: interactions between Erwinia spp. and their plant hosts. Annu Rev Phytopathol 1999, 37:307-334. Stover CK, Pham XQ, Erwin AL, Mizoguchi SD, Warrener P, Hickey MJ, Brinkman FS, Hufnagle WO, Kowalik DJ, Lagrou M et al.: Complete genome sequence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1, an opportunistic pathogen. Nature 2000, 406:959-964. Niermann WC, Feldblyum TV, Laub MT, Paulsen IT, Nelson KE, Eisen J, Heidelberg JF, Alley MRK, Ohta N, Maddock JR et al.: Complete genome sequence of Caulobacter crescentus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:4136-4141. Braun V: Active transport of siderophore-mimicking antibacterials across the outer membrane. Drug Resist Updat 1999, 2:363-369. Hantke K, Braun V: The art of keeping low and high iron concentrations in balance. In Bacterial Stress Responses. Edited by Storz G, Hengge-Aronis R. Washington, DC: ASM Press; 2000:275-288.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8. 9.

Conclusions
Energy-consuming Fe3+­siderophore transport across the outer membrane may only be an example of active transport of substrates with very low abundance. Energy transfer from the cytoplasmic membrane into the outer membrane has to be unraveled in molecular terms. Protein crystal structures do not provide the solutions but help researchers ask specific questions. Mutational analysis and the use of reconstituted systems will provide the means to understand the intriguing transport mechanism across the outer membrane. The unexpected crystal structure of the FhuD-binding protein suggests that Fe3+­siderophore transport across the cytoplasmic membrane is worth studying, as it may have mechanistic features that differ from those uncovered for amino acids and sugars. In addition, resistance to antibiotics can be overcome by linking antibiotics with low diffusion rates into the cytoplasm to Fe3+­siderophore carriers. In this case, the outer membrane no longer forms a permeability barrier but, rather, increases antibiotic entry and, in turn, susceptibility of the target cells. Additional active transport of the antibiotic­Fe3+­siderophore conjugates across the cytoplasmic membrane increases sensitivity of the target cells even more.

10. Hantke K: Iron and metal regulation in bacteria. Curr Opin Microbiol 2001, 4:172-177. 11. Ferguson AD, Hofmann E, Coulton JW, Diederichs K, Welte W: Siderophore-mediated iron transport: crystal structure of FhuA with bound lipopolysaccharide. Science 1998, 282:2202-2203. 12. Locher P, Rees B, Koepnik R, Mitschler A, Moulinier L, Rosenbusch J, Moras D: Transmembrane signaling across the ligand-gated FhuA receptor: crystal structures of free and ferrichrome-bound states reveal allosteric changes. Cell 1998, 95:771-778. 13. Barnard TJ, Watson ME Jr, McIntosh MA: Mutations in the Escherichia coli receptor FepA reveal residues involved in ligand binding and transport. Mol Microbiol 2001, 41:527-536. 14. Cadieux N, Kadner RJ: Site-directed disulfide bonding reveals an interaction site between energy-coupling protein TonB and BtuB, the outer membrane cobalamin transporter. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:10673-10678. 15. Cadieux N, Bradbeer C, Kadner RJ: Sequence changes in the Ton box region of BtuB affect its transport activities and interaction with TonB protein. J Bacteriol 2000, 182:5954-5961. 16. Merianos HJ, Cadieux N, Lin CH, Kadner RJ, Cafiso DS: Substrate ·· induced exposure of an energy-coupling motif of a membrane transporter. Nat Struct Biol 2000, 7:205-209. This paper contains the first in vivo kinetic evidence for structural transitions in the TonB box related to the loading of the transport protein with substrate. 17. Larsen RA, Thomas MG, Postle K: Proton motive force, ExbB and ligand-bound FepA drive conformational changes in TonB. Mol Microbiol 1999, 31:1809-1824.

18. Ferguson AD, Coulton JW, Diederichs K, Welte W: The ferric ·· hydroxamate receptor FhuA and related TonB-dependent transporters in the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. In Handbook of Metalloproteins. Edited by Messerschmidt A, Huber R,

Active transport of iron and siderophore antibiotics Braun and Braun

201

Poulos T, Wieghardt K. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons; 2001:835-849. This review summarizes the determination of the FhuA crystal structure and discusses the properties of published mutant FhuA proteins in light of the crystal structure. 19. Bös C, Lorenzen D, Braun V: Specific in vivo labeling of cell surface-exposed protein loops: reactive cysteines in the predicted gating loop mark a ferrichrome binding site and a ligand-induced conformational change of the Escherichia coli FhuA protein. J Bacteriol 1998, 180:605-613.  20. Braun M, Killmann H, Braun V: The -barrel domain of FhuA5-160 is sufficient for TonB-dependent FhuA activities of Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 1999, 33:1037-1049. 21. Killmann H, Braun M, Herrmann C, Braun V: FhuA barrel-cork · hybrids are active transporters and receptors. J Bacteriol 2001, 183:3476-3487. In this paper, it is shown that cork-free FhuA is active (see also [20]) and that transport activity is not only increased when the -barrel is complemented by the cork of the same organism, but also of different organisms. 22. Buchanan SK, Smith BS, Venkatramani L, Xia D, Esser L, Palnitkar M, Chakraborty R, van der Helm D, Deisenhofer J: Crystal structure of the outer membrane active transporter FepA from Escherichia coli. Nat Struct Biol 1999, 6:56-63. 23. Van der Helm D, Chakraborty R: Structures of siderophore · receptors. In Microbial Transport Systems. Edited by Winkelmann G, Weinheim. Wiley-VCH; 2001:261-287. This review contains a detailed comparison of the FepA and FhuA crystal structures, discusses the published biochemical and genetic data, proposes a transport mechanism and predicts functionally important residues. 24. Scott DC, Cao Z, Qi Z, Bauler M, Igo JD, Newton SMC, Klebba PE: · Exchangeability of N termini in the ligand-gated porins of Escherichia coli. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:13025-13033. This paper compares kinetic and thermodynamic properties of cork-less FepA and FhuA derivatives, and describes quantitatively the relevant transport parameters. 25. Chang C, Mooser A, Plückthun A, Wlodawer A: Crystal structure of the dimeric C-terminal domain of TonB reveals a novel fold. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:27535-27540. 26. Moeck GS, Letellier L: Characterization of in vitro interactions between a truncated TonB protein from Escherichia coli and the

outer membrane receptors FhuA and FepA. J Bacteriol 2001,183:2755-2764. 27. Howard SP, Herrmann C, Stratilo CW, Braun V: In vivo synthesis of the periplasmic domain of TonB inhibits transport through the FecA and FhuA iron siderophore transporters of Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 2001, 183:5885-5895.

28. Schalk IJ, Hennard C, Dugave C, Poole K, Abdallah MA, Pattus F: Iron-free pyoverdin binds to its outer membrane receptor FpvA Pseudomonas aeruginosa: a new mechanism for membrane iron transport. Mol Microbiol 2001, 39:351-360. 29. Stinzi A, Barnes C, Xu J, Raymond KN: Microbial iron transport via a ·· siderophore shuttle: a membrane ion transport paradigm. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:10691-10696. A new mechanism of ferric siderophore transport across the outer membrane is proposed in this paper. 30. Braun V, Killman H: Bacterial solutions to the iron-supply problem. FEBS Lett 1999, 24:104-109. 31. Köster W: ABC transporter-mediated uptake of iron, siderophores, heme and vitamin B12. Res Microbiol 2001, 152:291-301. 32. Clarke TE, Ku SY, Dougan DR, Vogel HJ, Tari LW: The structure of ·· the ferric siderophore binding protein FhuD complexed with gallichrome. Nat Struct Biol 2000, 4:287-291. The FhuD crystal structure reveals a fold that differs from most of the periplasmic binding proteins and contains the substrates bound at the surface of the protein. 33. Ferguson AD, Braun V, Fiedler HP, Coulton JW, Diederichs K, ·· Welte W: Crystal structure of the antibiotic albomycin in complex with the outer membrane transporter FhuA. Protein Sci 2000, 9:956-963. This is the first description of an antibiotic bound to its transport protein. 34. Ferguson AD, Ködding J, Walker G, Bös C, Coulton JW, Diederichs K, ·· Braun V, Welte W: Active transport of an antibiotic rifamycin derivative by the outer membrane protein FhuA. Structure 2001, 9:707-716. The authors of this paper show the tolerance of a substrate transporter for an entirely different antibiotic and demonstrate the structural requirements for antibiotic binding. 35. Higgs PI, Myers PS, Postle K: Interactions in the TonB-dependent energy transduction complex: ExbB and ExbD form homomultimers. J Bacteriol 1998, 180:6031-6038.

