doi:10.1006/jmbi.2001.5410 available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

J. Mol. Biol. (2002) 316, 1111±1125

Amino Acid Determinants of b -Hairpin Conformation in Erythropoeitin Receptor Agonist Peptides Derived from a Phage Display Library
Nicholas J. Skelton1*, Stephen Russell1, Frederic de Sauvage2 and Andrea G. Cochran1
Department of Protein Engineering and Department of Molecular Oncology, Genentech, Inc, 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA
2 1

Display of peptide libraries on ®lamentous phage has led to the identi®cation of peptides of the form X2-5CX2GPXTWXCX2-5 (where X is a variable residue) that bind to the extra-cellular portion of the erythropoietin receptor (EPO-R). These peptides adopt b-hairpin conformations when co-crystallized with EPO-R. Solution NMR studies reveal that the peptide is conformationally heterogeneous in the absence of receptor due to cistrans isomerization about the Gly-Pro peptide bond. Replacement of the conserved threonine residue with glycine at the turn i  3 position produces a stable b-hairpin conformation in solution, although this peptide no longer has activity in an EPO-R-dependent cell proliferation assay. A truncated form of the EPO-R-binding peptide (containing the i  3 glycine residue) also forms a highly populated, monomeric b-hairpin. In contrast, phage-derived peptide antagonists of insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1 (IGFBP-1) have a high level of sequence identity with the truncated EPO-R peptide (eight of 12 residues) yet adopt a turn-ahelix conformation in solution. Peptides containing all possible pairwise amino acid substitutions between the EPO-R and IGFBP-1 peptides have been analyzed to assess the degree to which the non-conserved residues stabilize the hairpin or helix conformation. All four residues present in the original sequence are required for maximum population of either the b-hairpin or a-helix conformation, although some substitutions have a more dominant effect. The results demonstrate that, within a given sequence, the observed conformation can be dictated by a small subset of the residues (in this case four out of 12).
# 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

*Corresponding author

Keywords: b-hairpin; a-helix; peptide structure; erythropoietin agonists; NMR

Introduction
Combinatorial methods have risen to prominence over the last decade as a means to sample large regions of conformational or chemical diverAbbreviations used: 2QF-COSY, 2-quantum ®ltered correlated spectroscopy; EPO, erythropoeitin; EPO-R, EPO-receptor; IGF, insulin-like growth factor; IGFBP, IGF-binding-protein; NOE, nuclear Overhauser effect; NOESY, 2D NOE spectroscopy; ROE, rotating frame Overhauser effect; ROESY, 2D ROE spectroscopy; RMS, root-mean-squared; RMSD, RMS deviation; TFA, tri¯uoroacetic acid; TOCSY, total correlation spectroscopy. E-mail address of the corresponding author: skelly@gene.com
0022-2836/02/051111±15 $35.00/0

sity in the quest for novel molecules that recognize particular targets of pharmaceutical or biotechnological interest. Phage display is a particularly ef®cient means of optimizing protein-protein interaction sites,1 and identifying novel peptide ligands to a variety of target molecules.2 ± 4 Phage display offers the bene®ts of large library size (up to 1012 discrete sequences),3 ready selection of tight-binding molecules (by binding to immobilized target) and rapid identi®cation of ligand via DNA sequenÈ cing. In the case of peptide selection, ``naõve'' libraries of peptides have been used to generate antagonists of protein-protein interactions,5 ± 9 agonists of protein-protein interactions10 or inhibitors of enzymes.11
# 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

l
1112 È Peptides displayed in such naõve peptide phage libraries routinely contain about 20 residues; however, not all positions are randomized. Pairs of cysteine residues may be included to allow disul®de bond formation, and other residue positions may be ®xed as particular amino acids (e.g. glycine or proline) that have particular conformational properties. A number of reports have shown that peptide ligands derived from such libraries fold into compact, stable structures either free in solution,5,11 or when bound to target protein.6,7,11,12 For many of these peptides, removal of the disul®de bond leads to a marked loss of structure in the free state and a decrease in binding to the target protein, implying that the folded state offers some entropic bene®t to binding. This raises questions about the proportion of peptides in a given library that have a structural preference in solution, the number of different folds that are present, and the nature of the intra-peptide interactions that stabilize each fold. One of the early successes in the use of peptide phage display libraries was obtained using the erythropoeitin receptor (EPO-R) as target.10 Peptides selected from a library of the form X4 C X2 GP X4 C X4 (where X is any residue) bound to EPO-R and were able to act as agonists by stimulating cell proliferation.10 Crystallographic characterization of the EPO-R/peptide complex revealed that two copies of the peptide EMP-1 interact with each other and consequently, dimerize the receptor.12 Interestingly, each peptide adopts an antiparallel b-hairpin conformation in the bound state. The observation of such a compact conformation for the bound peptide suggests that the selection process might be favoring peptides that are predisposed towards forming a b-hairpin structure in the absence of EPO-R. Furthermore, tighter binding might be achieved in peptides that have been designed to speci®cally stabilize the b-hairpin within EMP-1. Previously, we have studied the in¯uence of turn sequence and cross-strand pairwise interactions on the stability of disul®de-cyclized b-hairpin peptides that have the same cysteine spacing
Erythropoeitin Receptor Agonist -Hairpin Peptides

as the erythropoietin-antagonists.13 ± 15 In the current work, we investigate the factors that contribute to the stability of the b-hairpin conformation observed in a 16 residue EPO-R agonist peptide. In solution, the peptide is found to be conformationally heterogeneous. However, making a single amino acid change in a reverse turn leads to a peptide that forms a stable b-hairpin in solution. Although similar in overall fold to the original peptide when bound to EPO-R, there are some speci®c structural features of the modi®ed peptide that prevent it from binding to EPO-R. A 12 residue truncated variant of this peptide has the same b-hairpin structure, demonstrating that these residues are suf®cient to stabilize the fold. Interestingly, in spite of differing in sequence at only four residues, a similar 12 residue peptide derived from an insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 1 (IGFBP-1) antagonist peptide (derived from a similar phage-display peptide library) adopts a turn-ahelix conformation in solution.5 This suggests that the determinants of hairpin structure might be revealed by studying peptides of sequence intermediate between those of the initial hairpin and helix peptides. Accordingly, peptides have been synthesized with all 16 pairwise combinations at the four positions of difference. Spectroscopic analysis and characterization of b-hairpin stability have clari®ed the relative importance of the four residues in determining the conformational state. On the basis of these results, we speculate about the forces that drive selection from these libraries and the ability of a subset of residues to stabilize particular peptide structures.

Results
Solution conformation of EMP-18 Phage selection experiments identi®ed a 20 residue peptide designated EMP-1 (see Table 1 for sequence details) that stimulated proliferative activity via the EPO-R;10 this peptide adopted a b-hairpin conformation when co-crystallized with

Table 1. IGFBP-1 antagonist and erythropoietin agonist peptide sequences
Peptide EMP-1 EMP-18c EMP-18(T10G) EPO-1 EPO-3 EPO-4 bp1-01
a b 1 5 10

Sequencea G G T Y S C H F G P L T W V C K P Q G G nh2
15

Ceff (mM) n.d. n.dd >2000 n.dd 896 47 76

[y]227b n.d. 3 710 9 440 2 740 12 090 À7 760 n.d.

T Y S C H F G P L T W V C K P Q nh2 T Y S C H F G P L G W V C K P Q nh2
1 5 10

S C H F G P L T W V C K nh2 S C H F G P L G W V C K nh2 S C R A G P L Q W L C K nh2 C R A G P L Q W L C E K F Y G nh2

Residues that differ in sequence from EMP-18 are indicated by bold text. Mean residue ellipticity measured at 227 nm and 10  C. c In the text, EMP-18a, EMP-18b and EMP-18r correspond to the oxidized peptide with a trans Gly-Pro amide bond, oxidized peptide with a cis Gly-Pro amide bond, and reduced peptide with a trans Gly-Pro amide bond, respectively. d Peptides containing a threonine residue in the turn precipitated during equilibration in redox buffer, hence Ceff could not be determined.

Erythropoeitin Receptor Agonist -Hairpin Peptides

1113 onances observed for EMP-18r arise from having the Gly7-Pro8 peptide bond in a trans geometry (see Table 3 of the Supplementary Material); a minor species (peak intensities $13 % of the major form) was assumed to be from the cis isoform. In the case of EMP-18a, there are a number of down®eld-shifted Ha resonances and large 3JHN-Ha coupling constants relative to EMP-18r (Figure 1). Combined with the intense sequential Ha-HN nuclear Overhauser effects (NOEs) (see Figure 1 of the Supplementary Material), these data point to an extended peptide backbone for the residues surrounding each cysteine residue. Ha-Ha NOEs from Tyr2 to Pro15, Cys4 to Cys13 and Phe6 to Trp11 indicate an antiparallel arrangement of the strands. However, the Ha-Ha NOEs are of only moderate intensity, and many of the other cross-strand NOEs expected in an antiparallel hairpin are not observed, suggesting that a well-formed b-hairpin conformation is not highly populated in EMP-18a. For EMP-18b, the down®eld Ha resonance shifts are more extreme, and the 3JHN-Ha values are larger than for EMP-18a (Figure 1). Moreover, the Ha-Ha NOEs are very intense and other cross-strand NOEs are observed, suggesting that EMP-18b does adopt an antiparallel b-hairpin conformation in solution (see Figure 2 of the Supplementary Material). Structures were calculated for EMP-18b on the basis of the NMR data. Due to chemical shift degeneracy within EMP-18b, and overlap with EMP-18a resonances, many peaks in the ROESY spectra could not be used to generate restraints. However, the available data de®ne the backbone atoms within the disul®de-bonded cycle to be an antiparallel b-hairpin (Figure 2) with an RMSD for N, Ca, C atoms from the mean structure of Ê 0.43(Æ0.10) A. The N and C-terminal tails are less well de®ned by the available restraints, although the inter-residue NOEs observed between the termini suggest that the antiparallel hydrogen-bonded conformation continues beyond the cysteine residues. The majority of the ®nal 20 structures exhibit good geometry for the hydrogen bonds from His5 HN to Val12 CO, Gly7 HN to Thr10 CO and Val12 HN to His5 CO, and there is a distorted type I reverse turn at Pro8-Leu9. The folded peptide has the side-chains of His5 adjacent to Val12 (hydrogen-bonded pair) and Phe6 adjacent to Trp11 (non-hydrogen-bonded pair). The experimental restraints do not de®ne a unique w1 rotamer for Trp11 (À60  and 180 observed in ensemble); unfortunately, b-proton degeneracy precludes measurement of 3JHa-Hb that might indicate whether both conformations are sampled. In contrast, Phe6 adopts only a single w1 rotamer in the calculated structures, even though it has 3JHa-Hb coupling constants indicative of rotational averaging (6.1 and 10.6 Hz). In this case, the observed NOEs may be ``pinning'' the side-chain in only one of the conformations that is populated in solution.15

EPO-R.12 However, the structure of the peptide in the absence of EPO-R has not been reported. Subsequent truncation studies revealed that peptide EMP-18 was the shortest variant (16 residues) to exhibit signi®cant activity (EC50 $ 1 mM).16 Thus, we decided to study the conformational preference of EMP-18 in solution. NMR analysis of EMP-18 indicated the presence of two sets of resonances. Resonance assignments were made for both species (see Tables 1 and 2 of the Supplementary Material), and integration of resolved peaks in the 1D NMR spectrum showed the relative abundance of the two species to be approximately 3 to 2. For the more abundant species (EMP-18a), intense 2D rotating frame Overhauser effect spectroscopy (ROESY) peaks were observed between Gly7 Ha1/ a2 and Pro8 Hd1/d2; for the less abundant species (EMP-18b), these ROEs are of low intensity, but the Gly7 Ha1/a2 to Pro8 Ha ROE is very intense. These observations indicate that the two species result from the presence of trans (EMP-18a) and cis (EMP-18b) conformations about the Gly7-Pro8 peptide bond. The NMR data for both isoforms were analyzed for evidence of secondary or tertiary structure. To facilitate this, dithiothreitol (20 mM) was added to a sample of EMP-18 to reduce the disul®de bond and produce a standard, unfolded reference state (designated EMP-18r). The predominant set of res-

Figure 1. Comparison of (a) Ha chemical shifts and (b) 3JHN-Ha for EMP peptides. Data for the reduced and unfolded peptide EMP-18r are subtracted from the values for the peptides EMP-18a (open bars; trans Gly7Pro8 peptide bond), EMP-18b (shaded bars; cis Gly7Pro8 peptide bond) and EMP-18(T10G) (®lled bars).

1114

Erythropoeitin Receptor Agonist -Hairpin Peptides

Figure 2. Structure of EMP-18b. The 20 structures are overlaid using the N, Ca and C atoms of residues Cys4Ê Cys13 (mean RMSD 0.43(Æ0.10) A to the mean structure). For clarity, Thr1, Gln16 and the side-chains of Tyr2, Ser3, Thr10, Lys14 and Pro15 are omitted. The carbonyl oxygen atom of the cis Gly7-Pro8 amide bond is colored red.

Optimizing the b -hairpin character of EMP-18 In the EPO-R-bound state, the Gly7-Pro8 peptide bond of EMP-1 is trans, and the chain reversal occurring at residues Gly7-Pro8-Leu9-Thr10 is a distorted type-I turn.12 Ordinarily, such a turn type is not accommodated well in antiparallel hairpins, as the twist of the turn is not compatible with the natural twist of an antiparallel b-sheet.17 ± 20 This is borne out by the absence of a well-formed b-hairpin for EMP-18a in solution. Presumably, the environment in the complex is able to compensate for the strain between strands and turn. Pseudo dihedral angles based on Ca positions can be used to assess the twist (Table 2). For EPO-R-bound EMP-1, the turn and adjacent strand residues have twists of opposite sign (20  and À50  , respectively), whereas in EMP-18b the turn and adjacent strand residues have twists of the same sign

(À44(Æ7)  and À40(Æ5)  , respectively). Thus, the presence of a cis peptide bond alters the twist of a type-I turn and allows a well-formed b-hairpin to be present in EMP-18b. In an attempt to better mimic the bound structure of EMP-1, we wished to design a stable, structured variant of EMP-18 with a trans Gly7-Pro8 peptide bond. Such a variant might be expected to be a more potent agonist of EPO-R. Nakamura et al. have recently described a stable b-hairpin peptide discovered from a phage display library sorted against the high-af®nity IgE receptor.21 Interestingly, this peptide contains a type-I turn of sequence GPWG with a trans proline peptide bond and a positive f for the glycine at the turn i  3 position. In addition, we made a search of 467 non-redundant protein structures for examples of antiparallel b-strand pairs connected by a type-I turn:22 16 examples were found, seven of which contained a glycine residue with a positive f angle at the i  3 position of the turn. Presumably, the adoption of a positive f angle by this residue permits the four turn residues to span the ends of the twisted antiparallel strands. Accordingly, EMP18(T10G) (Table 1) was characterized by NMR; this peptide adopted a single b-hairpin conformation in solution (see Table 4 of the Supplementary Material). The Gly7-Pro8 peptide bond is now predominantly in a trans conformation ($90 %), but Ha chemical shifts and 3JHN-Ha coupling constants (relative to EMP-18r) are similar to those of EMP18b (Figure 1). Most of the cross-strand ROEs expected for a hairpin are observed, in particular the Ha-Ha ROEs Tyr2-Pro15, Cys4-Cys13 and Phe6-Trp11 are all very intense (see Figure 4 of the Supplementary Material). The circular dichroism (CD) spectrum and the equilibrium constant for disul®de bond formation (Ceff) provide additional evidence that EMP18(T10G) is a highly structured b-hairpin. The T10G substitution within EMP-18 leads to a marked increase in intensity of a positive band at 227 nm in the CD spectrum, consistent with the proximity of the aromatic side-chains of Phe4 and Trp9 in a highly populated b-hairpin state (Table 1; Figure 3(a)). We have observed similar positive

Table 2. Pseudo dihedral angles (deg.) formed by a-carbon atoms of b-hairpin peptides
Pseudo dihedral angle G7-P8^L9-T10d F6-G7^T10-W11d H5-F6^W11-V12 C4-H5^V12 C13 S3-C4^C13-K14 f i  3e
a b

EMP-18b soln.a À44 Æ 7 À40 Æ 5 À42 Æ 5 À9 Æ 13 À70 Æ 20 À110 Æ 16 20.1 À56.5 À52.0 À5.9 À18.7 À159

EMP-1b 15.8 À49.5 À46.5 À13.3 À21.1 À162

EPO-3c 50 Æ 3 À47 Æ 7 À58 Æ 3 À20 Æ 10 À40 Æ 18 63 Æ 4

Conformation with a cis peptide bond between Gly7 and Pro8. Conformation in the co-crystal structure with EPO-R;12 EMP-1 contains two additional N-terminal residues, hence actual residue numbers are increased by 2 relative to the values in column 1. Values for the two peptides in the asymmetric unit are given. c Residue numbers are decreased by 2 in this peptide (i.e. the turn is at G5-P6^L7-G8). d T10 replaced by glycine in EPO-3. e The f angle of the residue at the i  3 position of the turn (Thr or Gly).

Erythropoeitin Receptor Agonist -Hairpin Peptides

1115 $1 mM.16 A similar response is elicited with 100 pM rhEPO. Although EMP-18(T10G) adopts a more stable b-hairpin conformation in solution, it is not able to promote cell proliferation, even at a concentration of 100 mM (Figure 4). A reported variant of EMP-1 produces only a subtle structural change in the peptide/receptor complex, yet is an EPO-R antagonist.23 Accordingly, we tested whether EMP-18(T10G) could block EPO-R activation. The addition of 25 mM EMP-18(T10G) to the assay medium has no detectable effect on the ability of either EMP-18 or rhEPO to promote proliferation (data not shown). We conclude that EMP-18(T10G) is unable to activate EPO-R expressed on cells; moreover, EMP-18(T10G) appears to not even bind to EPO-R, since it is unable to act as an antagonist. Truncation of EMP-18(T10G) In the crystal structure of EMP-1 bound to EPOR there are two copies of the peptide present with Ê $400 A2 of surface area buried between them, raising the possibility that analogs of EMP-1 might have a tendency to dimerize in solution.12 In the crystal structure, residues corresponding to Thr1, Tyr2, Pro15 and Gln16 of EMP-18 contribute a sigÊ ni®cant portion ($160 A2) of the buried surface area. Tyr2 of one peptide chain is also involved in two intermolecular backbone-backbone hydrogen bonds with Cys4 of the other peptide. In the crystal structure, there are approximately 50 inter-peptide Ê proton-proton distances <5.0 A. The ROESY spectra of EMP-18(T10G) were inspected to see if any of these proton pairs give rise to observable peaks. Approximately half of the peaks were not readily observable (due to degeneracy, fast exchange with solvent or an equally short distance between the intrapeptide proton pair); of the remainder, 19

Figure 3. (a) A schematic view of the EPO-3 hairpin; the thick line follows the peptide backbone, the thin line represents the disul®de bond and the pairs of thin broken lines connect residues in hydrogen-bonded locations within each strand. Substitutions between EPO-3 and EPO-4 are indicated. (b) Spectra for EMP-18 (crosses), EMP-18(T10G) (open triangles), EPO-3 (open squares; HFGV) and EPO-4 (open circles; RAQL). (c) Spectra for EPO-3 (open squares; HFGV), EPO-12 (open circles; RFGL), EPO-14 (open triangles; HAGV) and EPO-9 (crosses; RAGL).

bands in b-hairpins with two Trp residues in nonhydrogen-bonded cross-strand positions.14 In our previous work with disul®de-cyclized b-hairpin peptides, high Ceff values correlated with a high degree of folding in the oxidized state.15 The value measured for EMP-18(T10G) is very high (>2 M), and indicative of a well-folded b-hairpin (Table 1). Biological activity of EMP-18(T10G) EMP-18 has been shown to promote proliferation of cells expressing EPO-R with an EC50 of

Figure 4. Cell stimulation activity of EMP-18 and EMP-18(T10G). Ba/F3 cells transfected with EPO-R were stimulated with varying concentrations of EMP-18 (®lled circles) or EMP-18(T10G) (open circles). Peptide activity was assessed by the incorporation of [3H]thymidine relative to the amount incorporated when 20 mM recombinant human EPO was present.

1116 were of zero intensity and two were of low intensity. The ROESY data for EMP-18 were analyzed in this fashion with similar results (over half not observable and weak peaks observed for only three of 23 or ®ve of 24 proton pairs in EMP-18a and EMP-18b, respectively). The observed peaks were all of low intensity, even though some of the distances in the crystal structure were of the order Ê of 3 A (e.g. the distances from His5 Ha to Thr1 Hb Ê or Tyr2 Hd were $3.1 or 2.8 A, respectively). Furthermore, resonance positions in the 1D NMR spectrum of EMP-18(T10G) changed by less than 0.1 ppm upon dilution from 3.0 to 0.05 mM at 300 K in 2H2O solution. Taken together, these data suggest that in solution, EMP-18(T10G) and EMP18 (a or b form) do not form discrete dimers as seen for EMP-1 in the crystalline state; a transient or weak association may give rise to the few observable peaks. To preclude any stabilization of the b-hairpin conformation by formation of a dimer (even if only transient in nature), we prepared variants of EMP-18 and EMP-18(T10G) that lacked the two N-terminal and two C-terminal residues, designated EPO-1 and EPO-3, respectively (Table 1). As with EMP-18, analysis of EPO-1 was complicated by the presence of cis and trans isoforms (in the ratio 3:2), hence we focused our attention on EPO3. NMR parameters (see Figure 5 and Table 5 of the Supplementary Material), CD spectra (Table 1, Figure 3(a)) and Ceff measurements (Table 1) for EPO-3 were very similar to those for EMP18(T10G), and are fully consistent with the truncated peptide adopting a stable b-hairpin in solution. EPO-3 structures calculated from NMRderived restraints have a well-de®ned b-hairpin conformation for the backbone (RMSD Ê 0.30(Æ0.06) A from the mean; Figure 5). The strand residues have the same register as EMP-18b (Figure 2), and in all 20 members of the ensemble,

Erythropoeitin Receptor Agonist -Hairpin Peptides

hydrogen bonds of good geometry are observed from His3 HN to Val10 CO, Gly5 HN to Gly8 CO and Val10 HN to His3 CO. The peptide has a trans Gly-Pro amide bond and a distorted type-I reverse turn at Pro6-Leu7. The positive f angle at Gly8 helps to accommodate the twist of opposite sign for the turn and adjacent strand residues (Table 2). The sampling of two w1 rotamers by Phe4 and Trp9 is probably an accurate re¯ection of what is occurring in solution (Figure 5). The 3JHa-Hb measured for Phe4 are indicative of rotational averaging; therefore, a number of NOEs to the ring protons were not used in the calculations, since they could be satis®ed only by a À60  or 180  w1 rotamer, but not by both. The structure of EPO-R-bound EMP-l may be superimposed onto EPO-3 with a backbone RMSD Ê of 1.2 A for residues within the disul®de cycle. In spite of this gross similarity, EPO-3 has a more pronounced pucker or bend for the residues connecting the non-hydrogen-bonded Phe-Trp pair of residues. Superimposing the backbone of EMP-3 and EPO-R-bound EMP-1 in the region of the disul®de (Cys2-Phe4, Trp9-Cys11, N, Ca, C; RMSD Ê 0.75 A) makes this difference much more apparent (Figure 6), and leads to a very different location of the turn residues with respect to the disul®debonded strands. The structural difference stems from the positive f angle adopted by Gly8 and is accompanied by a large change in the c angle of Leu7 (from À50  in the crystal to 60  in EPO-3). The relative orientation of the strand and turn resi-

Figure 5. Solution conformation of EPO-3. The 20 structures calculated for EPO-3 overlaid using the N, Ca and C atoms of residues 2-11. In addition to Cys2, Pro6 and Cys11, the side-chains of the residues that differ between EPO-3 and EPO-4 are shown and labeled.

Figure 6. Comparison of the crystal structure of EPOR-bound EMP-1 with EMP-18b and EPO-3 in solution. The minimized mean structures of EMP-18b (green) and EPO-3 (cyan) were superimposed on the crystal structure (pink; PDB accession code 1ebp chain D) using the N, Ca and C atoms of residues Cys2-Phe4 and Trp9 to Cys11 (EPO-3 numbering). The Ca of the residues corresponding to Phe4 and Trp9 of EPO-3 are shown as spheres, and the carbonyl oxygen atoms of the turn residues are colored red. The EPO-R atoms that donate a hydrogen bond to the peptide EMP-1 in the complex are indicated.

Erythropoeitin Receptor Agonist -Hairpin Peptides

1117 dues (Ser1-Gly4) is less well de®ned, although in many members of the ensemble, two g-turns are observed with hydrogen bonds from Ala4 HN to Cys2 CO and from Gly5 HN to Arg3 CO. Thus, the fold adopted by EPO-4 is very different from that of EPO-3, but similar to that of bp1-01 (Figure 8).5 All 16 peptides having either His or Arg at position 3, Phe or Ala at position 4, Gly or Gln at position 8 and Val or Leu at position 10 were synthesized (Table 3; Figure 3(a)) to identify which of the sequence differences contribute to the shift away from the b-hairpin conformation present in EPO-3. The relative stability of the b-hairpin conformation in these peptides was assessed from Ceff measurements. Interestingly, the values of Ceff for EPO-4 and the full-length precursor bp1-01 are low (47 and 76 mM, respectively), values that are indicative of poorly folded states in our previous studies of b-hairpins.15 Since both of these peptides are clearly folded, as determined by other criteria (NMR, CD), we conclude that the Ceff is not a useful metric for the degree of folding of the helical conformation. Presumably, the low effective con-

dues also differs between EMP-18b and the EPO-R bound conformation of EMP-1 (Figure 6). In this case, the cis Gly-Pro bond in EMP-18b is the cause of the structural difference. Amino acid determinants of b -hairpin conformation in EPO-3 A phage library similar to that used to identify the EPO-R agonist peptide has been used recently to identify bp1-01, a C-X2-GP-X4-C-X5 peptide antagonist of the interaction between IGFBP-1 and IGF-1.5 Six of the ten residues within the disul®de cycle of this peptide are identical with those of EMP-1. However, bp1-01 adopts a loop-turn-helix conformation in solution, with the disul®de bond connecting the N terminus to the middle of the helix.5 More recent studies have shown that the loop and helical turn structure within the disul®de cycle are present even in the absence of the exocyclic C-terminal tail.24 The high level of sequence identity yet very different conformation suggests that comparison of bp1-01 with EPO-3 might give further insights into factors that stabilize the b-hairpin conformation of EMP-1 and EPO-3. In order to facilitate comparisons between EPO-3 and bp1-01, we added the exocyclic residues of EPO-3 (Ser1 and Lys12) to the bp1-01 disul®de cycle, yielding EPO-4. The 3JHN-Ha and i,i  3 ROEs indicated the presence of a helical turn from Leu7 to Cys11 of EPO-4 (see Figure 6 and Table 6 of the Supplementary Material), and CD measurements were also indicative of helical character (negative band at 222 nm; Figure 3(b)). Structures calculated on the basis of the NMR data indicate that EPO-4 does contain a C-terminal turn of helix (Figure 7), with good geometry for hydrogen bonds from Cys11 HN to Leu7 CO and Lys12 HN to Gln8 CO in at least half of the 20 structures. As with the full-length bp1-01 peptide, Pro6 and Leu7 form a well-de®ned type-I reverse turn, and the helix is capped by a hydrogen bond from the indole hydrogen atom of Trp9 to the carbonyl oxygen atom of Pro6. The structure of the N-terminal resi-

Figure 7. Solution conformation of EPO-4. The 20 structures calculated for EPO-4 overlaid using the N, Ca and C atoms of residues 2-11. In addition to Cys2, Pro6 and Cys11, the side-chains of the residues that differ between EPO-4 and EPO-3 are shown and labeled.

Figure 8. Structural comparison of EPO-3 and EPO-4. (a) Minimized mean structure of EPO-3. For the case of Phe4 and Trp9, two representative side-chain conformations from the ensemble are depicted (see the text). (b) Minimized mean structure of EPO-4. For clarity, the side-chain atoms of Ser1 and Lys12 are omitted.

1118

Erythropoeitin Receptor Agonist -Hairpin Peptides

Table 3. Sequences of EMP and EPO peptides and extent of b-hairpin or a-helix formation
Peptide EPO-3 EPO-8 EPO-21 EPO-12 EPO-14 EPO-11 EPO-16 EPO-9 EPO-3  dtt EPO-4 EPO-15 EPO-17 EPO-18 EPO-19 EPO-20 EPO-6 EPO-2
a c b

Sequencea HFGV HFGL RFGV RFGL HAGV HAGL RAGV RAGL HRGL RAQL RAQV HAQL HAQV RFQL RFQV HFQL HFQV

Ceff (mM)b 896 290 463 189 172 114 166 106 n.a. 47 -

d(Cys2 Ha) (ppm) 5.47 5.28 5.43 5.24 5.28 5.01 5.22 5.02 4.49 4.79 4.81 4.75 4.80 4.80 4.82 4.74 4.78

d(Cys11 Ha) (ppm) 5.16 5.04 5.23 5.04 5.01 4.82 5.04 4.86 4.31 4.61 4.67 4.60 4.69 4.62 4.66 4.61 4.67

Structurec B B B b b U b U U A a A a a U a U

The one-letter codes are given for the amino acids present at residue position 3 (H or R), 4 (F or A), 8 (G or Q), and 10 (V or L). Measurement was made only for EPO-4 of the Gln8-containing peptides. The extent of formation of b-hairpin or a-helix conformation are indicated by B (highly populated b-hairpin), b (partially populated b-hairpin), A (highly populated a-helix), a (partially populated a-helix) or U (poorly folded peptides having no preference for b-hairpin or a-helix). See the text for discussion of this characterization.

centrations occur because only one of the cysteine residues is present within the regular secondary structure of the fold; population of this element of structure in the reduced state need not increase the proximity of the thiol groups. The large difference in Ceff between EPO-3 and EPO-4 indicates that the substitutions destabilize the b-hairpin fold by about 1.7 kcal molÀ1. Conformational preference was also ascertained for all 16 peptides from a detailed analysis of NMR parameters (chemical shifts and backbone coupling constants) and CD spectra. For all of this analysis, we interpret the data for each peptide in terms of degree of folding into the b-hairpin conformation, the degree of folding into the a-helical conformation or a lack of conformational preference. In the latter case, the peptides could be unstructured or have a mixture of the limiting b-hairpin and a-helix conformations. In either case, there is still a shift away from a single, stable conformation. The spectroscopic evidence (see below) indicates that the amino acid type at position 8 provides the clearest demarcation of conformation; peptides with glycine at this position are either b-hairpins or unfolded (never a-helical), whereas residues with glutamine at this position are either unfolded or a-helical. The lack of b-hairpin character for the Gln8 peptides agrees well with the strong stabilization of EMP-18(T10G) by glycine substitution at this turn position, whilst the absence of a-helical character for any Gly8 peptide correlates with the poor helix-forming properties of glycine.25 The Ceff measurements (Table 3) allow quanti®cation of the b-hairpin destabilization by substitution within the Gly8-containing peptides. The free-energy change for each substitution depends on context (Figure 9), but follows the trend that Phe4 to Ala is always

most destabilizing (ÁÁG  0.96, 0.60, 0.54 or 0.34 kcal molÀ1), followed by Val10 to Leu (ÁÁG  0.66, 0.52, 0.24 or 0.26 kcal molÀ1), and His3 to Arg being least destabilizing (ÁÁG  0.38, 0.25, 0.02 or 0.04 kcal molÀ1). Although these ranges overlap, when pairs of substitutions are compared in the same context, the trend indicated above is always valid. For example, in the context of the RFGV peptide, ÁÁG(Phe4Ala)  0.60 kcal molÀ1 and ÁÁG(Val10Leu)  0.52 kcal molÀ1. Previous investigations have shown that the 1H chemical shifts of the inward-facing a-protons on

Figure 9. Stability of Gly8-containing EPO peptides. The bars indicate the change in free energy relative to the model b-hairpin peptide bhpW (Ac-CTWEGNKLTCNH2; described by Cochran et al.15) determined by Ceff measurements for oxidation of the disul®de bond (see Materials and Methods). The labels above the graph indicate the residues present at positions 3 (His or Arg), 4 (Phe or Ala) and 10 (Val or Leu).

Erythropoeitin Receptor Agonist -Hairpin Peptides

1119 peptides (3JHNHa $ 10 Hz for the best folded, $9 Hz for the hairpins of intermediate stability, and $8 Hz for the least stable hairpins; see Table 7 of the Supplementary Material). In all of the Gln8containing peptides, these two couplings range from 6.5 Hz to 7.6 Hz (data not shown), hence they are not indicative of a particular structural preference. In the study of linear peptides, observation of large backbone coupling constants has been correlated with an extended main chain, and not necessarily with correct strand pairing of a b-hairpin.26 Such concerns are probably not relevant in the EPO-3 case, since the strands are tethered at both ends (by the type-I turn and the disul®de bond), hence an extended backbone almost certainly indicates b-hairpin formation. In many cases, CD spectra also gave an indication of the conformational preference of the peptide (positive ellipticity at 227 nm for b-hairpin structure; negative band at 221 nm for a-helical character; low-intensity positive band at 227 nm, and low-intensity negative band at 205 nm for no structural preference). Thus, for the Gly8-containing series, the peptides that also contain a phenylalanine residue have CD spectra characteristic of bhairpins, whilst those that contain an alanine residue have a much weaker positive band at 227 nm (Figure 3(b)). As a caveat, the intense CD bands associated with the b-hairpin conformation probably result from cross-strand exciton coupling between Trp9 and Phe4. Thus, the peptides that contain Ala4 might not be expected to exhibit this feature even if they were in a b-hairpin conformation. However, the CD signal at 227 nm may be used to judge the effects of the His3Arg and Val10Leu substitutions in either the Phe4 or the Ala4 context. In both backgrounds, the valine to leucine substitution causes a larger loss of signal than the histidine to arginine substitution (see Table 7 of the Supplementary Material), in line with the ranking based on Ceff and NMR parameters. The relative helical content of the Gln8-containing peptides is less easy to establish. Accurate quanti®cation of helix formation from the CD data is problematic, since the peptides contain only a single turn of helix; the CD signal at 221 nm is not strong and partially overlaps the signal at 205 nm attributed to unfolded or loop conformations (Figure 3). Similarly, quanti®cation of NMR parameters to yield accurate populations is fraught with sources of systematic error. Nonetheless, a number of qualitative trends are observed in the CD signal at 221 nm and the size of the 3JHN-Ha coupling constants. Notably, the peptides with a more negative ellipticity at 221 nm also have smaller coupling constants for Gln8 and Trp9 (up to 2.0 Hz smaller than the values observed in EPO-4 in the presence of dithiothreitol), suggesting that they have a higher proportion of helical character (see Table 8 of the Supplementary Material). In the Gly8-containing peptides, backbone couplings are not readily measured for the Gly8, and the values for Trp9 are intermediate in value (6.0 to 6.5 Hz),

each strand provide a robust method for quantifying b-hairpin content.15,26,27 The peptides in the present study contain two such pairs of residues, Cys2-Cys11 and Phe4-Trp9. Ha chemical shifts for the Phe4-Trp9 pair do not show a pronounced variation across the series (data not shown), perhaps due to the more dominant effect of ring-current shifts from the aromatic residues present at these sites. However, the cysteine Ha chemical shifts are much more informative (Table 3).15 In all of the Gln8-containing peptides, these chemical shifts are all less than 4.9 ppm (mean  4.80(Æ0.03) ppm and 4.64(Æ0.04) ppm for Cys2 and Cys11, respectively), whereas they are almost all above 5.00 ppm for the Gly8-containing peptides (mean  5.24(Æ0.17) ppm and 5.02(Æ0.14) ppm for Cys2 and Cys11, respectively). The data are consistent with a lack of b-hairpin structure in peptides containing glutamine at position 8, and a preference for b-hairpin structure in the peptides containing glycine at position 8. Moreover, the values for the Gly8-containing peptides follow the same trend as the Ceff measurements with the Phe4, Val10-containing peptides being most highly structured, the Ala4, Leu10-containing peptides being least structured, and the others being intermediate (Table 3). The chemical shift difference between the vicinal Ha protons of glycine residues has been used to estimate the degree of folding of small b-hairpin peptides, with larger differences being correlated with a better-de®ned structure when the glycine residue is at a turn i  2 position.28 In the present study, this parameter for Gly8 is large ($1.0 ppm) in the most stable b-hairpins and smallest ($0.4 ppm) in the least stable b-hairpins (see Table 7 of the Supplementary Material), following the trends described above for the various substitutions within EPO-3, and suggesting that glycine at turn i  3 positions may also be a useful indicator of hairpin stability. In the stable b-hairpin described by Nakamura et al., the separation of glycine Ha chemical shifts at the turn i  3 position is also large (0.81 ppm).21 The difference in Ha shift of glycine 5 (turn i position) shows very little variation with substitution within the Gly8-containing series (Ád 0.34-0.11 ppm), demonstrating that it is not informative. Finally, 3JHN-Ha backbone coupling constants were extracted from the NMR spectra. This parameter tends to be small (<6.0 Hz) in residues in an a-helical conformation and large (>8.0 Hz) when extended; intermediate values (6-8 Hz) do not allow an unambiguous structural categorization.29 For many residues in the EPO-3/ EPO-4 comparisons, this parameter is not readily measured (e.g. Cys2 HN is rarely observed due to fast exchange with solvent, residues 5 and 6 do not have a single amide proton), or is not structurally discriminatory between the two limiting folds (e.g. residues 3 and 7 are extended in both cases). However, the backbone couplings for residue 10 and 11 do follow the same trends as the Ceff measurements and chemical shifts for the Gly8-containing

1120 possibly as a result of twisting or bending in the middle of the b-hairpin.14,15 Taken together, the CD and coupling constant data suggest that replacing Leu10 with Val reduces the helical nature of the peptides substantially; substituting Ala4 with Phe has a less pronounced but still deleterious effect, while substituting Arg2 with His has little effect on the helical content. On the basis of these data, the population of helical conformation is categorized qualitatively in Table 3.

Erythropoeitin Receptor Agonist -Hairpin Peptides

Discussion
The goal of this study has been to probe structure-function relationships in peptide agonists of EPO-R, and to investigate the basis for conformational diversity amongst peptides that have a high degree of sequence identity. Investigations of such events provide insight into the factors that induce peptides and proteins to adopt a particular structure, and might allow prediction of structural motifs present in phage-derived peptides from sequence information only. A number of earlier studies of b-hairpin formation in peptides have suggested that choice of turn residues can play a crucial role in determining the stability of the hairpin and the register of strand residues.20,30 ± 33 Our present work with EMP-18 is no exception to this. The trans isoform (EMP-18a) is unable to adopt a b-hairpin conformation in solution because the twist of a pair of antiparallel strands is incompatible with the twist of the type-I turn favored by a proline residue.17 ± 20 However, ¯ipping the Gly7-Pro8 amide bond (EMP-18b) is suf®cient to relieve the strain (Table 2), as suggested by previous molecular modeling studies.19 Our results also demonstrate that the simple expedient of placing a glycine residue at position i  3 within the turn of EMP-18 produces a stable, highly populated b-hairpin peptide (EMP-18(T10G), or the truncated version EPO-3), albeit with a positive f angle at the turn i  3 residue. The overall fold of EMP-18b and EPO-3 in solution is reminiscent of the conformation observed when EMP-1 was co-crystallized with EPO-R.12 However, in the crystal structure of the complex, EMP-1 has a trans Gly-Pro amide bond and a f angle of À160  for the i  3 turn residue (Thr12). The presence of such a conformation in the complex and its absence in free solution indicates that it is energetically strained, and that the extensive intermolecular interactions observed in the complex are necessary to compensate for the strain. For example, there are four intermolecular hydrogen bonds between the backbone carbonyl oxygen atoms of the residues in the i  1 (Pro10), i  2 (Leu11) and i  3 (Thr12) positions of the turn to amide hydrogen atoms in the receptor (Figure 6). Surprisingly, stabilizing the b-hairpin conformation in solution with the Thr to Gly substitution leads to a peptide that does not show agonistic

(EC50 > 100 mM) or antagonistic (EC50 > 25 mM) activity towards EPO-R (Figure 4). Although the threonine side-chain of EMP-1 makes no intermolecular contacts to EPO-R in the crystal structure,12 it does accept an intramolecular hydrogen bond from the backbone amide hydrogen atom of the adjacent tryptophan residue. Replacing the threonine residue with alanine reduces EPO-R binding 20 to 120fold and ablates cell proliferation activity.16 Johnson et al. hypothesize that removal of the threonine side-chain perturbs the peptide structure thereby impairing receptor contacts.16 Similarly for EMP18(T10G), the loss of binding cannot be attributed directly to the removal of the side-chain. However, the relative orientation of strand and turn residues in EMP-18(T10G) (as deduced from EPO-3; Figure 6) suggests that this peptide could not maintain the non-bonded contacts between the stem of the peptide and the receptor at the same time as the intermolecular hydrogen bonds between the turn and the receptor. Thus, the stable b-hairpin conformation present in EMP-18(T10G) and EPO-3 is not optimal for binding to EPO-R, and the energetic cost of deforming it into a conformation that could bind outweighs the energetic bene®t that would be obtained from intermolecular contacts in the bound state. By a similar line of reasoning, the conformation observed for EMP-18b is unlikely to bind to EPO-R (Figure 6). The conformational preference of particular amino acids has been explored experimentally in model peptide and protein systems, and via a statistical analysis of published protein structures.34 ± 42 Such scales do give some insight into the conformational preferences of EPO-3 and EPO-4, in which loss of b-hairpin stability on residue substitution had the following rank order: G8Q > F4A > V10L > H3R (Table 3). In all of the b-propensity scales, phenylalanine is favored over alanine (by 0.2 to 1.1 kcal molÀ1) and valine is favored over leucine (by 0.1 to 0.5 kcal molÀ1), whereas histidine and arginine have similar energies. Thus, the quanti®cation of EPO-3 destabilization via Ceff measurements is in approximate agreement with the intrinsic amino acid propensities. The importance of Gly7 in EPO-3 is not predicted on the basis of b-propensity, due to its unique location at the i  3 position within a type-I turn and the requirement for a positive f angle. In a-helical propensity scales, the amino acids occurring in EPO-4 always energetically favor helix compared to those occurring in EPO-3, with the free energy differences ranging from 0.2 to 0.8 kcal molÀ1. In the case of Gln8 versus Gly or Leu10 versus Val, this may contribute directly to the formation of the C-terminal helix in EPO-4. Residues 3 and 4 of EPO-4 are involved in a pair of nested g-turns rather than in a regular helical conformation, hence the a-helical propensity of Arg3 versus His or Ala4 versus Phe may not play a direct role in actively stabilizing the conformation of EPO-4. Nonetheless, there may be an indirect ben-

Erythropoeitin Receptor Agonist -Hairpin Peptides

1121 histidine represented in both. This suggests that the choice of histidine in EMP-1 is not critical for structure or binding, in agreement with the preceding discussion and the observation that His3 is involved mostly in intrapeptide contacts in EMP-1. At the Phe/Ala position, the EPO-R sequences contained only phenylalanine, isoleucine or methionine, i.e. three of the six amino acids most stabilizing to a b-hairpin in the non-hydrogenbonded position.15 Thus, residues were selected that can form favorable hydrophobic interactions with EPO-R and at the same time contribute to the stability of the peptide tertiary fold. In contrast, the IGFBP-1 sequences contained 12 different amino acids, consistent with the postulated lack of IGFBP-1 contacts at this site.24 However, the amino acids selected are amongst the 14 least stabilizing to a b-hairpin in the non-hydrogen-bonded position,15 implying that there may be a structural requirement for a ``non b-forming'' residue in bp101. At the turn i  3 position, threonine was selected exclusively in the EPO-R library, although the reasons for this are not entirely clear (see above). Conversely, this site was not conserved in the IGFBP-1 library, although the majority of sequences contain glutamate (33 %), leucine (25 %) glutamine (11 %) or lysine (8 %), all of which are accommodated readily in an a-helix.34 Finally, at the Val/Leu position, valine was mostly present in the EPO-R library sequences, and leucine was present exclusively in the IGFBP-1 library sequences. This attests to the importance of b versus a-forming residues at these sites in EMP-1 and bp1-01, respectively. The structures of a number of disul®de-containing, phage-derived peptides have been reported in recent years, both in solution and bound to target protein. Of the ®ve examples described in a recent review,4 four adopt compact conformations containing either antiparallel b-interactions6,12 or sections of helix.5,11 In addition, compact hairpin or helix folds have also been identi®ed for peptides targeting the IgE high-af®nity receptor,21 GroEL,47 HIV gp417 and vascular endothelial growth factor.48 Thus, the folds observed in EPO-3 and EPO-4 are not unique to this particular phage display library or to the particular target proteins. The selection of such compact and folded states suggests that they confer a bene®t to binding, probably entropic in nature. As in proteins, the secondary structure motifs make use of intramolecular hydrogen bonds and shielding of hydrophobic surfaces from solvent to stabilize the structure. Indeed, these two interactions may be coupled, since sequestering a hydrogen bond from solvent may increase its strength relative to the solvated case. The preponderance of antiparallel b-hairpins and loop-helix folds suggest that these are two of the most ef®cient and robust methods to induce structure in a small peptide using naturally occurring amino acids. Although the number of reported phage-derived structures is relatively small, the observation of two predominant fold types

e®t in having residues at these positions that do not favor an extended conformation. Although the positive correlation between the structures of EPO-3 or EPO-4 and amino acid a- or b-propensity scales is intriguing, the fold adopted by a particular peptide depends on more than the intrinsic conformational preference of its constituent amino acids. Context, in particular the possibility of inter-residue interactions, often plays a key role in determining structure. In 10-15 residue peptides, protein-like extended tertiary contacts are not possible, but side-chain contacts are important. For example, in studies of the IGFBP-1 antagonist bp1-01, replacement of either leucine residue in the helix (equivalent to Leu7 or Leu10 in EPO-4 of the present study) with alanine leads to a dramatic loss of helical structure, even though alanine has a higher a-helical propensity.24 Presumably, this results from a cooperative clustering of residues on one face of the helix that includes Leu7, Trp9 and Leu10.5 Similarly, our recent studies on the stability of small, disul®de cyclized b-hairpin structures have shown that tryptophan in a non-hydrogen bonding location is the most stabilizing of the naturally occurring amino acids even though it has only a moderate b-propensity.15 Free energy values determined in this system via Ceff measurements show that large, hydrophobic residues in nonhydrogen bonding positions (Trp, Phe, Tyr, Leu, Met) stabilize the hairpin in an additive fashion by 0.2 to 0.8 kcal molÀ1 compared to threonine,13 a residue that has the highest intrinsic b-character in most published scales. We attribute the preference for large hydrophobic residues in the isolated hairpin to the ability of these residues to make nonbonded contacts with the opposite strand. The importance of cross-strand, interactions in stabilizing b-hairpin peptides has been investigated for a number of linear peptide systems wherein the presence of hydrophobic contacts were deemed to be stabilizing.26,43 ± 45 Moreover, in recent studies of the protein OspA, the burial of hydrophobic sections of large residues has been correlated with enhanced stability, suggesting that this may be a general phenomenon in extended peptides or proteins that contain an isolated b-hairpin or an extended, single-layer b-sheet.46 However, in larger, globular proteins such direct cross-strand interactions are less important, since other tertiary interactions (for example, hydrophobic packing between b-sheets or between b-sheets and a-helices) play a larger role in stabilization. During the phage-selection and optimization of EMP-1, a large number of phage clones were sequenced prior to selection of the tightest binding sequences via an elution ELISA assay.10 A large number of phage clones were sequenced during the optimization of bp1-01.24 Comparing the consensus (or lack thereof) at the positions discussed above offers further insight into the relative importance and function of these sites. For example, at the His/Arg position, there was little consensus from either library, with arginine and

1122 suggests that the total number of stable folds present in disul®de-constrained peptide libraries might be quite small. The geometric constraints imposed by covalent connection between the cysteine residues and the small number of intervening residues may be responsible for the predominance of b-hairpin and loop-helix motifs. Previous studies have demonstrated the intrinsic malleability of protein structures. For example, changing the amino acid type at less than half of the residues within the B1 domain of protein G (an a-helix  antiparallel b-sheet topology) lead to a marked conformational change of all residues to yield an all a-helical structure.49 ± 51 Analysis of protein structures has demonstrated that identical sequences up to seven residues in length that occur in different protein structures sometimes adopt very different backbone conformations.52 Experimentally, an 11 residue peptide substituted at two locations within the B1 domain of protein G has been shown to adopt very different secondary structures driven by the tertiary fold of the entire protein.53 The current study indicates that such transitions are not limited to proteins and can occur in small peptides. Changing only four of 12 residues (33 %) in EPO-3 is suf®cient to shift from a b-hairpin conformation to a helical one. This transition does not require extensive tertiary contacts to stabilize the limiting conformations, suggesting that the independent formation of structure by such small clusters of residues is energetically favorable. We note that reduction of the disul®de bond leads to a loss of structure in both the b-hairpin (Figure 1) and a-helical sequence.24 Presumably, the disul®de bond aids the nucleation of the folded structure by limiting the conformational space accessible to the peptide. In conclusion, we have shown that two phagederived peptides differing in sequence at only four out of 12 residues, have very well de®ned but different conformational preferences. The phage selection process appears to have chosen particular amino acids at several positions in the peptide so as to maximize the population of a-helix or b-hairpin (with the constraint that the resulting peptide still be able to bind to target protein). The conformational preferences cannot be explained entirely by the secondary structure propensities of individual residues. Even for these small peptides, nonbonded, non-sequential interactions play a dominant role in dictating the conformation, much as they do in larger proteins. From the limited number of phage-derived peptide structures determined to date, compact motifs containing an antiparallel b-hairpin or a loop-a-helix are very common. This raises the possibility that semiempirical calculation methods may be a suitable way to predict fold preference from sequence information alone (perhaps augmented by the empirical folding energies presented here and in our previous studies13 ± 15). For example, potential-based threading algorithms54,55 may be used to discriminate between possible fold conformations com-

Erythropoeitin Receptor Agonist -Hairpin Peptides

monly observed in phage libraries. Further work along these lines is currently underway in our laboratory.

Materials and Methods
Peptide synthesis Peptides were synthesized as C-terminal amides using standard Fmoc chemistry on a Pioneer synthesizer (PE Biosystems). Peptides were cleaved from resin by treatment with 5 % (w/v) triisopropylsilane in tri¯uoroacetic acid (TFA) for 1.5-4 hours at room temperature. After removal of TFA by rotary evaporation, peptides were precipitated by addition of ethyl ether then puri®ed by reversed-phase HPLC (acetonitrile/water/0.1 % TFA). Peptide identity was con®rmed by electrospray mass spectrometry. Peptides were converted to cyclic disul®des by drop-wise addition of a saturated solution of I2 in acetic acid to HPLC fractions and repuri®ed by HPLC. Puri®ed peptides eluted as single symmetric peaks on C18 analytical columns (0-40 % acetonitrile in 40 minutes). Effective concentration measurements Equilibrium constants were measured relative to the reference thiol glutathione (GSH) at pH 8.1 and 20  C.15 Brie¯y, concentrations of reduced and oxidized species were determined from HPLC peak areas, and effective concentrations (Ceff) were obtained from the following relationship: Ceff  ([GSH]2 Â [peptideox])/ ([GSSG] Â [peptidered]). The Ceff values reported in Table 1 and Table 3 are averages from three or more HPLC analyses. Uncertainties in the ÁÁG values calculated from the Ceff values are less than 0.03 kcal molÀ1. CD spectroscopy Concentrations of peptide stock solutions were determined spectrophotometrically as described.56 Samples contained 20 mM peptide in 20 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.0. Spectra were acquired with an Aviv Instruments, Inc. model 202 spectrophotometer at 5  C. Averaging time at each wavelength was ten seconds. Protein structure database searching. A database of 467 non-redundant protein structures was searched using the program TOOLKIT written by Dr Robert McDowell. The program takes as input a template coordinate ®le, and ®nds matches in the protein structures that have an RMS coordinate difference less Ê than a speci®ed threshold (1.0 A in this case). A template was generated from the minimized mean coordinates of the bhpW b-hairpin peptide.15 The search query consisted of the backbone atoms of three residues in each strand, with two intervening residues that correspond to the turn i  1 and i  2 positions. The program tabulates secondary structure (including turn-type) and the presence of positive f angles for the fragments identi®ed. NMR spectroscopy and structure calculations NMR samples contained 3-9 mM peptide in 92 % H2O/8 % 2H2O pH 5.0-5.3 and $100 mM 1,4-dioxane as chemical shift reference. All spectra were acquired on Bruker Avance-500 or Avance-600 spectrometers at 20  C

Erythropoeitin Receptor Agonist -Hairpin Peptides or 30  C as described.5,57 All analysis of NMR data was performed with the program FELIX (MSI, San Diego). Resonance assignments were made by standard methods using 2QF-COSY, TOCSY and ROESY data collected in H2O solution.29 For EMP-18b, EPO-3 and EPO-4, distance restraints were generated from H2O and 2H2O ROESY spectra (tm 150 ms); dihedral angle restraints were derived from 3JHN-Ha or 3JHa-Hb coupling constants measured from 2QF-COSY or COSY-35 spectra, respectively, processed to high digital resolution in F2.58 Hydrogen bond restraints were not employed at any stage of the calculation process. In all, 100 initial structures were calculated using the hybrid distance geometry/simulated annealing program DGII;59 80 of these were further re®ned by restrained molecular dynamics using the AMBER all-atom force-®eld60 implemented in DISCOVER (MSI, San Diego) as described.58 The 20 conformations of lowest restraint violation energy were chosen to represent the solution conformations. Restraint numbers and structural statistics for the three peptides whose structures were determined are presented in Table 4. Biological activity of peptides A DNA fragment corresponding to the entire coding region of the erythropoeitin receptor (EPO-R) was

1123
obtained by PCR and cloned into pRK5-tkneo under control of the CMV promoter. After linearization, this construct was introduced into Ba/F3 cells by electroporation (250 V, 9560 mF). Neomycin-resistant cells were selected in 2 mg/ml of G418 and individual clones were obtained by limiting dilutions. Clones that expressed EPO-R were selected by testing for proliferation in response to recombinant human erythropoeitin (rhEPO). Stimulation of proliferation of the Ba/F3 cells in response to rhEPO or peptide was measured by the extent of [3H]thymidine incorporation into the cellular DNA. Cells were starved of interleukin-3 for 16 hours then seeded in 96-well plates at a density of 25,000 cells per well in medium containing rhEPO or peptide at various concentrations. After incubation for 22 hours, 1 mCi of [3H]thymidine was added to each well followed by incubation for a further six hours prior to harvesting the cells. Incorporated radioactivity was determined in the presence of 40 ml of scintillation ¯uid (Microscint-20) using a Top Count counter (Packard Instruments). Peptide EMP-18 and EMP-18(T10G) were tested in place of rhEPO for proliferative activity up to concentrations of 1 mM or 100 mM, respectively. EMP-18(T10G) was also tested for antagonistic activity by adding 25 mM peptide to Ba/F3 cells that were stimulated with either 100 pM rhEPO or 1.0 mM EMP-18.

Table 4. Summary of input restraints and structural statistics for EMP-18b, EPO-3 and EPO-4
Molecule EMP-18b NOE restraints (number) Total Intraresidue Sequential Medium  long range Dihedral angle restraints f w1 Energies in final ensemble (kcal molÀ1) Total Bond Angle Dihedral Hydrogen bond Non-bonded Coulombic Restraint violation NOE violations Ê > 0.0 A Ê > 0.1 A Ê Mean maximum (A) Dihedral angle violations > 0.0  > 1.0  > 5 Mean maximum (deg.) f/c distribution (%) Favored Allowed Generous  disallowed Ê Mean RMSD from mean structure (A) Backbone heavy-atomsa All heavy-atoms, residuesa 52 18 17 17 11 4 À38.0 Æ 3.0 2.0 Æ 0.1 17.7 Æ 0.9 19.0 Æ 1.7 À4.9 Æ 0.9 À42.5 Æ 3.0 À29.5 Æ 1.8 0.07 Æ 0.02 1.1 Æ 0.8 0 0.02 Æ 0.02 5.8 Æ 0.7 0.3 Æ 0.5 0 0.8 Æ 0.2 63 37 0 0.43 Æ 0.10 0.89 Æ 0.12 EPO-3 70 13 25 32 9 4 À30.4 Æ 3.2 1.3 Æ 0.1 11.4 Æ 1.1 12.2 Æ 0.9 À3.7 Æ 0.4 À30.7 Æ 2.0 À21.0 Æ 0.7 0.04 Æ 0.01 0.8 Æ 0.7 0 0.01 Æ 0.01 3.7 Æ 1.1 0.1 Æ 0.2 0 0.8 Æ 0.1 70 30 0 0.31 Æ 0.06 0.89 Æ 0.09 EPO-4 98 17 42 39 8 3 À34.0 Æ 3.0 1.4 Æ 0.1 11.5 Æ 1.0 12.1 Æ 1.0 À3.9 Æ 0.5 À28.7 Æ 2.2 À26.9 Æ 1.0 0.04 Æ 0.02 2.1 Æ 1.1 0 0.02 Æ 0.01 2.0 Æ 1.2 1.0 Æ 0.9 0.1 Æ 0.4 0.5 Æ 0.4 63 37 0 0.47 Æ 0.15 1.08 Æ 0.17

a RMSD calculated for residues Cys4-Cys13 for EMP-1b, Cys2-Cys11 for EPO-3 and EPO-4. The backbone value drops to Ê 0.28(Æ0.11) A for EPO-4 when the less well-ordered Cys2, Arg3 and Ala4 are not included.

1124
Protein Data Bank accession numbers Coordinates and restraint ®les have been deposited with the RCSB Protein Data Bank for EMP-186 (ensemble, accession number 1KVF), EPO-3 (ensemble, accession number 1KVG) and bp1-01 (ensemble and minimized mean, accession numbers 1IMW and 1GJE, respectively). 13. 14. 15.

Erythropoeitin Receptor Agonist -Hairpin Peptides Ê tide agonist: the EPO receptor complex at 2.8 A. Science, 273, 464-471. Russell, S. J. & Cochran, A. G. (2000). Designing stable b-hairpins: energetic contributions from crossstrand residues. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122, 12600-12601. Cochran, A. G., Skelton, N. J. & Starovasnik, M. A. (2001). Tryptophan zippers: stable, monomeric b-hairpins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 98, 5578-5583. Cochran, A. G., Tong, R. T., Starovasnik, M. A., Park, E. J., McDowell, R. S., Theaker, J. E. & Skelton, N. J. (2001). A minimal peptide scaffold for b-turn display: optimizing a strand position in disul®decyclized b-hairpins. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123, 625-632. Johnson, D. L., Farrell, F. X., Barbone, F. P., McMahon, F. J., Tullai, J., Hoey, K. et al. (1998). Identi®cation of a 13 amino acid peptide mimetic of erythropoietin and description of amino acids critical for the mimetic activity of EMP1. Biochemistry, 37, 3699-3710. Sibanda, B. L. & Thornton, J. M. (1985). b-Hairpin families in globular proteins. Nature, 316, 170-174. Wilmot, C. M. & Thornton, J. M. (1988). Analysis and prediction of the different types of b-turn in proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 203, 221-232. Mattos, C., Petsko, G. A. & Karplus, M. (1994). Analysis of two-residue turns in proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 238, 733-747. Haque, T. S. & Gellman, S. H. (1997). Insights on b-hairpin stability in aqueous solution from peptides with enforced type I' and type II' b-turns. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 119, 2303-2304. Nakamura, G. R., Starovasnik, M. A., Reynolds, M. E. & Lowman, H. B. (2001). A novel family of b-hairpin peptides that inhibit IgE activity by binding to the high-af®nity IgE receptor. Biochemistry, 40, 9828-9835. Hobohm, U. & Sander, C. (1994). Enlarged representative set of protein structures. Protein Sci. 3, 522524. Livnah, O., Johnson, D. L., Stura, E. A., Farrell, F. X., Barbone, F. P., You, Y. et al. (1998). An antagonist peptide-EPO receptor complex suggests that receptor dimerization is not suf®cient for activation. Nature Struct. Biol. 5, 993-1004. Skelton, N. J., Chen, Y. M., Dubree, N., Quan, C., Jackson, D. Y., Cochran, A. G. et al. (2001). Structure-function analysis of a phage-derived peptide that binds to IGFBP-1. Biochemistry, 40, 8487-8498. Chakrabartty, A. & Baldwin, R. L. (1995). Stability of a-helices. Advan. Protein Chem. 46, 141-176. Maynard, A. J., Sharman, G. J. & Searle, M. S. (1998). Origin of b-hairpin stability in solution: structural and thermodynamic analysis of the folding of a model peptide supports hydrophobic stabilization in water. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 120, 1996-2007. Sharman, G. J., Grif®ths-Jones, S. R., Jourdan, M. & Searle, M. S. (2001). Effects of amino acid f/c propensities and secondary structure interactions in modulating Ha chemical shifts in peptide and protein b-sheet. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123, 12318-12324. Searle, M. S., Grif®ths-Jones, S. R. & Skinner-Smith, H. (1999). Energetics of weak interactions in a b-hairpin peptide: electrostatic and hydrophobic contributions to stability from lysine salt bridges. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121, 11615-11620. È Wuthrich, K. (1986). NMR of Proteins and Nucleic Acids, Wiley, New York.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr Robert McDowell for providing the software used to perform the structural motif searches, and Drs Melissa Starovasnik, Wayne Fairbrother and Tamas Blandl for many helpful discussions during the course of this study.

16.

17.

References
1. Lowman, H. B. & Wells, J. A. (1993). Af®nity maturation of human growth hormone by monovalent phage display. J. Mol. Biol. 234, 564-578. 2. Lowman, H. (1997). Bacteriophage display and discovery of peptide leads for drug development. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 26, 401-424. 3. Sidhu, S. S., Lowman, H. B., Cunningham, B. C. & Wells, J. A. (2000). Phage display for selection of novel binding peptides. Methods Enzymol. 328, 333363. 4. Sidhu, S. S. (2000). Phage display in pharmaceutical biotechnology. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 11, 610-616. 5. Lowman, H. B., Chen, Y. M., Skelton, N. J., Mortensen, D. L., Tomlinson, E. E., Sadick, M. D. et al. (1998). Molecular mimetics of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) for inhibiting IGF-1:IGFbinding protein interactions. Biochemistry, 37, 88708878. 6. DeLano, W. L., Ultsch, M. H., de Vos, A. M. & Wells, J. A. (2000). Convergent solutions to binding at a protein-protein interface. Science, 287, 1279-1283. 7. Eckert, D. M., Malashkevich, V. N., Long, L. H., Carr, P. A. & Kim, P. S. (1999). Inhibiting HIV-1 entry: discovery of D-peptide inhibitors that target the gp41 coiled-coil pocket. Cell, 99, 103-115. 8. Fairbrother, W. J., Christinger, H. C., Cochran, A. G., Fuh, G., Keenan, C. J., Quan, C. et al. (1998). Novel peptides selected to bind vascular endothelial growth factor target the receptor-binding site. Biochemistry, 37, 17754-17764. 9. Katz, B. A. (1995). Binding to protein targets of peptidic leads discovered by phage display: crystal structures of streptavidin-bound linear and cyclic peptides containing the HPQ sequence. Biochemistry, 34, 15421-15429. 10. Wrighton, N. C., Farrell, F. X., Chang, R., Kashyap, A. K., Barbone, F. P., Mulcahy, L. S. et al. (1996). Small peptides as potent mimics of the protein hormone erythropoietin. Science, 273, 458-463. 11. Dennis, M. S., Eigenbrot, C., Skelton, N. J., Ultsch, M. H., Santell, L., Dwyer, M. A. et al. (2000). Peptide exosite inhibitors of factor VIIa as anticoagulants. Nature, 404, 465-470. 12. Livnah, O., Stura, E. A., Johnson, D. L., Middleton, S. A., Mulcahy, L. S., Wrighton, N. C. et al. (1996). Functional mimicry of a protein hormone by a pep-

18. 19. 20.

21.

22. 23.

24.

25. 26.

27.

28.

29.

Erythropoeitin Receptor Agonist -Hairpin Peptides Â 30. de Alba, E., Jimenez, M. A. & Rico, M. (1997). Turn residue sequence determines b-hairpin conformation in designed peptides. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 119, 175-183. Â 31. de Alba, E., Rico, M. & Jimenez, M. A. (1997). Cross-strand side-chain interactions versus turn conformations in b-hairpins. Protein Sci. 6, 2548-2560. Â 32. Ramõrez-Alvarado, M., Blanco, F. J., Niemann, H. & Serrano, L. (1997). Role of b-turn residues in b-hairpin formation and stability in designed peptides. J. Mol. Biol. 273, 898-912. 33. Stanger, H. E. & Gellman, S. H. (1998). Rules for antiparallel b-sheet design: D-Pro-Gly is superior to L-Asn-Gly for b-hairpin nucleation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 120, 4236-4237. 34. O'Neil, K. T. & DeGrado, W. F. (1990). A thermodynamic scale for the helix-forming tendencies of the commonly occurring amino acids. Science, 250, 646-651. 35. Padmanabhan, S., Marqusee, S., Ridgeway, T., Laue, T. M. & Baldwin, R. L. (1990). Relative helix-forming tendencies of nonpolar amino acids. Nature, 344, 268-270. 36. Chakrabartty, A., Kortemme, T. & Baldwin, R. L. (1994). Helix propensities of the amino acids measured in alanine-based peptides without helixstabilizing side-chain interactions. Protein Sci. 3, 843852. 37. Minor, D. L. & Kim, P. S. (1994). Measurement of the b-sheet-forming propensities of the amino acids. Nature, 367, 660-663. 38. Minor, D. L. & Kim, P. S. (1994). Context is a major determinant of b-sheet propensity. Nature, 371, 264267. 39. Smith, C. K., Withka, J. M. & Regan, L. (1994). A thermodynamic scale for the b-sheet forming tendencies of the amino acids. Biochemistry, 33, 5510-5517. 40. Smith, C. K. & Regan, L. (1995). Guidelines for protein design: the energetics of b-sheet side chain interactions. Science, 270, 980-982. 41. Kim, C. A. & Berg, J. M. (1993). Thermodynamic b-sheet propensities measured using a zinc-®nger host peptide. Nature, 362, 267-270. 42. Munoz, V. & Serrano, L. (1994). Intrinsic secondary structure propensities of the amino acids, using statistical f-c matrices: comparison with experimental scales. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 20, 301-311. 43. Blanco, F. J., Rivas, G. & Serrano, L. (1994). A short linear peptide that folds into a native stable b-hairpin in aqueous solution. Nature Struct. Biol. 1, 584590. Â 44. Ramõrez-Alvarado, M., Blanco, F. J. & Serrano, L. (1996). De novo design and structural analysis of a model b-hairpin peptide system. Nature Struct. Biol. 3, 604-611. 45. Sieber, V. & Moe, G. R. (1996). Interactions contributing to the formation of a b-hairpin-like structure in a small peptide. Biochemistry, 35, 181-188. 46. Koide, S., Huang, X., Link, K., Koide, A., Bu, Z. & Engelman, D. M. (2000). Design of single-layer b-sheets without a hydrophobic core. Nature, 403, 465-460. 47. Chen, L. & Sigler, P. B. (1999). The crystal structure of a GroEl/peptide complex: plasticity as a basis for substrate diversity. Cell, 99, 757-768.

1125
48. Pan, B., Li, B., Russell, S. J., Tom, J. K., Cochran, A. G. & Fairbrother, W. J. (2002). Solution structure of a phage-derived peptide antagonist in complex with vascular endothelial growth factor. J. Mol. Biol. 316, 767-785. 49. Dalal, S., Balasubramanian, S. & Regan, L. (1997). Protein alchemy: changing b-sheet into a-helix. Nature Struct. Biol. 4, 548-552. 50. Dalal, S., Balasubramanian, S. & Regan, L. (1997). Transmuting a helices and b sheets. Fold. Des. 2, R71-R79. 51. Dalal, S. & Regan, L. (2000). Understanding the sequence determinants of conformational switching using protein design. Protein Sci. 9, 1651-1659. 52. Mezei, M. (1998). Chameleon sequences in the PDB. Protein Eng. 11, 411-414. 53. Minor, D. L. & Kim, P. S. (1996). Context-dependent secondary structure formation of a designed protein sequence. Nature, 380, 730-734. 54. Bryant, S. H. & Lawrence, C. E. (1993). An empirical energy function for threading protein sequence through the folding motif. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 16, 92-112. È 55. Flockner, H., Domingues, F. S. & Sippl, M. J. (1997). Protein folds from pair interactions: a blind test in fold recognition. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 1, 1291331. 56. Gill, S. C. & von Hippel, P. H. (1989). Calculation of protein extinction coef®cients from amino acid sequence data. Anal. Biochem. 182, 319-326. 57. Cavanagh, J., Fairbrother, W. J., Palmer, A. G. & Skelton, N. J. (1995). Protein NMR Spectroscopy, Principles and Practice, Academic Press, New York. 58. Skelton, N. J., Garcia, K. C., Goeddel, D. V., Quan, C. & Burnier, J. P. (1994). Determination of the solution structure of guanylin. Biochemistry, 33, 13581-13592. 59. Havel, T. F. (1991). An evaluation of computational strategies for use in the determination of protein structure from distance constraints obtained by nuclear magnetic resonance. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 56, 43-78. 60. Weiner, S. J., Kollman, P. A., Nguyen, D. T. & Case, D. A. (1986). An all-atom force ®eld for simulations of proteins and nucleic acids. J. Comput. Chem. 7, 230-252.

Edited by P. E. Wright (Received 24 August 2001; received in revised form 7 January 2002; accepted 8 January 2002)

http://www.academicpress.com/jmb Supplementary Material comprising six Figures and eight Tables is available on IDEAL

