Current Biology, Vol. 13, 1941­1953, November 11, 2003, 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. DOI 10.1016/j.cub.2003.10.036

ATP Hydrolysis Is Required for Cohesin's Association with Chromosomes
Prakash Arumugam, Stephan Gruber, Koichi Tanaka, Christian H. Haering, Karl Mechtler, and Kim Nasmyth* Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP) Dr. Bohr-Gasse 7 1030 Vienna Austria thought to stabilize connections between microtubules and kinetochores. Only when all chromosomes have bioriented (a state known as metaphase) is the "tug of war" between microtubules and cohesion finally resolved by the destruction of cohesion, which triggers the segregation of sister chromatids to opposite poles of the cell during anaphase. Sister chromatid cohesion depends on a complex called cohesin, which is composed of four core subunits: Smc1, Smc3, Scc1 (Mcd1), and Scc3 (SA) (reviewed in [1]). In budding yeast, cohesin's association with chromosomes shortly before the onset of DNA replication is triggered by the de novo synthesis of its Scc1 subunit along with that of securin, an inhibitor of a thiol protease called separase that cleaves and thereby inactivates Scc1. Cohesin is capable of associating with chromosomes at all stages of the cell cycle during which separase is inactive, namely from late G1 until the onset of anaphase. However, it can only generate connections between sister chromatids when present during DNA replication [2]. Cohesin's stable association with chromosomes as well as the establishment of sister chromatid cohesion depends on a separate complex composed of the Scc2 and Scc4 proteins [3]. Meanwhile, the establishment of sister chromatid cohesion but not cohesin's stable association with chromosomes depends on a putative acetyltransferase called Eco1(Ctf7) [4­6]. Sister chromatid cohesion is eventually destroyed at the metaphase to anaphase transition due to cleavage of its Scc1 subunit by separase [7, 8], which is activated through the sudden destruction of its securin inhibitor by a ubiquitin protein ligase called the anaphase-promoting complex or cyclosome (APC/C). Smc1 and Smc3 are putative ATPases belonging to the SMC family of proteins, which have diverse roles in controlling chromosome morphology in bacteria as well as in eukaryotic cells. The N- and the C-terminal halves of SMC proteins fold back on themselves forming 50 nm-long antiparallel [9] intramolecular coiled coils [10]. Their N- and C-terminal sequences form globular ABClike ATPase domains at one end of this coiled coil while a central region at the other end forms a dimerization domain through which they interact with other Smc molecules. Due to the angle at which their coiled coils emerge from their dimerization domains, the two arms of Smc dimers create a V-shaped molecule with a "hinge" composed of dimerization domains at its base and potential ATPases at its two apices (known as the heads). An important feature of ABC-like ATPases is that ATP molecules bound to one head are contacted by socalled signature motifs on another. Two heads are thought therefore to bind to each other, sandwiching a pair of ATP molecules. ATP hydrolysis within the two heads is thought to be both simultaneous and cooperative (reviewed in [11]). Cohesin's Smc1 and Smc3 subunits form heterodimers. If their Smc1 and Smc3 heads bind and hydrolyze ATP like other ABC-like ATPases, then they would be expected at some stage to associate

Summary Background: A multi-subunit protein complex called cohesin is involved in holding sister chromatids together after DNA replication. Cohesin contains four core subunits: Smc1, Smc3, Scc1, and Scc3. Biochemical studies suggest that Smc1 and Smc3 each form 50 nm-long antiparallel coiled coils (arms) and bind to each other to form V-shaped heterodimers with globular ABC-like ATPases (created by the juxtaposition of N- and C-terminal domains) at their apices. These Smc "heads" are connected by Scc1, creating a tripartite proteinaceous ring. Results: To investigate the role of Smc1 and Smc3's ATPase domains, we engineered smc1 and smc3 mutations predicted to abolish either ATP binding or hydrolysis. All mutations abolished Smc protein function. The binding of ATP to Smc1, but not Smc3, was essential for Scc1's association with Smc1/3 heterodimers. In contrast, mutations predicted to prevent hydrolysis of ATP bound to either head abolished cohesin's association with chromatin but not Scc1's ability to connect Smc1's head with that of Smc3. Inactivation of the Scc2/4 complex had a similar if not identical effect; namely, the production of tripartite cohesin rings that cannot associate with chromosomes. Conclusions: Cohesin complexes whose heads have been connected by Scc1 must hydrolyze ATP in order to associate stably with chromosomes. If chromosomal association is mediated by the topological entrapment of DNA inside cohesin's ring, then ATP hydrolysis may be responsible for creating a gate through which DNA can enter. We suggest that ATP hydrolysis drives the temporary disconnection of Scc1 from Smc heads that are needed for DNA entrapment and that this process is promoted by Scc2/4. Introduction Following DNA replication, cells face the daunting challenge of segregating sister chromatids to opposite poles prior to cell division. This process depends on their attachment to microtubules with opposing orientations, known as amphitelic attachment or biorientation. Sister chromatid cohesion has a crucial role in promoting biorientation because it resists the pulling force generated by microtubules and thereby generates the tension
*Correspondence: knasmyth@nt.imp.univie.ac.at

Current Biology 1942

directly with each other, at which point the V-shaped heterodimer would form at least transiently a bipartite ring structure. ATPase activity associated with cohesin's Smc1 and Smc3 heads has not hitherto been detected and its function is unknown. A clue to the possible function of cohesin's Smc1 and Smc3's ATPases has come from studying its cleavable Scc1 subunit. In both soluble and chromosomal forms of cohesin, Scc1 connects the Smc1 and Smc3 heads. Scc1's N-terminal and C-terminal domains bind to Smc3 and Smc1's heads, respectively, thereby creating a triangular or tripartite ring. Because cleavage of Scc1, either naturally by separase at the metaphase to anaphase transition or artificially by TEV protease, triggers cohesin's dissociation from chromosomes and destroys sister chromatid cohesion, it has been suggested that DNA molecules might be trapped within cohesin's large tripartite ring. An important prediction of this model is that cohesin should be released from DNA by severing any one of the three sides of cohesin's triangle. This is indeed the case. Introduction of TEV cleavage sites at equivalent positions within both strands of Smc3's coiled coil has made it possible to sever the coiled coil at a defined position both in vitro and in vivo, and this releases cohesin from chromosomes [12]. If the ring hypothesis is correct and sister chromatid cohesion is to persist for long periods of time, then the cohesin's subunit interactions must be very stable. Yet, one or another subunit interaction must be transiently broken to permit DNA entrapment in the first place. This suggests that one or more of cohesin's subunit interactions must be tightly regulated, switching between unstable and stable states. To address whether ATP hydrolysis might have a role either in forming stable rings or in breaking them, we have investigated the consequences of mutating amino acid residues within Smc1 or Smc3 heads that are predicted to be important either for binding or hydrolyzing ATP. Our results suggest that the binding of ATP to Smc1's head, but not Smc3's head, is necessary for Scc1's stable association with the Smc1/3 heterodimer. ATP hydrolysis, in contrast, is needed neither for Scc1's binding to Smc1 nor even for the formation of tripartite rings in which Scc1 connects Smc1 and Smc3 heads. It is, however, essential for cohesin's association with chromatin. Our data raise the possibility that ATP hydrolysis might drive the transient dissociation of Scc1 from Smc heads needed for trapping DNA inside cohesin rings.

Figure 1. The Walker A, the Walker B, and the ABC Signature Motifs of Rad50 Are Required for ATP Binding, ATP Hydrolysis, and ATPDependent Dimerization, Respectively (A) The formation of intramolecular coiled coils brings the N and C termini of SMC proteins together to form one half of an ABC-like ATPase referred to as the "head domain." SMC heads might dimerize in an ATP-dependent manner with the ABC signature sequence motif of one head binding to the ATP bound to the other head and vice versa as has been shown for Rad50 [13]. (B) Mutations engineered in Smc1 and Smc3 and their expected effects on ATP binding/hydrolysis or ATP-dependent dimerization. (C) Crystal structure of Rad50 bound to ATP (in blue) highlighting the Walker A (in red), the Walker B (in green), and the ABC signature sequence (in yellow) motifs [13]. The residues in Rad50 corresponding to those chosen for mutagenesis in Smc1 and Smc3 are indicated.

Results ATP Binding and Hydrolysis Are Required for Smc1 and Smc3 Function The amino-terminal domains of SMC proteins contain a Walker A motif (P loop) while their C-terminal domains contain a Walker B and an ABC signature motif (C motif). Walker A residues are important for ATP binding while Walker B sequences are important for both ATP binding and hydrolysis. Crystal structures of Rad50 and ABC transporters [13­15] suggest that Smc1 and Smc3 heads might dimerize in an ATP-dependent manner via their ABC signature motifs. If so, the ABC signature motif

(C motif) of Smc1 would be predicted to bind to the -phosphate of an ATP molecule bound to the Smc3 head and vice versa (Figure 1A). We introduced mutations in both Smc1 and Smc3 that should abolish ATP binding, ATP-dependent head dimerization, or ATP hydrolysis (Figure 1B). The position of the corresponding residues in the crystal structure of ATP-bound Rad50 are indicated in Figure 1C. Our choice of residues for mutagenesis was based on the premise that the muta-

ATPase Activity and Sister Chromatid Cohesion 1943

Figure 2. Asymmetric Interaction of Scc1 with Smc1/3 Heads (A) The ATP binding mutants (K39I and D1157A) and ABC signature sequence motif mutant (S1130R) of Smc1 do not bind Scc1 in vivo. Soluble extracts were prepared from cycling cells expressing Scc1 and Smc1 tagged with HA (six copies) and myc (nine copies) epitopes, respectively. Smc1 was either wild-type (K11859: SMC1-MYC9::URA3, SCC1-HA6::HIS3, MAT ) or carrying the K39I (K11861), S1130R (K11863), D1157A (K11864), or E1158Q (K11865) missense mutations. We used antibodies against the myc and HA epitopes to assay coimmunoprecipitation by probing the input (IN) (1X), flow through (FT) (1X), and immunoprecipitated (B) (5X) fractions. (B) Smc3 ATPase mutants interact with Scc1 normally. Soluble extracts were prepared from cycling cells expressing Smc3 and Scc1 tagged with HA3 and myc9 epitopes, respectively. Smc3 was either wild-type (K11866: SMC3-HA3::LEU2, SCC1-MYC18::TRP1, MAT ) or carrying K38I (K11872), S1128R (K11874), or E1155Q (K11880) mutations. To immunoprecipitate Smc3 we used an antibody against its HA3 epitope, and the amount of Scc1 bound was assayed by probing the input (IN) (1X), flow through (FT) (1X), and immunoprecipitated (B) (5X) fractions by using antibodies against the myc and HA epitopes. (C) C-Scc1 but not N-Scc1 interacts with Smc1/3 heterodimer in yeast. The centromeric plasmids C4309 and C4313, containing sequences encoding CBD-HA3-Scc1 (1­179) and Scc1 (451­566)-CBD-HA3, respectively, under a GAL1-10 promoter were introduced into a strain whose Smc3 was tagged with 6HA. Soluble extracts were prepared from asynchronous cells induced for overexpression with 2% galactose for 4 hr. The N- and C-terminal fragments of Scc1 were purified by binding the extracts to chitin beads. We used an antibody against the HA epitope to assay the amount of Smc3 bound by probing the input (IN) (1X), flow through (FT) (1X), and immunoprecipitated (B) (10X) fractions. (D) Soluble extracts were prepared from strains K11911 (SMC3-HA3::LEU2, SCC1TEV-MYC9::HIS3, SMC1-MYC9::URA3, MAT ) and K11912 (SMC3 head-HA3::LEU2, SCC1TEV-MYC9::HIS3, SMC1-MYC9::URA3, MAT ), and Smc3 (and Smc3 head) proteins were immunoprecipitated via an antibody against its HA3 epitope. We used antibodies against myc and HA epitope to measure the amounts of Scc1 and Smc1 copurified by probing the input (IN) (1X), flow through (FT) (1X), and immunoprecipitated (B) (5X) fractions.

Current Biology 1944

tions would have the same effect in Smc1 and Smc3 proteins as they have in bacterial SMC proteins [16] or related proteins like Rad50 and ABC transporters [13, 14]. Within Smc1, mutation of K39 (Walker A) and D1157 (Walker B) should abolish ATP binding, and mutation of E1158 (Walker B) should abolish ATP hydrolysis, whereas mutation of S1130 (signature motif) should abolish ATP-dependent dimerization, which is thought to be essential for ATP hydrolysis. The corresponding residues within Smc3 are K38, D1154, E1155, and S1128. To test the function of mutated genes, we integrated single copies at the URA3 (smc1) and LEU2 (smc3) loci of diploid strains heterozygous for smc1 or smc3 deletions. Tetrad dissection of haploid spores derived from these diploids revealed that none of the mutant proteins (except smc3 D1154A) could support vegetative growth at 25 C or 30 C. smc3 D1154A mutant cells were slow growing, temperature sensitive, and had a cohesion defect as measured by splitting of GFP-tagged chromosomes in cells treated with nocodazole (data not shown). The mutant Smc1 and Smc3 proteins were tagged with myc (nine copies) and HA (three copies) epitopes, respectively, and Western blotting confirmed that all proteins accumulated to levels comparable to wild-type (data not shown). Tagging the smc3 D1154A mutant protein caused lethality. These data suggest that hydrolysis of ATP bound to both Smc1 and 3 is required for cohesin function.

Smc1 but Not Smc3 ATP Binding Mutations Abolish Interaction with Scc1 To investigate whether ATP binding and/or hydrolysis is required for cohesin assembly, we measured coimmunoprecipitation of Scc1 (tagged with six copies of the HA epitope) with mutant Smc1 proteins (tagged with nine copies of the myc epitope). Wild-type or mutant Smc1 proteins were immunoprecipitated (with myc-specific antibodies) from soluble extracts prepared from log phase cultures and the amounts of Scc1HA6 and C-Scc1HA6 (its C-terminal separase cleavage fragment) coprecipitated were measured using Western blotting. Because this assay is performed in the presence of wildtype Smc1 protein, it in fact measures the ability of mutant proteins to compete with wild-type in capturing Scc1. Coprecipitation of Scc1HA6 with wild-type Smc1 was completely dependent on the attachment of myc epitopes to Smc1 (Figure 2A). Interestingly, coprecipitation was abolished by the K39I or D1157A ATP binding mutations and by the S1130R signature motif mutation but unaffected by the E1158Q ATP hydrolysis mutation (Figure 2A). Comparable amounts of Smc1 protein were precipitated in all cases. These results suggest that the binding of ATP to Smc1 but not its hydrolysis may be required for Scc1's stable association with Smc1/Smc3 heterodimers. Because signature motifs are thought to contact ATP bound to another molecule, the dependence of Scc1's association on Smc1's signature motif raised the possibility that ATP bound to Smc3's head might also be important for Scc1's interaction with Smc1/3 heterodimers. To test this, we used coimmunoprecipitation to

compare association of myc-tagged Scc1 with wild-type and mutant Smc3 proteins tagged with HA epitopes. Surprisingly, Scc1 association was unaffected by mutation of Walker A (K38I), Walker B (E1155Q), or signature motif (S1128R) residues (Figure 2B). These results suggest that ATP bound to Smc1's, but not Smc3's, head is necessary for Scc1's stable interaction with the Smc1/3 heterodimer. Thus, unlike the two arms of bacterial Smc dimers, cohesin's two Smc arms are different from each other and interact differently with Scc1; the Smc1/3 heterodimer is functionally as well as structurally asymmetric. Our data also raise the possibility that Smc1's signature motif might have a role in Scc1 binding that does not involve interaction with the -phosphate of ATP bound to Smc3. The finding that Scc1's association with Smc1/3 heterodimers is abolished by mutating putative ATP binding residues within Smc1 (Figure 2A) was surprising because the mutated Smc1 proteins dimerize normally with Smc3 (data not shown), which is known to be capable of binding both full-length Scc1 and its N-terminal separase cleavage fragment when coexpressed in the absence of Smc1 in insect cells [10]. Interaction between Scc1's N-terminal domain with Smc3 heads has also been detected in both soluble and chromosomal forms of cohesin isolated from yeast cells [12]. This raises an important conundrum. If the N-terminal fragment of Scc1 were able to bind Smc3 heads independently of Smc1 in vivo, then why should mutation of the latter's ATP binding pocket abolish binding? The simplest (but not only) explanation is that under physiological conditions the de novo interaction of Scc1's N-terminal domain with the Smc3 heads of Smc1/3 heterodimers is in fact dependent on events that take place on Smc1's head, namely the ATP-dependent association of Scc1's C-terminal domain (see below). If so, then ectopically expressed N-terminal Scc1 fragments should be incapable of associating with Smc1/3 heterodimers in vivo. To test this, we expressed from the GAL1-10 promoter either N-terminal (N-Scc1; residues 1­179) or C-terminal (C-Scc1; residues 451­566) Scc1 fragments. A chitin binding domain (CBD) followed by 3HA epitopes was fused to N-Scc1 and C-Scc1, at their N and C termini, respectively. The fusion proteins were expressed in a yeast strain whose Smc3 was tagged with 6HA epitopes. Cells were grown in the presence of galactose for 4 hr, during which period both fragments accumulated to levels comparable to endogenous Smc proteins (Figure 2C). Western blotting showed that Smc3 coimmunoprecipitated with C-Scc1, as previously reported [10], but not with N-Scc1 (Figure 2C). The finding that N-Scc1 cannot stably associate de novo with Smc1/3 heterodimers in yeast cells would explain why mutation merely of Smc1's ATP binding pocket is sufficient to abolish Scc1's interaction with Smc1/Smc3 heterodimers; Scc1's N-terminal domain presumably cannot bind to Smc3's head if its C-terminal domain has not previously bound to Smc1. This finding also provides a possible explanation for why expression of C-Scc1 but not N-Scc1 is lethal both in yeast [17] and in mammalian cells [18]. It is presently unclear why N-Scc1 can form complexes with Smc3 heads when massively overex-

ATPase Activity and Sister Chromatid Cohesion 1945

Figure 3. ATP Binding to Smc1 but Not Hydrolysis Is Required for the Interaction of Smc1 with Scc1 In Vitro (A) Concentrated yeast extracts from G1 cells expressing wild-type Smc1 (K11850: SMC1MYC9::URA3 MATa), K39I (K11852), or E1158Q (K11857) mutants tagged with nine copies of myc epitope were prepared as described [21]. This was mixed with purified Scc1-HA3His6 and incubated at 30 C for 2 hr with or without the presence of 1 mM ATP. Scc1-HA3His6 was immunoprecipitated using an anti-HA antibody, and the amount of Smc1 bound was detected by probing the input (IN) (1X), flow through (FT) (1X), and bound (IP) (5X) fractions with antibodies against HA and myc epitopes. (B) ATP S (1 mM; a nonhydrolyzable analog of ATP) was tested in the binding assay described in (A). (C) Extracts from insect cells expressing C-Scc1HA3 were tested in the binding assay with extracts from strains K11850 and K11852.

pressed in insect cells but not when expressed more moderately in yeast. Our finding that events taking place on Smc1's head affect the binding of Scc1's N-terminal domain to Smc3's head raises the possibility that Smc3's head might have a reciprocal role, namely facilitating the binding of Scc1's C-terminal domain to Smc1. To test this, we constructed strains that express either full-length Smc3 or a headless version (Smc3 head: residues 172­ 1042), each tagged with 3HA epitopes. Both Smc1 and Scc1 were meanwhile tagged with nine myc epitopes, and the amount of Smc1myc9 and Scc1myc9 protein immunoprecipitated with an HA-specific antibody was measured by Western blotting. Deletion of Smc3's head greatly reduced but did not eliminate Scc1's association with Smc1, without affecting Smc3's association with Smc1 (Figure 2D). Our results suggest that Smc3's head facilitates the binding or retention of Scc1 with Smc1's

head in a manner that does not require ATP bound to Smc3's head. ATP Binding but Not Hydrolysis Is Required for Scc1's Association with Smc1/3 Heterodimers In Vitro To address more directly whether ATP but not its hydrolysis is required for Scc1's association with Smc1/3 heterodimers, we established an in vitro system capable of assembling Scc1-Smc complexes. We prepared concentrated yeast extracts from G1 cells (to minimize Scc1 expression) expressing myc-tagged Smc1 protein and mixed it with Scc1 protein purified from insect cells that has 3HA epitopes followed by a hexa-histidine tag at its C terminus. Scc1 was precipitated using an antibody against its HA3 epitope and the amount of Smc1myc9 protein coprecipitated was measured by Western blotting. Smc1myc9 was absent from immunoprecipitates

Current Biology 1946

Figure 4. Smc3 ATPase Mutants Form Rings (A) Models A and B represent two possible modes of interaction of the Smc3ATPase mutants with Scc1. Soluble extracts were prepared from asynchronously growing cells expressing myc9-Scc1TEV-myc9 and Smc3-HA3. Smc3 was either wild-type (K11887: SMC3-HA3::LEU2, MYC9SCC1TEV-MYC9::URA3, GAL-SCC1::TRP1, MATa) or bearing K38I (K11888), S1128R (K11889), E1155Q (K11890), or K38I-S1128R (K11891) mutations. Smc3 was immunoprecipitated using an antibody against its HA3 epitope, and the immunoprecipitation beads were divided into three aliquots. One aliquot was loaded into immunoblots directly (IP), and the other two aliquots were incubated with or without TEV protease. Proteins bound to the beads (B) were separated from those released into the supernatant (S) before loading. Immunoblots were probed using antibodies against myc and HA epitopes. (B) Similar to the experiment described in Figure 5A, except that Smc3 proteins also contained TEV sites within the coiled coils. Smc3 was either wild-type (K11892: SMC3TEV-HA3::LEU2, MYC9-SCC1TEV-MYC9::URA3, GAL-SCC1::TRP1, MAT ) or having K38I (K11893), S1128R (K11894), or E1155Q (K11895) mutations. Immunoblots were probed using antibodies against myc and FLAG epitopes.

when either Scc1 or ATP alone was added to the extract but present in sizeable amounts when both were present (Figure 3A). ATP therefore stimulates association of Scc1 with Smc1/3 heterodimers in vitro. ATP stimulated Scc1's association with both wild-type Smc1 and a version that should not hydrolyze ATP (E1158Q) but it did not stimulate Scc1's association with a version predicted not to bind ATP (K39I) (Figure 3A). Moreover, the nonhydrolyzable ATP analog ATP S was as effective as ATP in inducing Smc1-Scc1 interaction (Figure 3B). Association of wild-type Smc1 but not K39I mutant protein with Scc1's C-terminal fragment was also stimu-

lated by ATP (Figure 3C). These data are consistent with the notion that binding of ATP to Smc1's head but not its hydrolysis stimulates formation of a complex with Scc1's C-terminal domain. They also confirm our presumption that mutation of K39 but not E1158 abolishes ATP binding. ATP Hydrolysis Is Not Required for Tripartite Ring Formation Mutations predicted to abolish ATP binding to Smc3's head or hydrolysis of ATP bound to either Smc head had little or no effect on the binding of Scc1 to Smc1/3

ATPase Activity and Sister Chromatid Cohesion 1947

Figure 5. Smc1 and Smc3 Heads Interact in a Scc1-Independent Manner We cleared extract from K10897 (SMC3TEVHA3::LEU2, SCC1TEV-MYC9::HIS3, SMC1MYC9::URA3, MATa) and immunoprecipitated Smc3 by using an antibody against its HA epitope. The immunoprecipitation (IP) beads were aliquoted and processed as described in the legend for Figure 4A. Immunoblots were probed using antibodies against myc and FLAG epitopes. The inset shows the relative amounts of Smc1 and Scc1 bound to Smc3. Note that K10897 has two copies of Smc1 (tagged and untagged) but one copy of Scc1.

heterodimers in vivo (Figure 2B). However, it is possible that these mutations might nevertheless affect the binding of Scc1's N-terminal domain to Smc3's head. This process could in principle be compromized without affecting the ability of Scc1's C terminus to bind Smc1's head, which, due to dimerization of Smc1 and Smc3 at the hinge region, would be sufficient for copurification of Scc1 and Smc1/3 heterodimers. If ATPase mutations compromised the binding of Scc1's N-terminal domain to Smc3's head, then the N-terminal domain should only be connected to the Smc1/3 heterodimer via the C-terminal domain's interaction with Smc1. In this case, cleavage between the two domains should release the N-terminal domain (see Figure 4A; model B). If, on the other hand, Scc1's N-terminal domain is bound to Smc3's head as occurs in wild-type cohesin complexes, then cleavage between

Scc1's N- and C-terminal domains will not release the N-terminal domain (Figure 4A; model A). What is at issue is whether binding or hydrolysis of ATP bound to Smc3's head is required for tripartite ring formation. To address this, we created a yeast strain that expresses either mutant or wild-type Smc3 tagged with HA epitopes and a functional Scc1 protein whose N and C termini are each attached to nine myc epitopes and whose second separase cleavage site has been replaced by the recognition site for the tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease (myc9-Scc1TEV-myc9). We prepared soluble extracts from cycling cells and immunoprecipitated Smc3 proteins by using an antibody against its HA3 epitope. Aliquots of the immunoprecipitation beads were incubated in the presence or absence of TEV protease and protein released from the beads (S) was separated from protein bound to the beads (B). Both N- and

Current Biology 1948

Figure 6. The Smc1 ATP Hydrolysis Mutant Fails to Bind to Chromosomes smc1ts strains expressing either wild-type Smc1 (K11869: smc1-2::LEU2, SMC1-MYC9::URA3, SCC1-HA6::HIS3, MATa) or E1158Q mutant (K11871) were arrested in G1 by treatment with factor and released into growth medium at the restrictive temperature (35 C) in the presence of nocodazole (15 g/ml). Aliquots of the culture were taken at an interval of 20 min over a period of 2 hr for (1) measuring DNA content (FACS), (2) monitoring expression levels and localization of Smc1 and Scc1 (by Westerns on whole-cell extracts and in situ immunofluorescence), and (3) detecting association of Scc1 and Smc1 with chromatin (chromosome spreading). (A) Analysis of budding index and percent of cells containing Scc1 on chromatin detected by chromosome spreads, during the time course.

ATPase Activity and Sister Chromatid Cohesion 1949

C-terminal cleavage fragments of myc9-Scc1TEV-myc9 remained associated with the HA-tagged Smc3 proteins associated with the beads after TEV cleavage, even when the latter carried mutations predicted to eliminate either binding or hydrolysis of ATP (Figure 4A). These data suggest that neither the binding of ATP to Smc3's head nor its hydrolysis is required for tripartite ring formation. To test whether ATP-dependent dimerization of Smc1 and Smc3 heads might be required for formation of tripartite rings, we constructed an Smc3 K38I/S1128R double mutant that should be deficient both in binding ATP and in binding to ATP bound to Smc1's head. The double-mutant protein was also able to form rings, as both the N- and the C-terminal Scc1 cleavage fragments remained associated with the beads after TEV cleavage (Figure 4A). To confirm that the association of N- and C-terminal Scc1 cleavage fragments (N- and C-Scc1) is mediated by Smc3's coiled coil, which is connected to Smc1, we transferred the Smc3 head mutations to a version whose coiled coil can also be cleaved by TEV protease [12]. In all cases, cleavage with TEV specifically released C-Scc1 from the beads while N-Scc1 remained bound to the beads, presumably through its interaction with Smc3 heads (Figure 4B). The ATP hydrolysis mutant (E1158Q) in Smc1 was also able to form tripartite rings (see Figure S1, available with this article online). Do Smc1 and Smc3 Heads Interact in the Absence of Scc1? Crystal structures of Rad50 and ABC transporters raise the possibility that Smc heads might dimerize in an ATPdependent manner. A previous analysis of interactions between cohesin subunits coexpressed in insect cells failed to detect any robust interaction between Smc1 and Smc3 proteins independent of their hinge dimerization domains and of Scc1; association of Smc1 and Smc3 molecules incapable of interacting via their hinge regions was dependent on coexpression of Scc1 [10]. Because of its potential importance, it is crucial to address the issue of head-head interactions under more physiological conditions by analyzing functional native complexes isolated from yeast cells. Previous work showed that N- and C-terminal Scc1 fragments produced either by separase or by TEV cleavage of native yeast cohesin remain stably associated but are efficiently released from each other when Smc3's coiled coil is severed, implying that Smc1 and Smc3 heads do not stably interact with each other when also bound to Scc1 fragments [12]. The latter study did not, however, address their state of interaction when Scc1 is absent. To do this, we created strains that express a TEV-cleavable Smc3 tagged with three HA epitopes and both Smc1 and Scc1 tagged with nine myc epitopes. Scc1 also contained three TEV recognition sites between its

two separase cleavage sites. We prepared extracts from exponentially growing cells and precipitated Smc3 by using an antibody against its HA3 epitope. The immunoprecipitation beads were divided into two aliquots and incubated with or without TEV protease. Western blots were then used to compare the amount of protein bound to the beads (B) and released into the supernatant (S) (Figure 5). Two types of C-terminal Scc1 fragments are detected: those produced by separase cleavage in vivo and those produced by TEV cleavage in vitro. The separase cleavage fragments remained stably bound to the beads in the absence of any TEV cleavage, implying that the connection between C-Scc1 and Smc1's head is very stable even when severed from N-Scc1. Incubation of the beads with TEV severed all intact Scc1 molecules and between 80% and 90% of Smc3 coiled coils. Most C-Scc1 fragments are released from the beads by TEV cleavage. Crucially, the degree to which both separase and TEV C-Scc1 cleavage fragments are released from the beads does not appear to be any less than the extent to which Smc3's coiled coil is severed (i.e., doubly cleaved). This implies that few if any Smc1 heads are associated with Smc3 heads when Scc1 is bound to them. However, around 25% of fully severed Smc3 hinge fragments (251­968) and a somewhat larger fraction of myc-tagged Smc1 remain associated with the beads under these circumstances. Identical results were obtained with K39I or S1130R mutant Smc1 molecules or with cells arrested in G1 (data not shown). These data are consistent with the notion that a modest fraction of Smc1 heads are associated with Smc3 heads but that this mode of interaction is possibly not mediated by ATP sandwiched between the heads and is only possible when Scc1 is not bound to them. Smc1 and Smc3 ATP Hydrolysis Mutants Fail to Load Scc1 onto Chromosomes Smc1 molecules predicted to be incapable of ATP hydrolysis form apparently normal tripartite rings with Scc1 and Smc3 but are nevertheless dysfunctional. We therefore tested whether their cohesin rings are capable of associating with chromosomes. Because Smc proteins might bind chromatin independently of Scc1 [3], we compared the ability of wild-type and mutant Smc1 proteins to support the loading of Scc1 onto chromosomes. A temperature-sensitive allele of smc1 was used to propagate strains carrying either an empty vector, a wild-type SMC1 gene, or an E1158Q mutant version. Wild-type and mutant Smc1 proteins were tagged with myc epitopes while Scc1 was tagged with HA epitopes. Cells were synchronized in G1 using factor and released at the restrictive temperature (34 C) into growth medium containing nocodazole. Replication was largely completed 80 min following release (Figure 6E) by which time more than 75% cells had formed buds (Figure 6A).

(B) Representative images of chromosome spreads of samples taken 80 min after the release from G1. The presence of Scc1 and Smc1 on spreads was detected by immunostaining with anti-HA and anti-myc antibodies, and DNA was visualized by staining with DAPI. (C) Representative in situ immunofluorescence images show the localization of Scc1 and Smc1 in the nucleus 80 min after the release from the G1 arrest. (D) Western analysis showing the levels of Scc1 and Smc1 in the cells during the time course. Swi6 was used as a loading control. (E) FACS analysis showed that the strains were arrested and released well.

Current Biology 1950

Scc1 protein accumulation shortly before the onset of replication was comparable in all three strains (Figure 6D) and in situ immunofluorescence confirmed that the Scc1 and Smc1 proteins accumulated within nuclei (Figure 6C). Chromosome spreading was used to measure the association of proteins with chromosomes (Figure 6B). In cells expressing wild-type Smc1, both Scc1 and Smc1 were found tightly associated with spread chromosomal DNA and appeared to be colocalized. The E1158Q mutation greatly reduced the amount of HAtagged Scc1 and myc-tagged Smc1 protein associated with chromosomes, to a level similar to that found in cells carrying only an empty vector. These observations are consistent with the notion that hydrolysis of ATP bound to Smc1's head is essential for stable association of the cohesin complex with chromosomes. We also found that the Smc3 ATP hydrolysis mutant (E1155Q) was incapable of loading Scc1 onto chromosomes (see Figure S2).
Figure 7. Scc2-Scc4 Complex Physically Interacts with Cohesin Extracts were prepared from K10529 (SCC2-TAP::TRP1, SCC4MYC18::URA3, MATa) and K11913 (SCC1-TAP::kanMX6, MAT ), and the TAP-tagged Scc2 and Scc1 complexes were purified by passing through two rounds of purification and elution as described [19]. The nature of proteins present in the eluate was determined by mass spectrometry. Percent coverages of various subunits obtained by mass spectrometric analysis of cohesin and Scc2-Scc4 complexes are indicated. The eluate was subjected to electrophoresis in a NuPAGE gradient (4%­12%) gel via an MOPS buffer system (Invitrogen), and the gel was stained with silver for visualizing the proteins. Since mass spectrometry of the complex was performed in solution, the bands were assigned on the basis of their predicted molecular weights.

The Scc2-Scc4 Complex Physically Interacts with Cohesin The lack of chromosome association of cohesin unable to hydrolyze ATP bound to Smc1 and Smc3 heads despite forming complexes with Scc1 resembles the situation caused by scc2 and scc4 mutations [3]. Indeed, tripartite ring formation was unaffected by scc2 or scc4 mutations (see Figure S3). This raises the possibility that the function of the Scc2/4 complex might be to promote hydrolysis of ATP bound to cohesin's Smc heads. If so, then the Scc2-Scc4 complex might be expected to interact at least transiently with cohesin. We earlier reported that a small fraction of Scc2 can be coimmunoprecipitated with cohesin's Scc3 subunit [4]. To investigate the possibility of a direct physical interaction between cohesin and the Scc2-Scc4 complex more thoroughly, we constructed strains in which a tandemaffinity purification (TAP) tag was fused to either Scc1 or Scc2. The TAP tag consists of a calmodulin binding peptide (CBP) fused to two domains of Protein A separated by a TEV protease site. We prepared extracts from cycling cells and purified Scc1 and Scc2 complexes using two rounds of purification and elution [19]. The eluates were run on a gel and proteins were visualized by silver staining. In the absence of a TAP tag, the eluate contained little if any protein detectable by silver staining (Figure 7). The eluate obtained from the strain whose Scc1 was TAP tagged contained bands corresponding to the size of Smc1, Smc3, Scc3, Scc1-CBP, and cScc1CBP. Mass spectrometry confirmed the presence of these proteins in the eluate. The eluate from the Scc2 TAP-tagged strain contained, apart from expected Scc2 and Scc4 bands, additional bands comigrating with Smc1 and Smc3 proteins (Figure 7). Mass spectrometric analysis of this sample revealed the presence of Smc1, Smc3, and Scc1 along with Scc2 and Scc4. Although Scc3 was not detectable in this preparation, we have detected Scc2 in purified Scc3-TAP complexes analyzed by mass spectrometry (data not shown). This shows that cohesin physically interacts with the Scc2Scc4 complex.

Discussion The ABC-like ATPases perched at the end of Smc1's and Smc3's 50 nm long coiled-coil arms presumably have a key role in cohesin's function. These domains are conserved in all members of the SMC family and at least in cohesin are connected by its Scc1 "kleisin" subunit, whose cleavage destroys sister chromatid cohesion at the metaphase to anaphase transition. Despite their potential importance, the function of cohesin's ATPase domains has not hitherto been investigated. As a first step toward understanding their function, we have analyzed the consequences of mutating residues predicted from both structural and functional analyses of related ABC-like ATPases to be essential either for ATP binding or hydrolysis. Because it has not so far been possible to detect hydrolysis of ATP by cohesin, we have not yet been able to confirm that our "hydrolysis" mutants really are defective in this process. Mutations predicted to compromise ATP binding to Smc1 heads abolished complex formation with Scc1 both in vivo and in vitro. Importantly, we confirmed the prediction based on this finding that ATP but not its hydrolysis would be essential for complex formation. Both ATP and ATP S stimulated complex formation between Scc1 and Smc1/3 heterodimers in vitro and this effect was abolished by putative ATP binding mutations. Though future studies will clearly be needed to measure ATP hydrolysis directly and show it to be abolished by

ATPase Activity and Sister Chromatid Cohesion 1951

Figure 8. A Model for ATP-Hydrolysis-Dependent Topological Trapping of DNA within the Cohesin Ring Smc1, Smc3, and Scc1 are depicted in red, blue, and green, respectively. (1) The C-terminal domain of Scc1 binds to ATP-bound Smc1/3 heterodimer by interacting with the Smc1 head (an unstable state). Initial contact is made to a heterodimer whose two heads are bound to each other, but Scc1 binding displaces the Smc3 head. (2) The N-terminal domain of Scc1 then interacts with the Smc3 head, which results in the formation of a tripartite cohesin ring (a stable state). This is not dependent on ATP binding to Smc3 head. (3) ATP-dependent dimerization induced by the ABC signature motifs enables the Smc1/3 heads to transiently associate with each other, completing the composite active site. (4) The Smc1/3 heads hydrolyze ATP in a cooperative manner, and this could be stimulated by the Scc2-Scc4 complex. ATP hydrolysis results in the separation of Smc1/3 heads and dissociation of Scc1 (indicated by the thick unfilled arrows), thus opening the cohesin ring. (5) Opening of the cohesin ring might allow the passage of DNA into the ring. (6) The soluble pool of cohesin binds ATP (6A) and goes through repeated cycles of ATP binding and hydrolysis. If DNA had entered the cohesin ring, then another round of ATP binding (6B) and subsequent Scc1 binding (through steps [7] and [8]) would achieve the topological entrapment of DNA within the cohesin ring (a stable state).

our mutations, it would not be unreasonable to attempt to draw some tentative conclusions from our current largely genetic study. Asymmetric Interaction of Scc1 with Smc1/3 Heterodimer Our first conclusion is that the binding of Scc1 to Smc1/ Smc3 heterodimers depends on ATP bound to Smc1's but probably not Smc3's head. Mutation of the Walker A residue K39 in Smc1 abolished complex formation with Scc1, whereas the equivalent mutation in Smc3, K38I, had no effect. It is unlikely that the latter does not eliminate ATP binding because this lysine residue is conserved in all ABC-like ATPases and is moreover essential for Smc3 function. The implication, that there is a fundamental asymmetry in the role of Smc1 and Smc3 heads in complex formation with Scc1, is supported by our observation that Scc1's C-terminal but not its N-terminal domain can bind de novo to Smc1/3 heterodimers in vivo. The ability of Scc1's N-terminal domain to interact with Smc3's head depends on its attachment to a C-terminal domain that has, presumably, already bound Smc1's head. Scc1's N-terminal domain is therefore dissimilar both in sequence and activities from its C-terminal domain, which appears to have the dominant role in Smc binding. Our data are consistent with the notion that binding of Scc1's C-terminal domain to an Smc1 head bound by ATP is the first, and indeed essential, step in the formation of Scc1-Smc complexes.

This might explain why expression of stable versions of C- but not N-terminal Scc1 fragments are toxic in both yeast [17] and mammalian cells [18]. C-terminal Scc1 fragments will bind to Smc1/3 heterodimers, which will not be capable of forming the tripartite rings essential for cohesin function. Scc1's N-terminal domain does not appear to be necessary for the interaction between Scc1's C-terminal domain and Smc1, but this is not to say that Smc3's head has no role. We found that removal of the Smc1/3 heterodimer's Smc3 head greatly reduced but did not completely eliminate complex formation. Given that the heads of Smc3 and Smc1 may interact (Figure 5), at least before they form stable complexes with Scc1, it is possible that contacts made between the two heads somehow facilitate binding of Scc1's C-terminal domain to the Smc1's head. There is at present little or no evidence that this contact is mediated by ATP, let alone by Smc3's signature motif thought to contact ATP bound to Smc1's head. Scc1 might initially make contact with an Smc1/3 heterodimer whose two heads are bound together. Binding of its C-terminal domain to Smc1's head may displace the Smc3 head, changing its conformation in a manner that permits the binding of Scc1's N-terminal domain. This second contact between Scc1 and the Smc1/3 heterodimer produces a stable bridge between its two heads, thereby creating a closed triangular ring. Neither binding of ATP to Smc3's head nor hydrolysis of ATP

Current Biology 1952

bound to either Smc1's or Smc3's head seem necessary to form tripartite rings. Furthermore, as far as we can tell, there is little or no further direct contact between Smc1 and Smc3 heads once Scc1 has formed a bridge between them. The binding of N- and C-terminal domains of Scc1 with Smc heads may be incompatible with head-head interactions. Bipartite Smc1-Smc3 rings do not appear therefore to coexist with tripartite Smc1Scc1-Smc3 rings. This mutual exclusion may be of biological significance, as it would enable cleavage of Scc1 to open the tripartite rings at the onset of anaphase without causing bipartite ring formation, which could hinder exit of DNA from the rings and the rapid destruction of sister chromatid cohesion.

A Role for ATP Hydrolysis in the Binding of Cohesin to Chromosomes Mutations predicted to abolish hydrolysis of ATP bound to either Smc1 or Smc3 heads had little or no effect on the formation of tripartite rings. However, they completely blocked the association of these rings with chromosomes. The similarity of this phenotype to that produced by inactivation of the Scc2/4 complex suggests that the latter may be necessary for stimulating hydrolysis. We cannot at present exclude the alternative possibility that hydrolysis of ATP bound to cohesin's heads is required for a change in the state of Scc2/4 needed for cohesin's loading onto chromosomes. Direct measurement of ATP hydrolysis will be required to distinguish these possibilities. What role might ATP hydrolysis serve in loading cohesin onto chromosomes? To answer this, it is necessary to know both the substrate and the product of the loading reaction; i.e., what is cohesin's state before it is loaded onto chromosomes and what is the mechanistic principle by which it binds to them so stably after the reaction has been completed? Our observations suggest that soluble cohesin forms tripartite rings that appear very similar to those formed by chromosomal cohesin. In both cases, contacts between Scc1's N-terminal and C-terminal domains with Smc3's and Smc1's heads, respectively, creates a stable bridge between the heads. Electron micrographs of soluble cohesin complexes isolated from Xenopus extracts or from HeLa cells [20] are consistent with this picture. It therefore seems reasonable to suppose that cohesin eventually loaded onto chromosomes forms tripartite rings before as well as after its chromosomal association. How might such rings bind stably to chromatin? The notion that chromatin fibers might be "topologically" trapped inside cohesin's rings has a number of attractive features. Entrapment of individual chromatin fibers could explain how cohesin binds stably to chromosomes without conferring cohesion between sister chromatids. Furthermore, entrapment of sister DNAs by the same ring could explain how sister chromatids are held together by cohesin without having to postulate a totally new mode of DNA association. The latter would also explain how cleavage of Scc1 by separase would immediately destroy the connection between sisters. Other evidence is consistent with the entrapment hypothesis. Cohesin's

association with chromatin is resistant to high salt concentrations, it is destroyed by severance of Smc3's coiled coil as well as by Scc1 cleavage. If we assume that cohesin binds chromosomes by trapping DNA inside its ring, then the failure of tripartite rings to associate with chromosomes in the absence of ATP hydrolysis may be due to their failure to entrap DNA. DNA's entry inside tripartite rings must involve transient opening of the ring. A gate must be created by the disengagement of one or more of the interfaces between Smc1, Smc3, and Scc1. One way of finessing this problem would be for DNA to engage with Smc1/3 heterodimers before they have ever formed tripartite rings with Scc1. If so, ATP hydrolysis might simply serve to drive the heterodimer's two heads apart, creating an entry gate (see below). Driving Smc1 and Smc3 heads apart may not be the sole function of ATP hydrolysis. If, as we have argued above, heterodimers that have previously formed tripartite rings are responsible for generating sister chromatid cohesion, then there must exist mechanisms both to open these rings prior to DNA entry and to close them again afterwards. The failure of ATP hydrolysis mutants to associate with chromosomes could arise due to a failure either to open or close cohesin's gate. If the defect lies in closing the gate, then this defect must be specific to closing the gate after DNA has entered the ring, because the mutants have no difficulty in closing the gate of soluble cohesin. The alternative, namely that the defect lies in opening the gate, is less ad hoc. We therefore suggest that ATP hydrolysis might serve to disengage Scc1 from either one or both of cohesin's Smc heads (Figure 8). In the absence of hydrolysis, cohesin's tripartite rings remain closed and DNA cannot therefore enter the ring. The notion that ATP hydrolysis triggers at least transiently the disengagement of Scc1 from either one or both heads is consistent with the notion that head-head interactions, which presumably have a role in hydrolysis, are incompatible with stable head-Scc1 interactions. It is also consistent with our observation that the association of Scc1's C-terminal domain with Smc1's head depends on ATP. At the same time as triggering Scc1 disengagement, hydrolysis may create a strong negative charge in the active site, which results in the two nucleotide binding domains being repelled apart [14], thereby creating an entry gate for DNA. It is not inconceivable that Scc1's association with Smc heads might have an important role in promoting hydrolysis. We hypothesize that the ATP binding/hydrolysis cycle is used as a switch to regulate association of Scc1 with Smc1/3 heterodimer (Figure 8). ATP binding induces association of Scc1 with the Smc1/3 heterodimer, whereas ATP hydrolysis leads to transient dissociation of Scc1 leading to opening of the cohesin ring. The ATP binding/hydrolysis cycles provide an opening for topological entrapment of DNA within the cohesin ring. Mutants defective in hydrolysis would not be able to dissociate Scc1 and thus remain locked, which would block their entrapment of chromosomal DNA. ATP hydrolysis might have a similar function in other Smckleisin complexes, for example, condensin. Though highly speculative, our hypothesis explains why tripar-

ATPase Activity and Sister Chromatid Cohesion 1953

tite cohesin rings that cannot associate with chromosomes accumulate when hydrolysis is abolished. It makes the key prediction that it should be possible to find conditions that promote disengagement of Scc1's C-terminal domain from Smc1's head and that this process will prove to depend on ATP hydrolysis. The development of an in vitro assay for cohesin loading will be an important step in testing the hypothesis. If we are correct in postulating that the Scc2/4 complex promotes ATP hydrolysis and hence disengagement of cohesin's kleisin subunit from its Smc heads, then this complex should possibly be viewed as a "key" to opening the ring. If so, one could envision that once they have trapped sister DNAs, cohesin complexes could be prevented from being opened by preventing any further access to Scc2/4 complexes; a situation analogous to a gate being locked and the key thrown away. An ability to form rings that cannot easily be opened may be a crucial and distinctive property of cohesin that enables it to hold sister DNA molecules together for very long periods of time after DNA replication. In human oocytes, this period may have to last several decades. If the entrapment hypothesis is correct, then the key conundrum about cohesin is how it switches from a state in which its ring can readily be opened to one in which it is locked shut. Turning on and off its ability to hydrolyze ATP may be "the name of the game." Conclusions By examining the functional consequences of mutations predicted to affect either ATP binding or ATP hydrolysis in both Smc1 and Smc3, we have gained valuable insights into the role of ATPase activity in sister chromatid cohesion. ATP binding to Smc1's head but not Smc3's head is required for interaction with Scc1. ATP hydrolysis is not required for tripartite ring formation but required for stable association with chromosomes.
Supplemental Data Supplemental data including three additional figures and the Experimental Procedures are available at http://www.current-biology. com/cgi/content/full/13/22/1941/DC1. Acknowledgments We would like to thank all members of the Nasmyth laboratory for stimulating discussions; and Jan-Michael Peters and Regha Kakkad for helpful comments on the manuscript. We are grateful to KarlPeter Hopfner for insightful suggestions on the choice for residues for mutagenesis and to Frank Uhlmann for sharing unpublished results. We also thank Wolfgang Helmhart for technical help. This research was supported by Boehringer Ingelheim and the Austrian Industrial Research Promotion Fund (FFF) and the Austrian Science Fund (FWF). K.T. was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS). Received: September 15, 2003 Revised: October 14, 2003 Accepted: October 14, 2003 Published: November 11, 2003 References 1. Nasmyth, K. (2001). Disseminating the genome: joining, resolving, and separating sister chromatids during mitosis and meiosis. Annu. Rev. Genet. 35, 673­745.

2. Uhlmann, F., and Nasmyth, K. (1998). Cohesion between sister chromatids must be established during DNA replication. Curr. Biol. 8, 1095­1101. 3. Ciosk, R., Shirayama, M., Shevchenko, A., Tanaka, T., Toth, A., and Nasmyth, K. (2000). Cohesin's binding to chromosomes depends on a separate complex consisting of Scc2 and Scc4 proteins. Mol. Cell 5, 243­254. 4. Toth, A., Ciosk, R., Uhlmann, F., Galova, M., Schleiffer, A., and Nasmyth, K. (1999). Yeast cohesin complex requires a conserved protein, Eco1p(Ctf7), to establish cohesion between sister chromatids during DNA replication. Genes Dev. 13, 320­333. 5. Skibbens, R.V., Corson, L.B., Koshland, D., and Hieter, P. (1999). Ctf7p is essential for sister chromatid cohesion and links mitotic chromosome structure to the DNA replication machinery. Genes Dev. 13, 307­319. 6. Ivanov, D., Schleiffer, A., Eisenhaber, F., Mechtler, K., Haering, C.H., and Nasmyth, K. (2002). Eco1 is a novel acetyltransferase that can acetylate proteins involved in cohesion. Curr. Biol. 12, 323­328. 7. Uhlmann, F., Lottspeich, F., and Nasmyth, K. (1999). Sisterchromatid separation at anaphase onset is promoted by cleavage of the cohesin subunit Scc1. Nature 400, 37­42. 8. Uhlmann, F., Wernic, D., Poupart, M.A., Koonin, E.V., and Nasmyth, K. (2000). Cleavage of cohesin by the CD clan protease separin triggers anaphase in yeast. Cell 103, 375­386. 9. Melby, T.E., Ciampaglio, C.N., Briscoe, G., and Erickson, H.P. (1998). The symmetrical structure of structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) and MukB proteins: long, antiparallel coiled coils, folded at a flexible hinge. J. Cell Biol. 142, 1595­ 1604. 10. Haering, C.H., Lowe, J., Hochwagen, A., and Nasmyth, K. (2002). Molecular architecture of SMC proteins and the yeast cohesin complex. Mol. Cell 9, 773­788. 11. Holland, I.B., and Blight, M.A. (1999). ABC-ATPases, adaptable energy generators fuelling transmembrane movement of a variety of molecules in organisms from bacteria to humans. J. Mol. Biol. 293, 381­399. 12. Gruber, S., Haering, C.H., and Nasmyth, K. (2003). Chromosomal cohesin forms a ring. Cell 112, 765­777. 13. Hopfner, K.P., Karcher, A., Shin, D.S., Craig, L., Arthur, L.M., Carney, J.P., and Tainer, J.A. (2000). Structural biology of Rad50 ATPase: ATP-driven conformational control in DNA doublestrand break repair and the ABC-ATPase superfamily. Cell 101, 789­800. 14. Smith, P.C., Karpowich, N., Millen, L., Moody, J.E., Rosen, J., Thomas, P.J., and Hunt, J.F. (2002). ATP binding to the motor domain from an ABC transporter drives formation of a nucleotide sandwich dimer. Mol. Cell 10, 139­149. 15. Locher, K.P., Lee, A.T., and Rees, D.C. (2002). The E. coli BtuCD structure: a framework for ABC transporter architecture and mechanism. Science 296, 1091­1098. 16. Hirano, M., Anderson, D.E., Erickson, H.P., and Hirano, T. (2001). Bimodal activation of SMC ATPase by intra- and inter-molecular interactions. EMBO J. 20, 3238­3250. 17. Rao, H., Uhlmann, F., Nasmyth, K., and Varshavsky, A. (2001). Degradation of a cohesin subunit by the N-end rule pathway is essential for chromosome stability. Nature 410, 955­959. 18. Hoque, M.T., and Ishikawa, F. (2002). Cohesin defects lead to premature sister chromatid separation, kinetochore dysfunction, and spindle-assembly checkpoint activation. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 42306­42314. 19. Puig, O., Caspary, F., Rigaut, G., Rutz, B., Bouveret, E., BragadoNilsson, E., Wilm, M., and Seraphin, B. (2001). The tandem affinity purification (TAP) method: a general procedure of protein complex purification. Methods 24, 218­229. 20. Anderson, D.E., Losada, A., Erickson, H.P., and Hirano, T. (2002). Condensin and cohesin display different arm conformations with characteristic hinge angles. J. Cell Biol. 156, 419­424. 21. Deshaies, R.J., and Kirschner, M. (1995). G1 cyclin-dependent activation of p34CDC28 (Cdc28p) in vitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 1182­1186.

