Structure of the epididymal retinoic acid binding protein at 2.1 resolution
Marcia E Newcomer
Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0146, USA

Background: Androgen dependent proteins in the lumen of the epididymis are required for sperm maturation. One of these is a retinoic acid binding protein, E-RABP, which binds both all trans and 9-cis retinoic acid. The other retinoid-binding proteins whose structures are known do not bind 9-cis retinoids. Results: We describe the X-ray structure determination of E-RABP with and without bound ligand. The ligand binds deep in the [3-barrel of the protein, the [3-ionone ring innermost. The binding site, like the lig-

and, is amphipathic and the deepest part of the cavity is formed by a ring of aromatic amino acids. The iso prene tail of all-trans retinoic acid is bound in a folded conformation which resembles that of the 9-cis isomer. Conclusion: E-RABP achieves high-affinity binding of both all-trans and 9-cis isomers of retinoic acid by forcing the all trans form to bind in a folded conformation. The RAR family of nuclear receptors for retinoic acid also binds both isomers, and their binding sites may therefore be similar.

Structure 15 September 1993, 1:7-18 Key words: 9-cis retinoic acid, lipocalin, vitamin A Introduction

After sperm are produced in the testes they traverse the epididymis and it is here, in the presence of a group of androgen-regulated proteins, that they acquire the ability to fertilize the egg [1-3]. One of the androgendependent proteins secreted by the epididymis is a retinoic acid binding protein (E-RABP) [4,5] which binds both all-trans and 9-cis retinoic acid [6], but not retinol or retinal [4]. Both the 9-cis and all-trans isomers of retinoic acid have been found in the epididymis [7]. An essential role for retinol in spermatogenesis has long been recognized. However, high levels of the cellular retinoid-binding proteins in epididymal tissue [8-10] suggest a role for retinoids in sperm matura tion as well. Cellular retinol-binding protein (CRBP) is abundant in the proximal epididymis and cellular retinoic acid binding protein (CRABP) is localized to the distal epididymis [8,10]. The retinoic acid binding protein we describe here is distinct from CRABP and is found in the lumen of the epididymis [4,11,12]. Retinoic acid is well known as a morphogen and a regulator of gene expression as either the 9-c~ [13-15] or the all-transisomer [16,17]. Two families of retinoic acid nuclear receptors have been identified. The family designated RAIl binds both 9-cis and all-trans retinoic acid with approximately equal atfinities, whereas the RXR family binds only the 9-cis isomer and at a lower al~nity than RAR binds either isomer [18]. High levels of mRNA transcripts for the a and 13 isoforms of RAR have been observed in epididymis [19]. This finding f~.arther supports the possibility that retinoic acid may be important in sperm maturation. Retinoic acid is only one of several biologically active forms of vitamin A. Physiological amounts of the vitamin, whether utilized as retinol, retinal or retinoic

acid, are transported as all-trans retinol to the target tissue by the serum retinol-binding protein (RBP) [20], the structure of which has been previously described [21,22]. E-RABP and RBP share nominal sequence homology (less than 20 % sequence identity) and overlapping ligand specificity (RBP can also bind all-trans retinoic acid in vitro, with an affinity comparable to that for all-trans retinol). It has been predicted that the two proteins have considerable structural homology. We report here the structural determination of the retinoic acid binding-protein from rat epididymis at 2.1~ resolution. The structural homology with the serum retinol-binding protein is substan tial, but limited to the overall fold of the protein. The retinoid binding sites occupy significantly different positions in the structural framework of the proteins, and the bound ligands themselves adopt different conformations in the two proteins. The X-ray structures of cellular retinol-binding proteins CRBP and CRBP(II) have been described [23,24]. In these proteins, which do not bind 9-cis retinol, the all trans retinol is found to bind with the isoprene tail fully extended, just as it is found in the binding site of RBP. However, the retinol in CRBP is bound in the opposite orientation relative to its position in RBP the 13-ionone ring of retinol is b o u n d innermost in RBP but in CRBP, retinol is bound with the hydroxyl group buried deep in the binding site. E-RABP also binds retinoic acid with the 13-ionone ring innermost. Like the retinoic acid receptor RAIl, E-RABP binds 9-ci2 and all- trans retinoic acid with equal affinity. In E-RABP the isoprene tail of the ligand is 'folded' so that all-trans retinoic acid adopts a conformation which resembles 9-cis retinoic acid. This observation probably accounts for the ability of E-RABP to bind both isomers equally. This report describes the structure of E-RABP both
7

(~ Current Biology Ltd ISSN 0969-2126

8

Structure 1993, Vol 1 No 1

with and without its ligand (the holo- and apo-protein, respectively) and the structural features that permit the protein binding site to recognize both all-trans and 9-cis retinoic acid.

Results and discussion
The overall structure of E-RABP

of strands d e f g h a i. Helix A packs on top of strand b in an antiparallel orientation. The direction of the chain then reverses again so that strand i runs antiparallel to strand a. The final carboxy-terminal segment wraps round on to the 'top' sheet and forms an additional <zhelix which packs on to strand b. In the first turn of the terminal <z-helix Cys154 forms a disulfide bond with Cys60 at the amino end of strand d Most of the reverse turns which connect the neighboring [£strands in the antiparallel sheet are fairly short. One notable exception is the connection between [3strands a and b, which is located at the binding site entrance in the tertiary structure. This segment of the protein is an irregular stretch of coil 15 amino acids long. The E-RABP molecule itself has a pseudo two-fold symmetry axis perpendicular to the length of the barrel. Rotation about this axis, illustrated in Fig. 3, causes not only the two [£sheets which form the two sides of the barrel to become superimposed, but also the <z-helices. These pack onto the [3-sheets in approximately equivalent orientations and are also related by this pseudo two-fold axis. In the superimposed molecules, the [3strands run in opposite directions, but the helices are parallel. This intramolecular pseudo-syl'm-netry led to some complications in the interpretation of the early electron density maps. The asymmetric unit of the crystal contains two protein molecules which are designated molecule A and molecule B. In the original electron density map, the region of the map which corresponded to molecule B was especially poor. -Early attempts to define the non-crystallographic symmetry operation relating the two molecules used density correlation programs in which the electron density for the volume of the map which corresponded to molecule A was rotated and translated with respect to the volume corresponding to molecule B, to find the relationship which gave the maximum correlation value for the electron densities. The best solution actually corresponded to orienting molecule A onto a molecule B rotated about the pseudo two-fold axis. The peak in

The retinoic acid binding protein is a globular protein of the approximate dimensions 40 x 40 x 35 g,. In the center of the protein is a very large and deep binding pocket more than 15 ~ across at the entrance and 20 g, deep. The basic structural framework of the molecule is an eight-stranded up-and-down [£sheet core which twists into a barrel. One end of the barrel is closed by amino acid side chains in the barrel interior and amino acid side chains from the amino terminus, which wraps across the back end of the barrel. The front end of the barrel is open and provides the entrance to the binding site. A portion of the 2F o -Fc map and the correspond ing volume in the multiple isomorphous replacement (MIR) map are shown in Fig. 1. About 60 % of the amino acids in E RABP are found in <z-helical or I~-strand secondary structure, and roughly threequarters of the secondary structure is [£sheet (Fig. 2a,b). There are a total of nine [£strands, designated a to i, in the linear sequence and two <z-helices, A and B, in addition to two <z-helical turns. In the lnear sequence the relationship of the secondary structural elements is as follows: a b c d e f g h A i B. The first <zhelical turn precedes strand a and the second is found between helix a and [~-strand i. Each [£strand, a to h, forms hydrogen bonds with the neighboring strand in the linear sequence. This eight-stranded 13-sheet core is twisted such that strand h may form hydrogen bonds with strand a. Strand i also forms l-sheet contacts with strand a. This results in a barrel consisting of two layers of orthogonally stacked antiparallel t-sheets. Strands a and d b e n d to form part of both the 'top' and 'bottom' t-sheets, where the 'top' sheet is that composed of strands a b c d a n d the 'bottom' sheet is that composed

2

Fig. 1. (a) A portion of the model and of the apo-2F o Fc electron density map contoured at 1.0 standard deviation. (b) The same region of the original (unaveraged) 2.6A.MIR map, which is especially poor in this area, contoured at 1.0 standard deviation with the refined model built in.

Structure of epididymal retinoic acid binding protein Newcomer

9

\

Fig. 2. (a) A C0~ trace of the retinoic acid binding protein. The regions of the backbone which adopt a-helical or [3strand structure are in yellow. The secondary structure elements are labelled according to the text. In this view the [3-sheet formed by strands efg/'liis in the foreground, the closed end of the barrel is on the left and the binding site entrance is on the right. (b) A stereo backbone trace for the same orientation as in (a). (c) A stereo drawing of a space-filling model of E-RABP, rotated 90° about the vertical axis relative to the view in (a) and (b), looking into the binding site. All backbone atoms are green. Side-chainatoms are as follows: C green, N blue, O red, S yellow. the sell:rotation f u n c t i o n w h i c h c o r r e s p o n d e d to the m i s - o r i e n t a t i o n was only slightly l o w e r t h a n the interm o l e c u l a r true two-fold peak, which, b e c a u s e only part of the m o l e c u l e c o n f o r m s to the non-crystallographic symmetry, was itself lower t h a n m i g h t have b e e n exp e c t e d for a perfect i n t e r m o l e c u l a r two-fold axis. Internal two-fold structural similarity in p r o t e i n s has b e e n o b s e r v e d b e f o r e in multi d o m a i n proteins. For example, the serine proteases are c o m p o s e d o f two l] barrels related b y a p s e u d o two-fold axis. T h e p s e u d o two-fold axis w o u l d b e c o n s i s t e n t with an inverted, rather than a tandem, repeat in the a m i n o acid se

10

Structure 1993, Vol 1 No 1

Fig. 3. The superposition of E-RABP with an image of itself rotated about the intramolecular pseudo two-fold symmetry axis.

quence, should such a thing be possible (see [25]). The internal structural homology occurs in a single domain in E-RABP but is similarly consistent with an 'inversion' of that part of the sequence which codes for the first half of the 13barrel.
Flexible regions of the molecule As described above, there are two molecules of E-RABP in the asymmetric unit. A substantial fraction of the molecule does not conform to the non-crystallographic symmetry relationship which relates molecules A and B. This is because the flexible regions of E-RABP are not sufficiently constrained or they adopt distinct conformations in the two molecules in the asymmetric unit, (The Ca-backbones of the two molecules are superimposed in Fig. 4.) The longest loop in the protein is the segment which connects 13-strand a with 13-strand b. For much of this stretch, for either molecule A or molecule B, the electron density is poor, suggesting that this region is a flexible loop. Other flexible loop/turn regions at the open end of the barrel occur between 13-strands c and d, e and f, and g and b. These regions adopt different conformations in the two crystallographically independent molecules, and the corresponding electron densities in the map are less well defined. There are also two loops at the closed end of the barrel where the two crystallographically independent molecules differ slightly. These two turns connect strands b and c and strands d and e. The structural divergence in these two areas appears to be a result of the crystal packing. A plot of the correlation of the calculated model electron density (for main-chain and side-chain atoms) with the electron density of the 2Fo-F c map is shown in Fig. 5. The positions of the elements of secondary structure are marked on the figure. It is apparent that the correlation between the model and experimentally observed electron density in the regions of the 13-stands and a-helices is quite good, but that the electron density for the turns is not of the same quality. This structural heterogeneity makes it difficult to compare the structures of these same Mops in the apo-protein with those structures they adopt in the holo-protein. The conformations differ not only between the apo- and hob-forms of the protein, but also between the two copies of the holo- and apo-molecules.

150

0

Fig. 4. The superposition of molecule A (thinner line) and molecule B (thicker line). The orientation is the same as Fig. 2a.

We have chosen, therefore, to compare holo-molecule B with apo-molecule B. Because the crystals are isomorphous, differences in the loop positions between holo-B and apo-B cannot be due to differences in the crystal packing environment. In addition, molecule A is not as well substituted in the holo-crystal, as · judged from the lower peak height in the MIR difference Fourier and the less well defined electron densit,/for retinoic acid in the 2Fo-Fc map. The reason for the decreased substitution of ligand in the binding site of molecule A can be explained by the fact that Arg80, which interacts with the ligand carboxylate in holo-molecule B, reaches out towards the protein surface in molecule A (in both the apo- and hob-crystal structures) to form an intermolecular salt link which stabilizes the crystal packing. The formation of this intermolecular salt link is possible because the side chain of Leu81 in this same loop in molecule A is packed into a hydrophobic pocket (formed by the exposed side chain of Ile8) at the closed end of the 13-barrel of molecule B. In the apo-structure of molecule B, Arg80

Structure of epididymal retinoic acid binding protein Newcomer

11

is pointing into the barrel of molecule B to fOrTh an intramolecular salt link with Glu63.
Real Space Residue Fit

a

b

e

d

e

f

g

h

A

i

B

50 Residue N u m b e r

100

150

chain stretches out towards the binding site entrance so that the positively charged amino group is at the entrance end of the binding site, near where the retinoic acid carboxylate is located in the holo-structure. Additional positive charges are provided by Arg80 and Lys85. Glu17 extends from the sheet opposite that containing Arg80 and Lys85. In the 2Fo-F c map of the apo-structure there is a long stretch of electron density which starts at the the side chain amino group of Lys115 and penetrates into the binding cavity. The crystals were grown in the presence Of glycerol and it is perhaps glycerol, and not water, in the apo-protein binding cavity. The electron density nicely accommodates two molecules of glycerol end-to-end, with the first able to form a hydrogen bond with Lys115. In Fig. 6 the complementarity of the fit between ligand and binding site is apparent. What is also quite clear from the drawing is the amphipathic nature of the binding site and the striking distribution of the aromatic amino acids around the 6-ionone ring. The amino acids along the length of the isoprene tail are hydrophobic. The side chain of Met39 adopts a different conformation in the apo-structure. The presence of the ligand in the binding site protects 187A2 of the sur face area of the protein from solvent. Only 26 A2 of the bound retinoic acid (of a total of 660A 2 for the free ligand) is solvent accessible. (Water molecules which are specifically bound were not included in this calculation. Bound water molecules protect the carboxylate from accessibility by bulk solvent.) This 821 A2 reduction in the surface accessible area of largely hydrophobic surfaces ( > 8 5 %) makes the binding of ligand a favorable process, given the estimate of 24 cal of free energy gained per A2 of hydrophobic surface buried [26]. However, small movements in the binding site side chains reduce the accessible surface area of the binding pocket in the apo-protein to only 116A2.
Ligand conformation Like the retinol in the binding site of RBP, the [3-ionone ring of the retinoic acid is innermost. The isoprene tail is not, however, in the extended conformation as it is observed to be in retinol in the binding sites of RBP, CRBP and CRBP(II). The shape of the electron density is consistent with that predicted for the 9-cis isomer. However, the crystals of the holo-protein were prepared using all-trans retinoic acid. (These isomers are compared in Fig. 7.) Although isomerization could easily have occurred over the length of time necessary for crystal growth, extraction of the crystals confirmed the presence of all-trans and 9-cis retinoic acid, in an approximately 2:1 ratio, as well as 13-cis retinoic acid [6]. The 13~cis isomer has a greatly reduced affinity for E-RABP [4,6] and is not likely to be in the binding site, but is an abundant product of the light-driven isomerization. The electron density we see for ligand corresponds to a mixture of 9-cis and albtrans retinoic acid, the all-trans isomer having adopted a 'pseudocid conformation by rotation of 180 ° about the C8-C9

Fig. 5. A plot of the correlation of the model electron density with
the electron density in the 2Fo-Fc map v e r s u s residue number. Both main-chain and side-chain atoms were included in the calculation (O version 5.7). The dotted line is for molecule A and the solid line for molecule B. The positions of the secondary structural elements are indicated.

The conformational changes which occur upon ligand binding include a rearrangement of side chains within the binding site and some differences in the conformation of the loops at the entrance to the binding site. The flexible Mops at the site entrance appear to move in the holo-protein relative to the apo-protein. However, it is difficult to quantitate the extent of the structural changes since, as discussed above, the electron density in these regions, although consistent with the models, is less well defined.
The ligand-binding site There is a large amphipathic cavity inside the [3-barrel which forms the binding site and binding site entrance (Fig. 2c). The deepest part of the cavity is lined with hydrophobic amino acids. Charged amino acids are found in the cavity proximal to the binding site entrance. The entrance itself, formed by the inside faces of the two [3-sheets, has both hydrophobic and charged amino acids. The side chains which form the binding cavity are Phe6, Phe11, Trp15, Glu17, Met39, Va141, Leu48, Leu50, Thr52, Tyr54, Va165, Phe76, Va178, Arg80, Lys85, Va187, Va189, Ala98, Ilel00, Ile102, Thr113, Lys115 and Tyr117. The presence of retinoic acid in the binding cavity limits the accessible surface area of all but Glu17 relative to the same surface in the holo-protein in the absence of ligand.

The aromatic amino acids Phe6, Phe11, Trp15, Phe76 and Tyr117 are deepest in the binding cavity and form a semicircle which surrounds the [3-ionone ring of the retinoic acid in the holo-protein (Fig. 6). These side chains make van der Waals' contact with the ligand around the perimeter of the [3-ionone ring. At the entrance to the binding cavity are Glu17, Glu63, Arg80, Lys85 and Lys115. The deepest of these residues is Lys115. The a-carbon of Lys115 is located in the hydrophobic portion of the binding site, but its side

12

Structure 1993, Vol 1 No 1

(b)

-...a,/

Fig. 6. (a) Stereo view of the binding cavity and binding site entrance of ERABPwith bound ligand (in cyan). Atom coloring is as follows: C green, N blue, O red, S yellow. The accessible surface area of the binding cavity is contoured (probe radius 1.6A). (b) A line drawing (in stereo) of the same view showing all the side chains which form the binding cavity and retinoic acid (thin line).

single b o n d (i.e., an '8-cid conformation). It has b e e n estimated that significant twists about the C8-C9 single bond in 11-cis-retinal can occur within 2 kcal of the ground state energy [27].

C16

C17

C19
I

C20
I

02

C2

O1

c

I
c4

II

3 c18

~

c12

c14
AII-trans mtinoicacid

'8-cis' retinoicacid

:"

."-.

Ligand specificity E-RABP was first identified as a retinoic acid binding activity in extracts of rat epididymis. It was apparent from competition studies with retinoic acid analogs that the protein was distinct from CRABP, which is abundant in epididymal tissue, because of the ability of E-RABP to discriminate at both the 13-ionone ring and carboxylate 'tail' ends of the retinoids. Like CRABP, E-RABP binds retinoic acid but not retinol or retinal. However, E-RABP does not bind some of the ringmodified retinoids which bind to CRABP. Such compounds include analogs which, in place of the ~-ionone ring, have a 4-methoxy-2,3,6-trimethylphenyl moeity, a pyridyl ring, or a trimethyl-thienyl ring, for example [4]. This ability to discriminate at both ends of the retinoic acid analog can be explained by the structure of the ligand-occupied binding site. As was apparent from Fig. 6, the ]£ionone ring, which has a ring-tail dihedral angle of - 160 °, fits snugly into the deepest part of the binding cavity and makes favorable van der Waals' contacts with the surrounding amino acids. Since there is little, if any, 'slack' in this area, modifications to the ring structure may not b e readily accommodated.
At the 'tail' end of the ligand-binding site, electrostatic interactions determine the specificity. Fig. 8 shows the amino acids found at this end of the binding cavity, as well as the b o u n d retinoic acid, and two of the water molecules located in the binding site entrance. There are three positively charged amino acids (Arg80, Lys85 and Lys115) and two negatively charged amino

9-cis retinoicacid
Fig. 7. Structural formulae of retinoic acid isomers.

Structure of epididymal retinoic acid binding protein Newcomer

13

acids (Glu17 and Glu63) which point into the ]3-barrel and are positioned for favorable electrostatic interaction. They constitute a network of charges with the bound retinoic acid. Three negative and three positive charges form a web across the open end of the barrel. As mentioned above, one of the positively charged amino acids (Arg80) is pulled away from the binding site in molecule A as a result of the crystal packing, and molecule A has a reduced substitution of ligand in the holo-protein crystal. This observation implies that the integrity of the charge network is critical for ligand binding. The positive charges provided by Lys85 and Lysll5 are not sufficient to stabilize the binding of ligand. In addition, neither retinol nor retinal will bind to E-RABP. Mthough these compounds both have polar end groups, the negatively charged carboxylate is important for charge neutralization. The 13-cis isomer of retinoic acid would position the ligand carboxylate t o o far away from Arg80 and Lys85 and too close to Glu17 for the charge network to form. In the apo*structure, the charged pairs Glu17:Lys115 and Glu63:Arg80 are maintained. However, the side chain of Lys85 is pulled away from the binding site towards bulk solvent.

Fig. 8. The charge network at the carboxylate end of the retinoic acid binding site. Three positively charged amino acids (Arg80, Lys85 and Lys115)and two negatively charged amino acids (Glu17 and Glu63) with the retinoic acid carboxylate form a network of three charge pairs at the entrance end of the amphipathic binding site. Additional polar side chains and water molecules which participate in the network are included. Distances (A) are given. The coloring is as follows: C green, N blue, O red, S yellow. However, the retinoic acid carbon atoms are yellow.

Comparison of E-RABP with RBP The topology of retinoic acid binding protein described above has previously been reported for the human serum retinol-binding protein [21,22] and other members of the ot-2 microglobulin superfamily (also referred to as 'lipocalins'). The sequence identity is generally low between the various pairs of members of the superfamily, and E-RABP and RBP are no more related to each other than RBP is to insecticyanin, an insect camouflage protein which binds biliverdin IX (for example, see [22]). Lipocalins are secretory transport proteins for a variety of hydrophobic or labile ligands. So far, only a single enzyme, prostaglandin D synthase, has been reported to be a member of this family [28]. Although RBP and E-RABP are proteins that have the same structural motif and overlapping ligand specificity, there are major structural differences between them. These differences are presumably necessary to allow E-RABP to be specific for retinoic acid (versus retinol or retinal) as well as to accommodate both the 9-cis and the all-trans isomers of the ligand in the binding site. Those amino acid side chains that are conserved between RBP and E-RABP cluster to the closed end of the RBP barrel. None of the amino acids whose surface accessibility is limited by the presence of retinol in the binding cavity of RBP are conserved in E-RABP. In RBP the retinol hydroxyl reaches to the surface of the protein and the ]3-ionone ring is bound innermost, about halfway into the barrel [21,22]. In E-RABP the binding site is located about 8 A deeper into the barrel (the ligand itself is about 15 A long) so that the binding site penetrates more than two-thirds of the way into the barrel. This large invagination which is observed in E-RABP (Fig. 2b) serves as both a binding site and a large binding site entrance, making the cavity in this protein exceptionally deep. In RBP, side chains fill up the closed end of the barrel so that the binding cavity in the apo-form is shallower. In Fig. 9a the structures of RBP and E-RABP are superimposed (O version 5.6, as described in Materials and methods) so that the alignment of the ]3-barrels is optimized. The alignment of the amino acid sequences according to the structural overlay is given in Fig. 10. This alignment is similar to that previously predicted [22], where E-RABP was identified as an 'androgendependent secretory protein'. The structural homology between the two proteins is mostly localized to the closed end of the barrel. This is the area where," in the tertiary structures, a cluster of amino acids conserved throughout the protein family is found. There is substantial variation between the two structures at the entrance end of the barrels, where the proteins differ in the extent of the ]3-sheets and in the conformations and lengths of the loop regions. The root mean square (rms) difference in positions for 97 (of a possible 164) ot-carbons is 1.37A.. Only the Cot's of the ]3-barrels were included in the superposition since helix A in E-RABP

14

Structure 1993, Vol 1 No 1

is moved relative to helix A in RBP and there is no helix B in RBP. Fig. 9b shows the side chains of the amino acids conserved between RBP and E-RABP and their respective ligands. Those side chains found in the context of the 'cluster', which includes the majority of these identical residues, adopt similar conformations in the two proteins. A notable exception is Phe11 (RBP Phe20) which, if it adopted the same orientation as the corresponding amino acid does in RBP, would occupy the innermost portion of the binding cavity, where the [3-ionone ring is bound. In RBP, Phe20 is found in a circular cluster of five phenyl rings. (The cognate amino acids in E-RABP for three of these phenylalanines are Va141, Ala67 and Lys115.) In E-RABP, the side chain of Phe11 is oriented to make favorable aromatic-aromatic interactions with Phe6, Trp15, Phe20 and Tyr117 at the deepest part of the binding site. As a result, Tyr94 is displaced relative to its position in the RBP cluster, although the side-chain and main-chain conformation is similar to the corresponding amino acid in RBP (Tyr114). Both Phe11 and Tyr94 are highly conserved throughout the lipocalin superfamily. In both E-RABP and RBP, important interactions at the closed end of the [3-barrel are made by Arg119 (RBP Arg138) which packs onto Trp15 (RBP Trp24) and forms a main chain hydrogen bond with Thr96 (RBP Thr116). The single disulfide bond in E-RABP (Cys60:Cys154) corresponds to one of the three disulfides found in RBP (Cys70:Cys160).

Presumably the binding site for a primarily hydrophobic ligand has relatively few constraints, since it simply requires a hydrophobic pocket complementary in shape to the ligand. A binding site that involves the formation of multiple hydrogen bonds between the ligand and the protein is likely to be more tightly constrained, since minor changes in side-chain packing might signifi icantly affect the geometry of the hydrogen bonds. There are 22 amino acids that form the ligand binding site in E-RABP, and five of them are conserved in RBP (see Fig. 10). However, none of these five forms part of the ligand binding site in RBP. This illustrates the danger of arguing that conserved residues in homologous proteins might have homologous functions. These five amino acids are in positions in RBP that are important for maintaining the integrity of the [3-barrel. If the structure of RBP were not known, an obvious experiment would have been to mutagenize these five amino acids, expecting to obliterate retinol binding. This experiment would have had the expected effect, but for the wrong reason; although none of the ligand binding amino acids would have been changed, the overall structure of the [3-barrel would have been destroyed. Although there is good conservation of the relative positions of the amino acids which form the binding sites of the two proteins (13 of the 22 E-RABP binding site amino acids occupy structurally conserved positions in RBP), none of the residues themselves are conserved. In Fig. 10, the binding site amino acids are indicated for both E-RABP and RBP.

(a)

~/~

Fig. 9. Stereo views of the superposition of (a) the Cot traces and (b) the conserved amino acids in the E-RABP/RBP pair of lipocalins. E-RABP and retinoic acid are represented by the thicker line and RBP and retinol by the thinner line. The numbering is for E-RABP.

Structure of epididymal retinoic acid binding protein Newcomer

15

a b c . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

i05
* E -RABP *

20¢ *

30~-

405 * * *

50]* * * *

RBP

E RDCRVS S F

~

K

E

~

~

K

D P~c~LF L Q . . . . . D N I V A E F S V D E T G Q M S ~ A K G R V

d e f g . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

60~
* * * *

70,~
*

805 *

*

*

905 *

*

i00,~ * * * *

RBP

RLLNN~V~C~DMVGu~H~TE

D~F~MKYWGVAS

F LQR~N DDHW IVD~D~D~VQ

YSC ~

h A i B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ii0~ * 120~ * . . 1305 140~ * 1505 160~

RBP

N LDGTCADS YS FV~R~PNG

LPPEAQK IVRQRQEE LCLARQYRLIV~NGY~DGRS

ERNLLRP

Fig. 10. A structure based s e q u e n c e alignment of the amino acid sequences of E-RABP (top line) and RBP (bottom line). The numbering is for E-RABP. Conserved amino acids are in bold and enclosed in boxes. The secondary structural elements of E-RABP are indicated and labelled as in Fig. 2a. 13-strand amino acids which point into the ERABP barrel are marked (*). Amino acids which form the ligand binding sites are indicated with ( A ).

In the crystal structure of the lipocalin odorant-binding protein, a protein of the nasal mucosa thought to be involved in odor sensation, the barrel interior is completely filled with side chains and the odorant binding site is at the dimer interface [29]. It is apparent that despite the overall structural homology between the members of this protein family, the proteins vary in the mechanism by which they recognize their respective ligands, even when the ligands themselves are also structurally homologous. In RBP, because the ligand hydroxyl is at the surface of the protein, there is no discrimination at the hydroxyl end. E-RABP is one of the most specific retinoid-binding proteins yet described [4,6] as it discriminates at both the ring and tail ends of the retinoid molecule. The structures of two cellular retinoid-binding proteins have recently been determined. These proteins, CRBP [23] and CRBP(II) [24] also have their retinoid-binding sites sandwiched between two layers of orthogonally stacked 13-sheet. CRBP and CRBP(II), however, belong to a distinct structural class, as they are composed of 10-stranded [3-barrels and the barrel entrance is blocked by a pair of w helices. These proteins, like E-RABP, discriminate at the hydroxyl/carboxyl end of the retinoid. However, in these proteins the retinol is inserted into the barrel hydroxyl end first rather than [3-ionone ring end first, as it is in RBP and E-RABP. Another striking contrast is the inclusion of multiple water molecules in the binding sites of CRBP and CRBP(II). In CRBP the binding cavity includes eight water molecules as well as the retinol and as a consequence the contours of the protein do not conform as closely to the shape of the ligand as they do in E-RABP. In both CRBP and CRBP(II) the bound water molecules form an integral part of the binding site and contribute to the formation of a binding cavity.

Biological implications
We have described the structure of a retinoic acid binding protein (E-RABP) w h i c h is found in the lumen of rat epididymis, the site of s p e r m maturation. It has long b e e n recognized that there is a nutritional r e q u i r e m e n t for vitamin A (retino!) for the maintenance of epithelial tissue, and consequently, normal epididymal function. However, the p r e s e n c e of androgen-regulated E-RABP in the lumen of the epididymis suggests that retinoids may also be important in s p e r m maturation. ERABP is a m e m b e r of a family of s e c r e t o r y transp o r t proteins for h y d r o p h o b i c or labile ligands, the lipocalin superfamlly, and may serve to shuttle retinoic acid b e t w e e n the epididymal tissue and s p e r m in transit. The overall fold of E-RABP was p r e d i c t e d from its s e q u e n c e h o m o l o g y w i t h h u m a n serum retinolbinding protein (RBP), w i t h w h i c h it also shares functional homology. However, the ligand binding sites of the t w o proteins are very different. E-RABP binds the amphipathic retinoic acid molecule d e e p within the ~-barrel f r a m e w o r k of the protein, with the ~-ionone ring innermost, s u r r o u n d e d by a cluster of aromatic amino acids. The exquisite specificity of E-RABP for retinoic acid is d u e in part to the positioning of a charge n e t w o r k at the polar e n d of the amphipathic binding site, and in part to t h e site's overall shape. Unlike RBP, E-RABP can bind the 9-cis isomer of retinoic acid as well as the all-trans isomer,

16

Structure 1993, V o l 1 N o 1 a n d o u r s t r u c t u r e s h o w s t h a t t h i s is a c h i e v e d b y lation function could not be found. However, it was apparent from inspection of the MIR map that the crude model had been properly oriented in the rotation function, as least for the one of the molecules in the asymmetric unit which had clearer electron density (molecule A).

binding the all-trans i s o m e r i n a f o l d e d c o n f o r m a t i o n that resmbles the 9-cis i s o m e r , i n s t e a d o f
i n a n e x t e n d e d c o n f o r m a t i o n . B o t h 9-cis a n d alltrans r e t i n o i c a c i d a r e f o u n d i n t h e e p i d i d y m i s , a n d b o t h i s o m e r s a r e also l i g a n d s f o r t h e n u c l e a r

retinoic acid receptor RAR. It is possible that, like E-RABP, RAR binds all-trans retinoic acid in a folded conformation. Thus the binding site of E-RABP may serve as a starting point for the design of synthetic retinoic acid analogs as therapeutic agents.

Table 1. Heavy atom data. Derivative % Completeness Resolution Rmerge (%) Rculn s Average isomorphous differences in intensities (%) Binding site(s) Phasing power Mersal EMTS MMC 84 3.0/~, 5.28 0.643 17.7 4 1.67 94* 94* 2.6,~ 2.6/~, 6.89* 6,70* 0.618 0.615 19.8 10 1 1.53
- {I}i K2PtCI 4

83 3.0/~, 5.1 0.624 13.2 1 1.73

Materials and methods

Protein purification and crystallization
The retinoic acid binding protein was purified from frozen rat epididymis as previously described [5]. The protein is expressed in two forms, designated B and C and differing by an additional three amino acids on the amino terminus of the latter, but indistinguishable with respect to ligand binding affinity and specificity. Crystals were grown of the apo-B form under conditions similar to those previously described [5]: 40 % sat urated ammonium sulfate, 10mM Tris-HC1 (pH8.0), 10-12% glycerol, 2.5 mM EDTA at room temperature. Holo-protein crystals were prepared from protein to which retinoic acid (in DMSO) had been added from 31% saturated ammonium sulfate, 10n-flVl Tris-HC1 (pH8.0), 10-12% glycerol, 2.5raM EDTA. Although the two crystal forms appear quite different, both apoand holo protein crystals belong to space group P21 and are reasonably isomorphous with respect to unit cell parameters: apo- a=39.33 b=58.67 c=66.274 13= 109.35°; holo- a=39.80 b = 58.89 c = 66.654 13= 109.44°. As was indicated by the results of the self-rotation function, there are two molecules per asymmetric unit related by a two-fold along the a axis of the unit cell.

2 1.39

*Friedel pairs not merged. Rrnerge= E l l

where I= intensity measurement for a given reflection and {I} is the mean intensity for multiple measurements of this reflection. I FpH-FpI - IFH(calc) l Rcullis= ~ ~ i Fell - Fp[ Fp, FpH = structure factor amplitudes for protein and proteinheavy atom; FHlcalc ) = calculated heavy atom structure factor amplitude, summed over centric data. Phasing power = < F H > / E rms heavy-atom structure factor amplitudes/residual lack of closure error. Mersal, mersalyl acid; EMTS, ethyl mercuric thiosalicylic acid; MMC, methyl mercuric chloride.

X-ray data collection
X-ray data were collected at room temperature with a pair of San Diego multiwire area detectors mounted on a Rigaku RU-200 rotating anode. The apo data were 99.8 % complete to 2.1 4 resolution (63562 reflections, 16724 unique, Rmeme= 5.48 %). The average VcI for the highest resolution shell (2.26-2.104) was 4.8. For the hologrotein the data were 94.8 % complete (53778 re flections, 14116 unique, Rmerge= 6.88 %) to a resolution of 2.24 with I/cr for the highest resolution shell (2.37-2.204) of 2.7. A single crystal was used for each data set.

Structure solution and refinement
The structure of the apo-protein was solved by the method of isomorphous replacement (MIR, Table 1). Data from four heavy atom derivatives were used to calculate the initial MIR map to 2.64 resolution. This map was of poor quality (figure of merit 0.567) but from visual inspection it was possible to roughly locate a center of non-crystaflographic symmetry which was in agreement with the heavy atom positions of those heavy atom derivatives with multiple binding sites and the locations of the two retinoic acid molecules determined by a difference Fourier calculated with the MIR phases. Some regions of 13strands were visible, especially in one of the molecules of the asymmetric unit (molecule A). An earlier attempt to solve the structure of the protein by the method of molecular replacement with a model based on the structure of retinol-binding protein as a starting model had failed due to the fact that a solution to the trans-

Given the (at best) marginal quality of the MIR map it would have been easy to over interpret the electron density to give a structure resembling that of RBP. In order to avoid the introduction of errors into the structure, only those regions of density which clearly corresponded to 13-strandswere interpreted. A 2.8~ resolution map was subsequently improved by phase combination with partial structure phases and averaging with respect to the non-crystallographic symmetry (NCS). The first improved map, calculated from MIR phases which were phase combined with partial structure phases for 82 alanines per monomer and then averaged with respect to the non-crystallographic symmetry, had a figure of merit of 0.838. After seven cycles of map interpre tation, partial structure phase calculation, phase combination and averaging, 154 amino acids of a possible 164 were placed for each monomer. The center of non-crystallographic symmetit and symmetry operator were re-refined each cycle. As more structure was included in the calculation of the partial structure phases, the number of cycles of map averaging was decreased. Regions outside the volumes of the map delineated with molecular masks for the volumes of the maps to be averaged were at no time solvent leveled. During this stage of map interpretation all X-ray data to 2.64 were included. The first 2Fo-Fc map was calculated to 2.1_~ resolution with phases from the 2.64 resolution model. Averaging of this initial 2Fo-Fc map with respect to the non-crystallographic symmetry greatly improved the map quality. All subsequent maps were straight 2Fo Fc maps calculated with model phases. Until the R-factor reached 25 % all X-ray data from 20 to 2.1-& resolution were included in the map calculations. Subsequently, a 2or cutoff was applied. The structure was refined with the simulated annealing protocol in X-PLOR version 2.1 [30] after each cycle of map interpretation. In the early stages of refinement no non-

Structure of e p i d i d y m a l retinoic acid binding protein N e w c o m e r

17

crystallographic symmetry restraints were applied. All 164 amino acids were placed for molecule B and 160 for molecule A. Once the model reached an R-factor of 22 %, non-crystallographic restraints were applied to the main-chain atoms of a portion of the molecule. It was clear during the refinement process that several of the loop regions adopted distinct conformations in the two molecules. In order to verify the structural divergence in these areas, the loops were built to be equivalent in both structures, either as in the conformation observed in either of the two copies of the protein or in a conformation consistent with an 'averaged' electron density. However, these regions invariably diverged with further refinement. The noncrystallographic restraints were then only applied to 75 % of the backbone atoms. After a round of slow-cooling with the noncrystallographic symmetry restraints applied, followed by refinement of the atomic B-factors, the structure was refined with the positional refinement protocol with X-PLOR, with the weight for the X-ray term put at 75 % of the calculated value and no NCS restraints applied. In subsequent positional refinements no NCS restraints were applied. The holo-protein The initial model for the holo protein was that of the apoprotein with those water molecules not in or near the binding site, and the retinoic acids molecules and side chains of Met39 positioned according to a difference Fourier calculated with MIR/partial structure phases (with no averaging). A difference Fourier with phases calculated from a rigid-body refined apo-structure against the holo data in which molecules A and B and the water molecules as a whole were each treated as a group gave equivalent peaks. After multiple Wcles of rigid body refinement for each monomer and each ligand, the structure was refined by the simulated annealing protocol in X-PLOR with seve r n cycles of model rebuilding in the 2F o Fc maps. The model of retinoic acid was the all-trans isomer from the X-ray coordinates [31] with a 180 ° rotation about the C8-C9 bond. Model quality The final R-factor for the apo-model is 19.6 % for data between 6.0 and 2.1 ~ resolution (F > 2e, 94 % of all possible data in the resolution range) and 18.2 % for the holo-model with data be tween 6.0 and 2.2A resolution (F > 2e, 87 % of all possible data in the resolution range). The rms deviations in atomic positions for the main-chain atoms in the portion of the structure which conforms to the non-crystallographic symmetry is 0.41 ~_ (1.10~ for all main-chain atoms) for the apo- and 0.47Jr (1.15A for all main-chain atoms) for the holo-structure. A summary of the refinement statistics is given in Table 2. The model has been examined with the program PROCHECK version 2.1 [32]. Of the ten parameters evaluated, which include an assessment of the quality of the Ramachandran plot and analysis of peptide bond geometry, bad contacts and hydrogen bond energies, as well as parameters relevant to side chain geometry, nine fall inside the bounds established by well refined structures of equivalent resolution. The tenth parameter, the measure of Ccz distortion, is on the better side of this region. A plot of the correlation of the calculated and observed electron density for side-chain and main-chain atoms (as calculated with O version 5.7 [33]) versus residue number is given in Fig. 5. The correlation is excellent in the regions of the molecule in regular secondary structure, an indication that the sequence of the polypeptide as placed is in agreement with the observed electron density. The PHASES package (W Furey, VA Medical Center and Univer sity of Pittsburgh) was utilized for the location and refinement of heavy atom positions, phase refinement, phase combination,

Table 2. Summarized model refinement statistics. Apo-structure R-factor (%) Cutoff % Measured data included Protein/ligand atoms (non-hydrogen) Water molecules Resolution range Main chain average B factor (molecule A) (molecule B) Deviations from ideality Bond lengths Bond angles 19.6 F > 2a 94 2537 119 6.0-2.1 ,a, 21.1 ,a2 22.7 ~,2 0.018/~ 3.73" Holo-structure 18.2 F > 2~ 92 2581 72 6.0-2.2/~ 25.1 A 2 27.5/~, 2 0.017/i 3.37"

R-factor : ~Ch II %[ = I Fc IIh ~hIFolh Fo = observed structure factor amplitudes; Fc = structure factor amplitudes calculated from model.

averaging and calculation of all maps prior to refinement. Map interpretation, model building, and the comparison of RBP and ERABP was done on a Silicon Graphics 4D70GT with the program O version 5.6 [33]. Refinement of the structure was done with the simulated annealing protocol in X-PLOR version 2.1 [30]. The atomic coordinates have been deposited with the Brookhaven protein data bank. Acknowledgements. This work was funded by the NIH (DK-41891) and a American Cancer Society Junior Faculty Award (JFRA-275). Computing facilities were funded by NSF-9011014. The author would like to thank LJ Banaszak for a copy of the CRBP(II) structure manuscript prior to publication and Wayne Anderson and David Ong for discussions throughout the course of this work.

References

1.

2.

3.

4. 5.

6.

7.

Orgebin-Crist, M-C., Danzo, B.J. & Davies, J. (1975). Endo crine control of the development and maintenance of sperm fertilizing ability in the epididynlis. In Handbook of Physiology Endocrinology V (Greep, R. & Hamilton, D.W., eds), pp. 319-338, Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore. Brooks, D.E. & Higgins, S.J. (1980). Characterization and androgen dependence of proteins associated with lumenal fluid and spen-natozoa in the rat epididymis. J. Reprod FertiL 59, 363-375. Brooks, D.E. (1981). Secretion of proteins and glycoproteins by the rat epididymis: regional differences, androgen dependence, and effects of protease inhibitors, procaine and tunicamycin. BioL Reprod. 25, 1099-1117. Ong, D.E. & Chytil, F. (1988). Presence of novel retinoic acidbinding binding proteins in rat epididymis; Arch. Biochem. BiD phys. 267, 474-478. Newcomer, M.E. & Ong, D.E. (1990). Purification and crystallization of a retinoic acid-binding protein from rat epididymis. Identity with the major androgen-dependent epidldymal pro teins. J. BioL Chem. 265, 12876~12879. Newcomer, M.E., Pappas, R.S. & Ong, D.E. (1993). X-ray crystallographic identification of a protein binding site for both all-trans and 9-cis retinoic acid. Proc. Natl. Acad Sci. USA, in press. Pappas, R.S., Newcomer, M.E. & Ong, D.E. (1993). Endogenous retinoids in rat epididymal and rat and human spermatozoa. Biol. Reprod. 48, 235-247.

18

Structure 1993, Vol 1 No 1 8. 9. Porter, S.B., Fraker, L.D., Chytil, F. & Ong, D.E. (1983). Local ization of cellular retinol-binding protein in several rat tissues. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 80, 65864590. Porter, S.B., Ong, D.E., Chytil, F. & Orgebin-Crist, M-C. (1985). Localization of cellular retinoi-binding protein and cellular retinoic acid binding protein in rat and epididymis..f Androl. 6, 19~212. Kato, M., Blaner, W.S., Mertz, J.R., Kamna, D., Kato, K. & Goodman, R.S. (1985). Influence of nutritional status on cellular retinol- and retinoic acid-binding protein concentrations in vat ious tissues. J~ BioL Chem. 260, 4832-4838. Nishiwaki, S., Kato, M., Okuno, M., Moriwaki, H., Kanai, M. & Muto Y. (1991). Purification and partial characterization of a rat epididymal retinoic acid binding protein, and its immuno histochemical localization../~ Nutri. Sci. VitaminoL (Tokyo), 37, 461~471. Zwain, I.H., Grima, J. & Cheng, CX. (1992). Rat epididy mal retinoic-acid binding protein: development of a radioim munoassay, its tissue distribution, and its changes in selected androgen-dependent organs after orchiectomy. Endocrinology, 131, 1511-1526. Mangelsdorf, D.J., Ong, E.S., Dyck, J.A. & Evans, R.M. (1990). Nuclear receptor that identifies a novel retinoic acid response pathway. Nature, 345, 224-229. Heyman, R.A. et aL, & Thaller, C.M. (1992). 9 Cis retinoic is a high af~nity ligand for the retinoid X receptor. Cell, 68, 397-406. Levin, A.A. et aL, & Grippo, J. (1992). 9-CL~ retinoic acid stereoisomer binds and activates the nuclear receptor RXRa. Nature, 355, 359-361. Petkovich, M., Brand, M.J., Krust, A. & Chambon, P. (1987). A human retinoic receptor which belongs to the faintly of nuclear receptors. Nature, 330, 444-450. Giguere, V., Ong, E.S., Segui, P. & Evans, R.M. (1987). Identification of a receptor for the morphogen retinoic acid. Nature, 33O, 624-629. Allenby, G. et aL, & Levin, AA. (1993). Retinoic acid receptors and retinoid X receptors: interactions with endogenous retinoic acids. Proc. Natl. Acad Sci. USA, 90, 30-34. Wan, Y.J., Wang, L. & Wu, T.C. (1992). Detection of retinoic receptor mRNA in rat tissues by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction../~ Mol. EndocrinoL 9, 291~94. Goodman, D.S. (1984). Plasma retinol binding protein. In The Retinoids. (Spore, M.B., Roberts, A.B. & Goodman, D.S., eds), pp. 4148, Academic Press, New York. 21. 22. 23. Newcomer, M.E. et aL, & Peterson, P.A. (1984). The three dimensional structure of retinol binding protein. EMBO J. 3, 1451 1454. Cowan, S.W., Newcomer, M.E. & Jones, T.A. (1990). Crystallographic refinement of human serum retinol binding protein at 2.0A resolution. Proteins, 8, 44-61. Cowan, S.W., Newcomer, M.E. & Jones, T.A. (1993). Crystallographic studies on a family of cellular lipophilic transport proteins: the refinement of P2 myelin protein and the struc ture determination and refinement of cellular retinol binding protein in complex with all-trans retinol. J. Mol. BioL 230, 1225-1246. Winter, N., Bratt, J. Banaszak, LJ. (1993). The crystal structures of holo and apo cellular retinol-binding protein 1I. J~ MoL BioL 230, 124~1259. Richardson, J.S. (1981). The anatomy and taxonomy of protein structure. Adv. Protein. Chem. 34, 167-339. Richards, F.M. (1977). Areas, volumes, packing and protein structure. Annu. Rev. Bzbphys. Bioeng. 6, 151 176. Rowan, R. Iii, Warshel, A., Sykes, B.D. & Karplus, M. (1974). Conformation of retinal isomers. Biochemistry, 13, 970--981. Nagata, A. et al., & Hayaishi, O. (1991). Human brain prostaglandin D synthase has been evolutionarily differentiated from lipophilic-ligand cartier proteins. Proc. Nail, Acad Sci. USA, 88, 4020~024. Monaco, H.L. & Zanotti, G. (1992). Three dimensional structure and active site of three hydrophobic molecule-binding proteins with significant amino acid similarity. Biopolymers, 32, 457-465. Brunger, A.J., Kuriyan, J. & Karplus, M. (1987). Crystallographic R factor refinement by molecular dynamics. Science, 235, 458-46O. Stam, C.H. (1972). The crystal structure of a monoclinic modification and the refinement of a triclinic modification of vitamin A acid. Acta Crystallogr. B, 28, 29362204. Laskowski, R.A., MacArthur, M.W., Moss, D.S. & Thornton, J.M. (1993). PROCHECK: a program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures. J. Appl, Crystallogr 26, 283-291. Jones, T.A., Zou, J.Y., Cowan, S.W. & Kjelgaard, M. (1991). Improved methods for building protein models in electron density maps and the location of errors in these maps. Acta Crystallogr. A, 47, 110~119.

10.

11.

24. 25. 26. 27. 28.

12.

13.

14.

29. 30. 31. 32. 33.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

Received: 2 April 1993; revised: 7 June 1993. Accepted: 21 June 1993.

