Structure and function of copper-containing proteins
Elinor T. Adman
University of W a s h i n g t o n , Seattle, W a s h i n g t o n , USA

Insight gained from three-dimensional structures of several cupredoxins has led to site-directed mutagenesis of copper ligands and of adjacent residues relevant to the electron-transfer function of these molecules. Results from these studies have shown that the methionine ligand can be modified and will not perturb function greatly, whereas a conserved hydrophobic patch is important to function. A new X-ray structure of nitrite reductase shows that it is a trimer with unexpected sequence and structural similarity to ascorbate oxidase, another multicopper protein of known structure. Each of these multicopper proteins has domain folds like that of the cupredoxins (and superoxide dismutase). The structure of galactose oxidase reveals a three-domain structure which includes one domain with a fold related to the cupredoxin fold, and one with a fold related to that of methylamine dehydrogenase. This structural study also reveals a novel covalent linkage of a cysteine to a tyrosine ligand of the copper center. This linked pair is believed to be the source of a tyrosine radical important to the function of the molecule. Current Opinion in Structural Biology 1991, 1:895-904

Introduction
Copper plays a significant role in biological systems. Copper-containing proteins for which three-dimensional structures were known before 1990 include: the small blue copper proteins, known as cupredoxins, whose function is electron transfer (plastocyanin, azurin, cucumber basic protein and pseudoazurin); superoxide dismutase, a superoxide scavenger; hemocyanin, an oxygen carrier; and, ascorbate oxidase, a 'blue' oxidase. Copper proteins have been characterized spectroscopically by the kind of copper atom(s) each contains: type 1, type 2 and/or type 3. Cupredoxins are singledomain proteins and contain typed copper atoms, superoxide dismutase is a single domain protein and contains a type-2 copper atom. Hemocyanin is a multidomain protein and contains a pair of type-3 copper atoms. Ascorbate oxidase is a multidomain protein and contains all three kinds of copper atoms. These structures have been recently reviewed [1]. In the past year, two new copper-containing structures have been determined: that of galactose oxidase and that of nitrite reductase. Site-directed mutagenesis studies dissecting the function of cupredoxins and superoxide dismutase comprise the bulk of the remainder of structural work on copper proteins. An outstanding summary of recent research on copper proteins relx)rted at the 6th Manziana Conference on Copper in Biological Systems, will soon be published [2].

Interestingly, all of the copper-containing proteins that have so far been characterized by X-ray diffraction contain at least one, and sometimes only one, Greek-key 13-barrel domain, although not all use this domain for binding copper, nor is ~ e copper bound in the same way in all cases. It is tempting to speculate that this represents a distant evolutionary relationship among the copper proteins, and which is only partially evident in sequence comparisons. It appears from the relatively few known copper protein structures that type-1 copper is generally used for electron transfer and type-3 for binding oxygen. The coordination of type-2 copper is most amenable to ligand exchange and hence most useful in chemical reactivity. A sketch of a prototypic cupred~,xin showing the basic Greek-key [3-barrel (Fig. 1) will facilitate description of the various results obtained for the cupredoxins and nitrite reductase, The reader is referred to the original literature and to [1] for stereo drawings of each of the structures. This review is formed of three sections which discuss recent advances in our understanding of the single domain cupredoxins and superoxide dismutase, the multidomain nitrite reductase, and galactose oxidase, respectively. Papers have been selected for this review if their results either have direct bearing on three-dimensional structure or have been interpreted in the light of three-dimensional structure.

Abbreviations epr---electron paramagnetic resonance;EXAFS extendedX-ray fine structure; PQQ~l~yrroloquinoline quinone. (~ Current Biology Ltd ISSN 0959-440X 895

8%

Proteins

Single-domain copper proteins

blue color, redox potentials, putative paths of electron transfer,and pH effects are among the properties being explored using site-directed mutagenesisof x cupredoxins.In one of the first of such studies, the mutants Phel14Ala, His35Lysand Glu91Asnof azurin were shownto havelittleeffect on the absorption spectra (only the maximum for Phel14Ala shifted by - 7 m-nrelativeto that for the wild type) and a modest effect on redox potential(differences from wild type ranged from - 14 to +3I mV,dependingon pH and buffer) [3]. These results attachedless importance to the role of His35 and Glu91 in electron tmnsfer than had previouslybeen attributed to them; however, another analysis of His35, described below, has providedgreater insight into its role.
An intense

hwin ad plastocyanin

mainingamino acids in the wild-typeprotein are Part of the carboxy-terminalp-sheet, a highly conserved feature of the cupredoxins. Interestingly,the electron panUW3netic resonance (epr) spectrum for the MetlZlStop mutant resembles that of stellacyanin(a cupredoxin which does not contain methionine) as much as any of the mutants. The absorption maximum of all of these mutants shifted to a lowerwavelength(by O-58 run,the latter for Metl21Glu), becoming more like plastoqanin than azurin. A trend noted by the authors is that the most hydrophobic residues shift the optical band the least, whereas negatively charged glutamlneaifects it the most. The authors also suggest that the proteins do not bind copper to the same extent - the copper : protein molar ratio falls in the range0.04 (Met121Phe)-O.54 (wild type). Site-directedmutants of azurin have been used to probe the specific function of the `hydrophobicpatch (see Fig. 1) and His35 [5**]. His35 has been postulated to modulate the electron-transferpath and the rates of electron transfer depending on its state of protonation, although it is not a Cu ligand [6]. In previouswork, Met44 (part of the hydrophobic patch) was mutated to lysine, and the self-exchange electron-transfer rate, as measured by NMR,was shown to decrease by a factor of - 103. In this paper, temperature-jumpexperiments, redox potentials, and second-order rate constants for electron transfer

Cassette mutagenesis of azurin at residue 121, the methionine l&and to copper, has yielded proteins for all 20 possible amino acid substitutions [4]. In view of the buried nature of the methionine l&and, and its relativelyhydrophobic environment, it is surprising that all 20 amino acids are accommodated. It is even more surprisingthat shortening of the polypeptide chain by eight amino acids by insertion of a stop codon at residue 121 yield.3 a functional protein because the seven reAmino-terminal These loops are much longer in multicopper oroteins psheet

In this carboxy-tenninal loop, sequence distance between cysteine, histidine and methionine is characteristic of protein class

Plus extra residues in pseudoazurin Cartxgyi-inal 5

U/----J

I

These loo are considerably lps engthened in superoxide disrnutase to form CwZn-binding site

Fig.1. Anatomy of cupredoxins, sketched from the plastocyanin structure.

Structure and function of copper-containing proteins A d m a n
between azurin mutants (His35Asn, His35Leu, His35Phe and Met44Lys), cytochrome c551 and nitrite reductase (cytochrome Cdl) are reported. Although the electronic structure appears little changed for these mutants, a more sensitive probe such as resonance Raman spectroscopy would be appropriate. Mutations at His35 are shown to abolish the slow step in electron transfer between wildtype azurin and cytochrome c551, thus confirming the involvement of His35 in the slow step, ascribed to conformational change. Because the bi-molecular rate constants for electron transfer are unaffected by mutations at His35, however, it was concluded that His35 is not a major path for electron transfer. The X-ray structures of two His35 mutants of Pseudo monas aeruginosa azurin, His35Gln and His35Leu, have been reported [7°°]. These crystallize in two different space groups, the former like that of the wild type, but in fact not isomorphous to it. Unpublished results (ET Adman) have shown that a modestly different packing arrangement causes the non-isomorphism. The redox potential of His35Gln is 51 mV and that of His35Leu 22 mV lower than that of the wild type. R-factors for the structures refined at 2.1 and 1.9~, are 0.16 and 0.17, respectively, with good geometry (0.012A deviation from ideality). Surprisingly, the electron density for Gin35 apparently is disordered, but its orientation is consistent with the hydrogen bonding originally proposed as the basis for the pH effect for His35 described in P. a e r u g inosa and Alcaligenes denitriflcans azurins [6]. Leu35 forms a hydrophobic contact with nearby residues and allows three new water molecules to fill the cavity so created, one of which appears to hydrogen bond to His46. Although the CuSS bond length of the His35Leu mutam (2.20A) is only 0.1A longer than that seen in other blue proteins, the difference appears significant in view of the small root mean square deviations (0.03A) from the mean of four molecules in the asymmetric unit. As in A denitr/flcam; the azurin molecules pack with their hydrophobic patches apposed, such that water molecules link the surface histidine residues at the interface, providing a suggestive path for electron transfer. Interestingly, in this crystal form, the histidine rings are nearly perpendicular, not parallel as was reported for A denitrtfw.ans azurin. Mutagenesis of both P. aeruginosa azurin and Populus nigra plastocyanin by a stepwise construction of synthetic genes, including leader sequences needed for transport to the periplasm of the host cells ( ~ ~ co//), resulted in the replacement of the Metl21 residue for azurin [8"] (a copper ligand) by all 20 naturally occurring amino acids with little change in the spectral properties of the resulting proteins (e.g. all were blue, apparently in contrast the result for Metl21Glu [3]). Interestingly, attempts to replace the ligand Met92 of plastocyanin yielded only four viable mutants (Ala92, Gly92, Cys92 and His92) none of which are blue. Several explanations (some unlikely) come to mind for this distinctive difference between azurin and plastocyanin expression in the same system. It is possible, although unlikely, that mutation changes the reduction potentials so much that the site as isolated is already reduced and therefore colorless. Alternatively, Zn2 + may have replaced the copper ion and is so strongly bound that it is not easily replaced. This has been shown to be the case for an apparently non-reconstitutable form of azurin reported by van de Kamp etal [9]. Huber (personal communication) has reported that, crystallographically, the non-reconstitutable azurin is nearly identical to native azurin with the Zn2 +-methionine bond becoming 3.38 A and the Zn 2 +carbonyl oxygen bond 2.32/~ The presence of the carbonyi oxygen near the metal atom may well be a key factor, as described below. Collyer et at [10.] have determined the high-resolution structure of an algal plastocyanin from Enter~ morpha pro//fera, achieving the remarkably low R-factor of 0.12 for the refined coordinates against combined diffractometer and synchrotron film data. Characteristically, the precision claimed for copper-ligand distances is cautiously estimated at 0.07 A, suggestingthat observed differences of 0.15A among structures are not significant. A brief report on the structure of reduced A denitrifl #_am azurin determined at 1.9A resolution shows that the copper center undergoes a systematic increase in all copper-ligand distances of 0.05A to O.12A [11"]. This increase is insignificant at the level of estimated error. However, the change from 3.11A to 3.23A for the Cu--Met92 distance upon reducing the azurin disagrees with the decrease (to 2.7A from >3.0A) for the same distance derived from extended X-ray fine structure (EXAFS) measurements [12]. Results described above concerning self-exchange rates have demonstrated that the hydrophobic patch is the primary path of electron transfer in azurin. Other paths may also be relevant, particularty when such paths are common to a number of proteins. Protein electron-transfer pathways for tunneling between internal donor and acceptor sites of azurin and plastocyanin have been calculated by a relatively simple coupling model. The calculations have shown that the carboxy-terminal loop in the cupredoxins is one of the 'preferred' paths [13"']. This is quite a satisfying result in view of the fact that this loop provides the link between type-1 and other copper centers in the muMcopper proteins. Although the accuracy of protein structure determination is gening better and better, it has not yet reached the level of detail which spectroscopic studies are capable of revealing. A case in point is the study by Werst et aL [14] using Q-band electron-nuclear-double resonance spectroscow to analyze plastocyanin, azurin, stellacyanin and laccase. Both cysteinyl I]-proton and 14N resonances could be assigned, and were consistent with the HlkClkS-Cu dihedral angles being quite constant among the proteins. The spin localization to the cysteinyl ligand was calculated to be ,-~0.5 and relatively constant among the proteins, except for fungal laccase where it appeared to be significantly higher. Tree laccase was shown to be unique in having a strongly anisotropic 14N hyperfine coupling constant for one of the ligand nitrogens. Furthermore, plastocyanin was shown to have two equivalent 14N resonances unlike the other blue proteins in this

897

898

Proteins
study. This sort of study is quite important to eventually understanding preferred paths of electron transfer. A pulsed E ~ R study of stellacyanin at two pH values has uncovered a third 14N resonance, ascribed to a glutamate residue, which has been suggested to be the fourth ligand for stellacyanin [15-]. It had previously been suggested that the structure of stellacyanin was similar to that of cucumber basic protein. Although stellacyanin has long been considered to be unique, if not anomalous, in lacking a methionine as a fourth ligand for copper, clearly the studies on mutants of azurin have made that less of a puzzle. Azurin has proved to be unusual among the blue proteins because of the presence of the much debated 'fifth' ligand, a carbonyl oxygen that precedes the amino-terminal histidine ligand. This carbonyt oxygen cannot approach the copper in plastocyanin-type structures because it is part of a shorter loop across the top of the molecule. This suggests that the creation of azurin mutants with the methionine replaced is facilitated by the presence of this carbonyt oxygen. The Cu-O distance of 2.9A in azurin is at best a weak bond, but in Cd- or Znsubstituted azurin shorter distances indicate a stronger bond (EN Baker, personal communication; R Huber, personal communication). Hence, one wonders if a similar compensating interaction exists in stellacyanin. The availabilityof this carbonyl oxygen in azurin and not plastocyanin might also explain the ditticulties encountered in replacing the methionine ligand in plastocyanin during site-directed mutagenesis studies. ences are again frustratingly close to estimates of experimental error. In previous work on plastocyanin, and in unpublished work on pseudoazurin, shortening of the Cu-Met S6 bond seems to be primarily associated with the copper becoming three coordinate, whereas if it is reduced while remaining four coordinate, the bond length is slightly increased.

Pseudoazurin Pseudoazurin has been isolated from several denitrifying bacteria and from methylotrophic bacteria, and highresolution structures are available [16,17]. Site-directed mutants of this protein are being made by M Nishiyama and T Beppu (personal communication). In one example, a proline residue has been changed to alanine in order to test the idea that NH-S bonds are important to the electronic structures and redox properties of blue proteins. Pre"luninary structural results indicate that a water molecule has filled the space vacated by the alanine side chain, and is likely to be responsible for the change in redox properties (an increase of 130mV in the redox potential) that accompanies mutation. Studies of oxidized and reduced forms are underway (Adman ET, Tudey S, Beppu T, Nishiyama M: Abstracts of the American Crystallographic Association Meeting, Toledo, Ohio, July, 1991, p79). Rusticyanin Another cupredoxin, rusticyanin, is of interest because of its unusually high redox potential (680 mV) and stability at pH 2. For an explanation of these features, one must turn to the protein structure, for EXAFS studies reveal quite normal bond lengths at the copper site, both in its oxidized and reduced form, including a Cu-Met S bond length of 2.84A, which decreases upon reduction to 2.79A, less than twice the cited error in bond-length measurements [18]. The sign of the difference, however, is opposite to that cited for the X-ray structures of A. denitriflcans reduced azurin. Here, however, the differ-

Amicyanin Most of the cupredoxins described above are noted for their ability to donate electrons. Amicyanin, however, a cupredoxin isolated from methanogenic bacteria, receives electrons from methytamine dehydrogenase. Amicyanin has been characterized structurally in three recent papers [19,20o,21]. EXAFS analysis of the pH dependence of copper-ligand geometry in oxidized and reduced forms shows that: the Cu-SV bond increases from 2.11 to 2.19A upon reduction at high pH, whereas the Cu-N bond lengths are increased onl~ slightly [19]. At low pH in reduced amicyanin, Met S° becomes coordinated at a distance of 2.41A (the coordination number was previously determined from NMR spectra). Debye--Waller factors measured from these experiments predict vibrationalfrequencies associated with copper-ligand bonds that correlate well with measured values, e.g. from resonance Raman experiments. A histidine ligand to the copper in reduced amicyanin can be protonated leading to a redox inactive form [20°]. The process is catalyzed by phosphate. Analysis of line-broadening effects in NMR led to the conclusion that there are two interconvertible forms of the reduced protein. Whereas it was previously thought that just plastocyanin, and not azurin, contained this particular titratable histidine in the reduced form, it is evident that amicyanin does as well. The structure of a low-pH reduced form of pseudoazurin shows that pseudoazurin also has a titratable histidine (ET Adman, unpublished data). The structure of amicyanin has been predicted by sequence similarity to be quite similar to that of plastocyanin [21]. Just as pseudoazurin has been described as a plastocyanin molecule with an extra carboxy-terminal tail, amicyanin can be viewed as a plastocyanin molecule with an amino-terminal tail. An NMR structure [22] and the structure of amicyanin complexed with methylamine dehydrogenase [23 oo] both indicate that the aminoterminal tail crosses under the molecule and extends to one side of the amino-terminal 13-sheet, in contrast to extensions in similar 13-barrels found in ascorbate oxidase and nitrite reductase. The site of the titratable histidine, the region close to the hydrophobic patch through which this histidine protrudes, is quite similar to other cupredoxins. Pseudoazurin also contains the exposed histidine. In azurin, the histidine is less exposed because of the loop containing Phell4. Thus, it is likely that the titratability of this histidine has more to do with its ability to rotate around the CILc~ bond than to any inherent differences at the reduced copper site.

'Honorary' copper proteins
Before now, the intense blue colour of these proteins has been ascribed to the copper-thiolate charge transfer in-

Structure and function of copper-containing proteins A d m a n
teractions, where the thiolate has always been a cysteine ligand of the protein. This was even true in the 'honorary' blue protein carbonic anhydrase, where the zinc that was tetrahedrally coordinated by cysteine residues was replaced by copper. Recently, Brader and Dunn [24] have succeeded in making another honorary blue protein from insulin. The R-state of insulin can be switched on by the binding of phenol to hydrophobic pockets, which results in geometric changes at the zinc site. This can be made to bind copper instead of zinc, yielding spectra characteristic of a type-1 blue site, including hyperfine coupling constants which are less than usually seen for type-2 centers, and are more like those of type-1 centers. in this case, pentafluorothiophenol presumably provides the thiol function, and the three remaining ligands are histidines, one from each of the three subunits of insulin. Although intended to provide insight into metal- and anion-binding specificity of lactoferrin, a report on the structure of copper-substituted lactoferrin has provided useful structural information on five and six coordinate copper in a protein environment [25]. Copper in the amino-terminal lobe is five coordinate, bound by two tyrosines, one histidine, one aspartate and a carbonate ligand, whereas it is six-coordinate in the carboxy-terminal lobe, where oxalate replaces the carbonate ligand. These findings afford useful comparisons with other type-2 copper structures. described in [31], drawn on the plastocyanin motif in order to emphasize the relationship of superoxide dismutase to cupredoxins. The original motif described by Getzoff consisted of the black and white loops without the cross-hatched portions (see Fig. 2). The 'black-half provides most of the copper ligands in both the cupredoxins and superoxide dismutase proteins; the 'white loop' becomes extended to provide ligands for zinc or, in the case of azurin, folds back on itself to form the 'back flap'. It also provides one of the ligands in nitrite reductase (see below).

899

N

Superoxide dismutase
Overviews of current thinking on superoxide dismutase structure and function have been provided by Fisher et aL [26] and Roberts et aL [27]. In anticipation of NMR characterization of site-directed mutants, a preliminary start has been made on the full assignment of protons for this protein. A 600 MHz study of active-site protons shows that it is likely that the bridging histidine (His63) is not coordinated to the copper in the dithionite-reduced form of the protein [28]. Azide bound to the copper is more strongly bound to the reduced form; when bound to the oxidized form, His48 is the most perturbed histidine residue. A Cys6Ala mutant of bovine superoxide dismutase decreased the rate of irreversible denaturation, but at a lower energetic cost than predicted. Compensating packing adjustments were observed crystallographically [29"]. Notably, these adjustments were not adequately modelled by the powerful refinement program XPLOR, and the changes observed in electron-density difference maps had to be modelled manually before refinement would proceed properly. This shortcoming was ascribed to the highly correlated nature of the shifts. A 2 J~ resolution structure of spinach superoxide dismutase has revealed that the structure is little changed from the bovine form [30]. One intriguing difference appears to be loss of a solvent bound to the copper at the active site, but this must be treated with caution as the R-factor from the refinement is rather high (0.25 for 5-2.0A data). In an earlier paper on superoxide dismutase, Getzoff et aL [31] discussed the evolution of the Greek-key ~-barrel in terms of its structure and exon patterns. Figure 2 is a schematic summary of the primitive structural units
Fig 2. A simplified Greek-key fold, obtained by superpositon r of superoxide dismutase structural components and a simplified plastocyanin motif. The labels "I,2,4 and "1',2',4' identify regions noted by Getzoff et al. [3"1] as exhibiting twofold symmetry (in this case, the putative twofold axis would run approximately horizontally between 2/2' and "1/"1'. Loops are labelled with Roman numerals after Getzotf et al. [3"1].

Interestingly, an algorithm for pattern search of a sequence database effectively picks up the two strands 2' and 2 (using the Getzoff nomenclature; Fig. 2) [32"]. This pattern search revealed yet another protein not previously thought to be related to this group, a copper resistance protein, CopA, from a plasmid in Pseudomonas syringae [33].

Multidomain copper proteins Ascorbate oxidase
The structure of nitrite reductase is better understood in the context of the other multicopper protein of known structure, ascorbate oxidase [34]. Ascorbate oxidase is a plant-derived protein that catalyzes the reduction of 0 2 to water when reduced with ascorbate. Its importance lies in its homology to other blue oxiclases, laccase and ceruloplasmin, and in its novel copper center. The structure of ascorbate oxidase can be visualized in terms of the plastocyanin motif shown in Fig. 1.

900

Proteins

Ascorbate oxidase is a dimer of total molecular weight 140 kD in solution, and in each of two crystal forms aggregates into a tetmmer. Each monomer contains three domains, each of which has the same fold as the plastocyanin motif. Only two of these domains bind copper; the third lacks the correct ligands for binding either a type-1 (cysteine, two histidines, methionine) or type-2 (histidine) copper site. Domain 3 contains a typed copper at the site corresponding three-dimensionally to the type-1 site in plastocyat~. Domain 3 also provides four of the ligands that bind a novel trinuclear center. This copper center, whose trinuclear arrangement was suggested by spectroscopic and chemical work, consists of three copper atoms, a type-3 copper pair 3.52t, apart, and a type-2 copper ~ 4A from each of the other two. The structure reveals that this center lies between domains 1 and 3 of an ascorbate oxidase monomer, domains which are related by an approximate twofold axis that also bisects the copper triad. A total of eight histidines bind the triad, four derived from each domain. Each type-3 copper is bound by three histidines, while the type-2 copper is bound by two histidines. It is likely that water or an OH group completes the ligation of the type-2 copper. There is also evidence for a bridging oxygen between the type-3 copper atoms. Among the four histidines from each domain, two are part of a His--X-His sequence (where X represents any amino acid) and project from the next-to-last B-strand in the carboxy-terminal loop; the other two project from the I]-strand adjacent and amino-terminal to this. The interface binding these coppers also provides limited solvent (and presumably oxygen) access to the trinuclear copper site. Figure 3 is a highly schematic representation of the structure. Messerschmidt and Huber [35] have noted extensive sequence similarity between ascorbate oxidase, laccase and ceruloplasmin. Laccase is likely to have three domains like those of ascorbate oxidase, whereas ceruloplasmin will have six. Proteins depleted of type-2 copper sites have played a significant role in understanding the spectra of these proteins which have all three kinds of spectroscopically distinguishable copper atoms. Initial attempts to define crystallographicaUy the type-2 copper yielded ambiguous results. A metal-binding site between the monomers of the dimer can be removed with dithiocarbamate, a standard procedure for producing type-2depleted material. Yet this binding site appears so remote from the other sites that it does not seem to be the one characterized spectroscopically. Recent attempts to make type-2-depleted material have shown that the copper ligated by two histidines is removed first, but that levels of all three coppers in the trinuclear center are decreased, suggesting that there is facile rearrangement of the copper atoms in this center [36].
Nilrile r e d u d a ~

~
, H

/H,
" I' ,

I
m'

/

TI'

H ~k

"',

II

k

xC :X ?,

)

Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of possible ascorbate oxidase dimer
from crystallographic asymmetric unit, with domains I and U in about the same orientation as domain I and II of nitrite recluctase. Dashed lines represent domain boundaries, solid outlines represent molecular boundaries. Copper atoms are denoted by @; copper ligands by the one-letter amino acid code. trites into nitrogen gas, producing NO, and under some circumstances N20, from NO2-. A completely unexpected finding is that nitrite reductase shares considerable structural and sequence similarity with ascorbate oxidase. A monomer of what was expected to be a (69 kD) dimeric protein crystallizes in a cubic unit cell, in which there are no twofold axes, thus excluding a dimeric structure. The protein aggregates tightly around a crystallographic threefold axis, and indeed is a trimer in solution [38°°]. It remains unclear why SDS gels show a protein with an apparent molecular weight of 69 kD unless its mobility is severely affected by the trimeric structure. The copper: dimer stoichiometry was previously estimated to be 3:1 (wanslating to 4.5:1 for the trimer). Our crystal structure clearly shows two copper atoms per monomer, or six per trimer [38°°]. The 2.3A multiple isomorphous replacement map shows that one copper center is a typed copper with one cysteine, two histidine and one methionine ligands, whereas the other is a type-2 copper with three histidine ligands and one water, tetmhedrally coordinated. Intriguingly, two of the histidines come from one monomer of the trimer, whereas the third

The chemicalsequence [3"7"] and X-raystructure [38"] of a copper-containing nitrite reductase from A ~
mobacter cyc/odastes have recently been reported. This protein catalyzes one step in the conversion of soil ni-

Structure and function of copper-containing proteins Adman

901

comes from another, so that this copper is bound at the interface between two molecules (Fig. 4).

Both nitrite reductase and ascorbate oxidase have the type-1 site ~ 1 2 . 5 h from the second copper (or copper center), bridged by adjacent copper ligands, HisCys. This forms part of the electron-transfer pathway proposed by Beratan et aL [13"*] in plastocyanin and azurin. The rate of electron transfer along this path has been measured for ascorbate oxidase. By reducing ascorbate oxidase by photochemically reducing lumiflavin semiquinone, Tollin and colleagues [40] have measured the rate constant for reoxidation of the type-1 copper center to be 160s-1 which was interpreted to be the sum of the forward and reverse rates of electron transfer between the type-1 and type-3 sites. The value of this rate constant is consistent with limiting rates at high substrate concentration for enzyme reduction by ascorbate, or reoxidation by dioxygen. This value is also comparable with the other intramolecular rates of electron transfer in multicenter redox enzymes tabulated by these authors. It will be interesting to see whether it is consistent with the tunneling paths described by Beratan etal. [13"'] or some process other than the simple transfer of electrons between the two sites will need to be invoked.
Galactose oxidase

Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of the nitrite reductase trimer. Domains I' and I1' are related to I and II by a crystallographic threefold axis. Copper atoms are denoted by O; copper ligands by the one-letter amino acid code.

The type-2 copper is accessible to solvent via a fairly deep channel, and indeed the fourth ligand of the tetrahedral array of ligands appears to be a water. This water can be replaced when crystals are soaked in a large excess of nitrite, suggesting that the type-2 copper is the active site [38"']. Each of the monomers folds into two domains, each of which has the plastocyanin fold, with greatly exaggerated loops connecting the 13-strands. Only the amino-terminal domain has appropriate ligands for binding the type-1 copper. The domains pack together so that the ~-sheets are stacked and slightly rotated like four playing cards. The stacking of the domains at the interface between molecules is just like the stacking of the domains in ascorbate oxidase, where the trinuclear center is bound between domains, not molecules. The presence of a sixdomain structure in the trimer and its sequence similarity with ceruloplasmin led us to propose a plausible model for ceruloplasmin [37"']. Understanding the evolutionary relationships among all of these molecules with a cupredoxin-like fold presents a significant challenge. The nitrite reductase in Alcaligenes faecalis has been shown to require pseudoazurin in order for it to function [39"]. The type-1 site in nitrite reductase appears to have a hydrophobic surface similar to that described above for the cupredoxins. Insofar as this surface is the likely site for self-exchange in the cupredoxins, it seems likely that this surface in nitrite reductase provides a similar interaction site for pseudoazurin. Specificity will then be determined by the residues surrounding this area.

Research on galactose oxidase has flourished on biochemical and structural fronts. Careful biochemical and spectroscopic studies by Whittaker and Whittaker [41] have established that a reductively inactivated form of the protein gives rise to its characteristic type-2 epr signal. The enzyme catalyzes a two-electron oxidation of primary alcohols to aldehydes. X-ray absorption near edge spectra studies of the different oxidation states of the molecule have shown that the oxidatively activated and the .reductively inactivated forms have the same Cu(II) edge structure, and that the enzyme-substrate complex has the resolved shoulder characteristic of Cu(I) [42]. An enzyme radical has been proposed to account for the lack of epr signal of the type-2 copper, e.g. the radical and copper spin must somehow be paired. The X-ray structure of galactose oxidase [43,] provides great insight into the function of this molecule. The structure corresponds to a mixture of the activated and reductively inactivated forms. Fungal galactose oxidase is a monomeric 68kD protein that contains one copper. Its sequence has been determined from the cloned gene. The X-ray structure was determined at 1.7A, and provides a feast for the inveterate structure gazer (Fig. 5). There are three domains: an amino-terminal domain of ,-, 150 residues with ~-sheet topology (but not Greekkey); a middle domain; and, the carboxy-terminal domain. Each looks as if it could fold independently. The middle domain consists of a seven-fold winding of ,-~50-residue segments, each forming four-stranded ~-sheets, arranged as a seven-petalled flower with an open center. Domain 3 folds into a Greek-key I~-barrel, with a greatly lengthened loop corresponding to loop IV of the plastocyanin/superoxide dismutase fold shown in Fig. 2. This loop has the sole histidine in this domain at its tip. The loop reaches through domain 2 to where

902

Proteins

Fig. 5. Sketch of galactose oxidase, illustrating approximate chain folding. For emphasis, domain III is somewhat enlargecl, domain I moved slightly away, and many loops are omitted from domain II. The copper atom is denoted by 0 ; copper ligands by the amino acid one-letter code. O A c - , acetate (at pH = 4.5); H20, water (at pH ----6.7); N, amino terminus; C, carboxyl terminus.

the copper is located, so providing one of the equatorial copper ligands. Other copper ligands are an adjacent Tyr-His pair with the tyrosine axially ligated, another tyrosine, and an acetate ion (in the pH 4.5 form) or a water molecule (in the pH 7 form). Although the copper site is accessible to solvent, it is surrounded by concentric rings of aromatic residues. These may be important in stab'flizing the other unusual few ture of this protein. Although it has no other dissociable cofactor, this protein does perform a two-electron oxidation-state change. Spectroscopic studies suggested involvement of a tyrosine. The crystal structure reveals that Cys228 is covalently linked to Tyr272, one of the copper ligands. It is not clear at what stage in the production of this protein this linkage is formed, but there are a growing number of examples of proteins in which modilied or crosslinked amino acids are providing additional functionality. The Tyr-Cys moiety is stacked parallel to a nearby tryptophan residue. The shape of the wateraccessible surface suggests a binding pocket for substrate where an oxygen of galactose could bind directly to copper, replacing the acetate seen in the structure. Clearly, this structure provides a fascinating basis for investigating the mechanism of this protein.
Amine oxidases

32 kD protein which catalyzes a key step in crosslinkage in elastin and collagen. It is believed to contain a pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ)-like cofactor, as do other amine oxidases. However, a review letter describing the current status of knowledge of the organic cofactor used by these copper oxidative enzymes is enlightening [45"']. This cofactor was long thought to be PQQ, and now is more likely to be t-topa (6-hydroxydopa quinone). The chemistry by which PQQ-ltke products are produced is not understood, but stoichiometric derivatization under mild conditions has revealed a modified amino-acid at the position X in a conserved sequence Leu-Asn-X-Asp-Tyr (X is 2,4,5-trihydroxyphenylalanine in bovine serum amine oxidase). It is suggested that as lysyl oxidase does not share sequence similarity with the other amine oxidases, its cofactor may yet be an exception. Thomson [46] has provided a succinct summary of the current situation.

Conclusion

Amine oxidases are a group of proteins containing type-2 copper which is required for activity. Although no threedimensional structures are yet available, two reports are worth noting. Gacheron et al. [44] have described a detailed characterization of lysyl oxidase, a monomeric

Techniques for studying small copper proteins have reached the stage where specific questions regarding function can be posed and answered. Structural data and insight are essential to answering these functional questions. With the advent of two new multidomain coppercontaining protein structures, we have seen additional ways of using the folding motif of the single-domain copper proteins, in the case of nitrite reductase forming as active site between molecules of a trimer, and in the case of galactose oxidase making use of a new sort of endoge-

Structure and function of copper-containing proteins Adman

903

References and recommended reading
Papers of special interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as: · of interest ·. of outstanding interest 1.
2.

The authors describe a simple yet apparently powerful method of predicting 'hot spots' or preferred paths through proteins for electron transfer, combining through-bond and through-space coupling. 14. WERSTi i , DAVOUSTCE, HOFFMANBM: Ligand Spin Densities in Blue Copper Proteins by Q-band IH and 14N ENDOR Spectroscopy. J Am C~om Soc 1991, 113:1533-1538.

ADMANET: Copper Protein Structures. Adv Protc~'n Chem 1991, 42:144-197.
BEINERTH: Copper in Biological Systems. A Report from

the 6th Manziana Conference, 23-27 Sept 1990. J lnorg Bt;0chem 1991, in press. 3. PASCHER T, BERGSTROM J, MALMSTROM BG, VANNGARD T, LUNDBERG LG: Modification o f the Electron Transfer Sites of Pseudomonas aeruginosa Azurin by Site-directed Mutagenesis. FEBS Lett 1989, 258:266-268. ~ N BG, NORDLING M, PASCHER T, Tsm L, SJOLIN L, LUNDBERG LG: Cassette Mutagenesis of Metl21 in Azurin from Pseudomonas aeruginos~ Protein Eng 1991, 4:343-349.

THOMANN BERNARDOM, BALDWINM, LOWRYM, SOLOMONEI: H, Pulsed ENDOR Study of the Native and High pH Perturbed Forms of the Blue Copper Site in Stellacyanin. f Am Cbem Soc 1991, 113:5911-5913. A clever triple-resonance technique is used to make a reasonable prediction of the fourth copper ligand in stellacyanin. 16. ADMANET, TURLEY S, BRAMSON IL PETRATOS K, BANNER D, TSERNOGLOU D, BEPPU T, WATANABEH: A 2.0A Structure of the Blue Copper Protein (Cupredoxin) from Alcaligenes faecalts S-6. J B/o/ OJem 1989, 264:87-99.
PETRATOSK, DAUTER Z, WILSON KS: Refinement of t h e Struc-

15. .

4.

17.

ture o f Pseudoazurin from Alcaltgenesfaecalts S-6 at 1.55 J~ Resolution. Acta Crystallogr [B] 1988, 44:628--636. 18. HOLTSD, PIGGOTF B, INGLEDEWWJ, FEITERSMe, DLAKUNGP: EXAFS of the Type-1 Copper Site of Rusticyanin. FEBS Lett 1990, 269:117-121. LOMMEN PANDYAKI, KONIGSBERGERn c , CANTERSGW: EXAFS A, Analysis of the pH D e p e n d e n c e o f the Blue Copper Site in Amicyanin from Thiobacillus versutug Biocht'm Biophys Acta 1991, 1076:439--447.

vAN DE KAMP M, SILVESTRINIMC, BRUNORI M, VAN BEEUMEN J, HALl FC, CANTERSGW: Involvement of the Hydrophobic Patch of Azurin in the Electron Transfer Reactions with Cytochrome C551 and Nitrite Reductase. Eur J Biochem 1990, 194:109-118. One of the succession of papers from this research group in which specific hypotheses of azurin function are carefully dissected.
6.

5. ..

I9.

ADMAN Structure and Function of Blue Copper Proteins. ET: in Topics in Molecu~r and Structural Biology: Metalloproteins edited by Harrison P [book]. New York: Macmillan, 1985, pp 1-42.

7. ··

NAR H, MESSERSCHMIDTA, HUBER R, VAN DE KAMP M, CANTERS GW: X-ray Crystal Structure o f the Two Site-specific Mutants His35Gln and His35Leu o f Azurin from Psendomonas aeruglnos~ J Mol Biol 1991, 218:427--447. The first report of the structure(s) of site-directed mutants of cupredoxins. The mutants and the wild-type protein crystallize differently although the residues mutated are all internal. 8.
·

LOMMEN A, CANTERS GW! pH-dependent Redox Activity and Pluxionality o f the Copper Site in Amicyanin from Thiobadllus versutus as Studied by 300-and 600-MHz NMIL J B/o/C~em 1990, 265:2768-2774. The surface ligand histidine of amicyanin is shown to undergo a low-pH conformational change previously thought to be unique to plastocyanin. It may m m out that azurin is the only cupredoxin that does not undergo this change. 21. VAN BEEEMENJ, VAN BUN S, CANTERSGW, LOMMENA, CHOTHIA C: The Structural Homology o f Amicyanin from Thtobaci~ lus versutus to Plant Plastocyanins. J BR~/ C~om 1991, 266:4869-4877. KALVERDA AP, LOMMENA, WYMENGAS, HILBERS ~ , GANTERS GW: Three Dimensional Structure Determination o f Amicyanin by NMR and MD Simulations. J / n o r g B/ochem 1991, 43:171.

20. ·

CHANGTK, IVERSONSA, RODmGUES CG, KISER CN, ~ AYC, GERMANAS RICHARDSJH: Gene Synthesis, Expression and JP, Mutagenesis of t h e Blue Copper Proteins Azurin and Plastocyanin. Proc Naa Acad Sci USA 1991, 8:1325-1329. Mutations of the methionine ligand of plastocyanin are not so easy to effect as those for the same ligand in azurin. 9. vAN DE KAMP M, HALl FC, ROSATO N, FINAZZI-AGROA, CANTERS GW: Purification and Characterization of a Non-reconstitutable Azurin, Obtained by Heterologons Expression of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa gene in Escherichta colt B i o ~ m B ~ o , s Acta 1990, 1019:283-292.

22.

MATHEWSFS, CHEN L, DURLEY Pc Crystal Structure of an Electron Transfer Complex Between a Quinoprotein and a Blue Copper Protein: Methyiamine Dehydrogenase and Amicyanin. J / n o r g BR~hem 1991, 43:193. A preliminary account of one of the few crystallized complexes between electron-transfer redox partners. The full report is eagerly awaited. 24. BRADER ML, DUNN MF: Insulin Stabilizes Copper(II)-Thiolate Ligation that Models Blue Copper Proteins. J Am ~ Soc 1990, 112:4585--4587. SMITH CA, BAKER HM, BAKER EN: Preliminary Crystallographic Studies o f Copper(H) and Oxalate-substituted Human Lactoferrin. J Mo/BR)/1991, 219:155-159. FISHERCL, HALLEWELLRA, ROBERTSVA, TAINERJA, GE'IZOFF ED: Probing the Structural Basis for Enzyme-Substrate Recognition in Cu, Zn S u p e ~ x i d e Dismutase. Free Radio Res Commun 1991, 12-13:287-296. ROBERTSVA, FISHER eL, REDFORD SM, MCREE DE, PARGE HE, GETZOFF ED, TAINER JA: Mechanism and Atomic Structure of Superoxide Dismutase. Free Radio Res Commun 1991, 12-13:269-278. BE~ I, CAPOZZI F, LUCHINAT C, PICCIOLI M, VIEZZOLI MS: Assignment of Active-site Protons in the 1H-NMR Spectrum of Reduced Human Cu/Zn Superoxide Dismutase. Eur J Biochem 1991, 197:691497.

23. ..

COLLYER GUSSJM, SUGIMURAY, Y O S ~ CA, F, FREEMANHC: Crystal Structure of Plastocyanin from a Green Alga, Ew teromorpha prolifera~ J M o / B ~ / 1 9 9 0 , 211:617432. Another of the careful studies from this laboratory setting the limits on precision for copper-ligand geometry. SHEPARDWEB, ANDERSON BF, I.EWANDOSrd DA, NORMS GE, BAKER EN: Copper Coordination Geometry in Azurin Undergoes Minimal Change on Reduction o f Copper (II) to Copper (I). J A m C~em S ~ 1990, 112:7817-7819. This is the first report of a structure for reduced azurin. 11.
·

10. ·

25.

26.

27.

12.

GROENEVELD CM, FErI'ERS MC, HASNAINSS, VAN RIJN J, REEDIJK J, CANTERSGW: The pH and Redox-state D e p e n d e n c e o f the Copper Site in Azurin from Pseudomonas aeruginosa as Studied by EXAFS. Biochim Biophys Acta 1986, 873:214-227. BERATAN DN, BETrS .IN, ONUCHICJN: Protein Electron Transfer Rates Set by the Bridging Secondary and Tertiary Structure. Scienc~ 1991, 252:1285-1288.

28.

13. ..

904

Proteins
MCREEDE, REDFORDSM, GETZOFF ED, LEPOCKJR, HALLEWELL RA, TAINERJA: Changes in Crystallographic Structure and Thermostability of a Cu$Zn Superoxide Dismutase Mutant Resulting from the Removal of a Buried Cysteine. J Biol . O~rn 1990, 265:14234-14241. "The authors present a high-resolution structure of a simple mutant with important caveats for prediction of structural change without diffraction data. 29.
·

This initial report of the X-ray structure reveals unexpected structure and sequence similarity to ascorbate oxidase, unexpected trimertc quaternary structure, and both type-1 and type-2 coppers. The latter is the site of interaction with NO2- . KAKUTANI WATANABEH, ARIMAK, BEPPU T: A Blue ProT, tein as an Inactivating Factor for Nitrite Reductase from Alcaligenesfaecalis Strain S-6. J BiocJoem 1981, 89:453-461. 40. MEYERTE, MARCHESlNIA, CUSANOVICHMA, TOLLIN G: Di· rect Measurement of Intramolecular Electron Transfer Between Type I and Type III Copper Centers in the Multicopper Enzyme Ascorbate Oxidase and its Type II Copper-depleted and Cyanide-inhibited Forms. B~hemistry 1991, 30:4619-4623. One of the first measurements of the rate of electron transfer between copper sites in ascorbate oxidase. WHITFAKERMM, WHITTAKER J'W: A Tyrosine-derived Free Radical in Apogalactose Oxidase. J Biol Chem 1990, 265:9610-9613. 42. CLARKK, PENNER-HAHNJE, WHrlTAKER MM, WHITTAKERJW: Oxidation-state Assignments for Galactose Oxidase Complexes from X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy. Evidence for Cu(II) in the Active Enzyme. J Am Cbem Soc 1990, 112:6433-6434. 43. ITO N, PHILLIPSSEA],STEVENSC, OGELZB, MCPHERSONMJ, KEEN .. JN, YADAVKDS, KNOWLESPF: Novel Thioether Bond Revealed by a 1.7A Crystal Structure of Galactose Oxidase. Nature 1991, 350:87-90. The copper is bound at the intersection of a flower-like 13-sheetdomain, which folds like methylamine dehydrogenase, and a Greek-key ~-sheet domain, one loop of which pierces the flower center to provide one of the copper ligands. Another ligand is a tyrosine which turns out to be covalently linked to a cysteine. GACHERON SN, TRACKMAN PC, SHAH MA, O'GARA CY, SPACCIAPOLIP, GREENAWAY KAGANH i : Structural and CatFT, alytic Properties of Copper in Lysyl Oxidase. J Bto/ Chem 1990, 265:19022-19027. 45. KLINMAN DOOLEYDM, DUINEJA, KNOWLESPF, MONDOVIB, JP, oo VILLAFRANCA Status of the Cofactor Identity in Copper JJ: Oxidative Enzymes. FEBS Left 1991, 282:1-4. An important summary of current thinking on a cofactor in copper oxidative enzymes previously thought to be PQQ. 46. THOMSONAJ: Radical Copper in Oxidases. Nature 1991, 350:22-23. 44. 41. 39.

30.

K1TAGAWA TANAKA HATAY, KUSUNOKIM, LEE G, KATSUBE Y, N,
Y, ASADA K, AIBARAS S, MORITA Y: Three-dimensional Struc-

ture of Cu,Zn-Superoxide Dismutase from Spinach at 2.0A Resolution. J Btk~em 1991, 109:477-485. 31. GETZOFF ED, TAINERJA, STEMPIENMM, BELLGI, HALLEWELL RA: Evolution of Cu,Zn Superoxide Dismutase and the Greek Key B-Barrel Structural Motif. Proteins 1989, 5:322-336.

Ouzoums C, SANDERC: A Structure-derived Sequence Pattern for the Detection of Type I Copper Binding Domains in Distantly Related Proteins. FEBS Lett 1991, 279:73-78. A new prediction pattern catches a possible new member of the family of proteins exhibiting a cupredoxin-like fold. 33. MELLANO MA, COOKSEYDA: Nucleotide Sequence and Organization of Copper Resistance Genes from Pseudomonas syrtngae pv. tomato. J Bacteriol 1988, 170:2879-2883. MESSERSCHMIDT ROSSlA, LADENSTEINR, HUBERT, BOLOGNESI A, M, GATI'I G, MARCHESINIA, PETRUZZELLIR, FINAZZI-AGROA~ X-ray Crystal Structure of the Blue Oxidase Ascorbate Oxidase from Zucchini: Analysis of the Polypeptide Fold and a Model of the Copper Sites and Ligands. J Mol Biol 1989, 206:513-529. MESSERSCHMIDT HUBER l~ The Blue Oxidases, Ascorbate A, Oxtdase, Laccase and Ceruloplasmin: Modeling and Structural Relationships. Eur J Bt~.hem 1990, 187:341-352. MESSERSCHMIDT HUBER R, KRONECKPMH: X-ray CrystalloA, graphic Characterization of the Type-2 Depleted Ascorbate Oxidase from Zucchini. J Inorg Bt~0c_.hem1991, 43:189.

32. .

34.

35.

36.

FENDERSON KUMARS, ADMANET, lau M-Y, PAYNEWJ, LEGALL FF, J: Amino Acid Sequence of Nitrite Reductase: a Copper Protein from Achromobacter cycloclaste~ Biochemistry 1991, 30:7180-7185. A sequence comparison suggests an interesting homology to nitrite reductase and a plausible model for cemloplasmin. 38. ., GODDENJW, TURLEY S, TELLER DC, ADMAN ET, LIU M-Y, PAYNE WJ, LEGALLJ: The 2.3A X-ray Structure of Nitrite Reductase from Achromobacter cycloclasteg Science 1991, 253:438-442.

37. .,

ET Adman, Department of Biological Structure, SM-20, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

