A N N L D O 8(8/9) 53-64,1992

I S S N 0738-1751

V O L U M E 8, N U M B E R 8/9, A U G U S T / S E P T E M B E R 1992

EDITORIAL BOARD

Editor
H A R O L D C. NEU, M D
College of Physicians and Surgeor~ Columbia University, New York, New York

Associate Editors D A N I E L AMSTERDAM, P h D
State University of New York at Buffalo and Erie County Medical Center Buffalo, New York

CLYDE THORNSBERRY, P h D
Institutes for Microbiology Research, Inc. Franklin, Tennessee

STEVEN L. BARRIERE, P h a r m D
UCLA Medical Center Los Angeles, California

LOWELL S. YOUNG, MD
KuzellInstitutefor Arthritis and InfectiousDiseases
Medical Research Institute of San Francisco
Pacific Presbyterian Medical Center

RONALD N. JONES, MD
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics Iowa City, Iowa

San Frandsco, California

EDITOR'SNOTE HAROLDC. NEU

53

Susceptibility Testing of Anaerobic Bacteria: A Review of Current Methods and Future Prospects DIANEM. CITRON
Overview of the Development of a New Class of 13-LactamAntibiotics: The

SUSCEPTIBILITY T E S T I N G OF A N A E R O B I C BACTERIA: A REVIEW OF C U R R E N T M E T H O D S A N D FUTURE PROSPECTS
DIANE M. CITRON
The R.M. Alden Research Laboratory, Santa Monica Hospital Medical Center, Santa Monica, California

53

bic bacteria, has been questioned and is at variance with the recommendation for facultative and aerobic bacteria.
CURRENT METHODS

Carbacephems DAVIDA. PRESTON

58

EDITOR'S N O T E Citron provides us with an excellent review of the current methods of testing the antibiotic susceptibility of anaerobic bacteria. She notes the problems with our methods and offers future prospects. As she notes, the E-test which incorporates an antibiotic gradient and utilizes an agar method has great potential for laboratories which now do not do anaerobic testing. As we develop new agent s---fluoroquinolones, streptogramins, avermectins, and macrolides---with anaerobic activity the clinician will benefit from the rapid, reproducible data.

Patterns of susceptibility of anaerobic bacteria to antimicrobial agents are becoming increasingly unpredictable. Resistance to metronidazole) a imipenem,a and [3-1actamase inhibitor combinations ( have been reported. Resistance to second and third generation cephalosporins is common, and variability of resistance of strains isolated at different hospitals within a geographic location to these agents and to clindamycin has been reported, s-8 Thus the current reco m m e n d a t i o n by the National Committee on Clinical Laboratory Standards 9,'° for laboratories to limit susceptibility testing of individual patient strains, and for physicians to consult published national or local surveys of susceptibility patterns of anaero-

One reason for this recommendation may be the lack of accurate and easy to perform methods for determining MICs against anaerobic bacteria within a clinicaUy relevant time frame. Prior to the publication of the current NCCLS standard, 9 the broth-disk elution method was used by most laboratories that performed susceptibility tests on anaerobes. u,12The simplicity and flexibility of this method accounted for its widespread acceptance. However, several investigators have demonstrated that this is not an accurate and reproducible method for determining susceptibility of anaerobic bacteria, particularly for the Bacteroides fragilis group. ",'3 In the current stand07~-17sl/92/,0.00+ 2.20

ELSEVIER

54

THE ANTIMICROBIC NEWSLEITER, VOLUME 8, NUMBER 8/9, AUGUST/SEI~EMBER 1992

ard, NCCLS has withdrawn their acceptance of the brothdisk elution method, which has created a void in anaerobe susceptibility testing. The reference method is an agar dilution procedure, performed on Wilkins-Chalgren agar (WCA)2 Serial twofold dilutions of antimicrobial agents are incorporated into molten agar and plates are poured. Organisms are suspended in a dear broth to match the turbidity of the 0.5 McFarland standard and are applied to the plates by means of a multipronged rephcating device. The final inoculum concentration is approximately 10s CFU per spot. After anaerobic incubation for 48 hr, the plates are examined for growth. The MIC is defined as the concentration of the antimicrobial agent that allows for growth of only one colony, a barely visible haze, or multiple pinpoint colonies. In the laboratory setting, many anaerobes exhibit "hazy growth," a development that makes interpretation of endpoints difficult.14 Because the replicating device accommodates 32-36 individual organisms, and preparation of the drug plates is very labor intensive, this method is usually used for testing many strains simultaneously, typically in a research laboratory, and is seldom used in a clinical microbiology laboratory. '2 In addition, because WCA does not support the growth of many anaer-

obes,1s,~6the current NCCLS document has approved the use of supplemented brucella agar as an alternative medium. Many investigators supplement WCA with blood, which contradicts the primary reason this medium was created. 17

T h e broth microdilution method is the only procedure currently described in the NCCLS document that is suitable for testing individual patient strains in the clinical laboratory; however, this method is fraught with problems.

The broth microdilution method is the only procedure currently described in the NCCLS document that is suitable for testing individual patient

strains in the clinical laboratory; however, this method is fraught with problems. Fifteen to forty percent of anaerobic bacteria do not grow in this system, 18,19and there are no recommendations provided for use of supplements for fastidious strains, as there are for aerobic organisms, to help alleviate this problem. In addition, major discrepancies with the reference agar dilution method occur, even with the robustly growing B. fragilis group of organisms, especially with [~lactam agents and clindamycin20,21 These discrepancies may be due to inoculum effects. The MIC panels are frequently inoculated on the bench, which exposes the anaerobe to oxygen. Different strains of anaerobes display varying and unpredictable susceptibility to oxygen; thus, inoculum preparation and tray inoculation may kill a proportion of the cells, thereby introducing an unintentional inoculum effect. The American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) control strains are not as oxygensensitive as some clinical isolates, and may not detect this problem. In addition, the growth rate of anaerobes in broth media appears to be slower than on agar containing media; thus another unintentional inoculum effect may be introduced. 22Inoculum concentration has a major impact on MICs determined in broth microdilution tests, 4 especially

The Antimicrobic Newsletter (ISSN 0738-1751) is issued monthly in one indexed volume per year by Elsevier Science Publishing Co., Inc., 655 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10010. Subscription price per year: Institutional: $75.00 For air mail, add $,33.00. Second-class postage paid at New York, NY and at additional mailing office~. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Antimicrobic Newsletter, I~2sevierScience Publishing Co., Inc., 655 Avenue of the Am~icas, New York, NY 10010. NOTICE: No responsibility is assumed for any injury and/or damage to persovs or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, ins tructions or ideas contained in the material herein. No Suggested test or procedure should be carried out unless, in the reader's judgment, its risk is justified. Because of rapid advances in medical sciences, we recommend that the independent verification of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made. Discus sions, views and recommendations as to medical procedures, choice of drugs and drug dosages are the responsibility of the authors.

© 1992 ELSEVIERSCIENCE PUBLISHING CO., INC.

0738-1751/92/$0.00 + 2.20

THE ANTIMICROBICNEWSLE'I'I'~¢,,VOLUME 8, NUMBER 8/9, A U G U S T / S E ~ B E R 1992

55

with [~-lactam antimicrobial agents. The inoculum effect is less evident on MICs determined on agar-containing media.Z%24 It has been suggested that bacterial growth on agar-containing media more closely simulates their characteristics in an infection, which requires adherence of organisms to tissue surfaces prior to establishment of an infection;z5thus susceptibility test methods performed on agar-containing media more closely reflect the in vivo situation. Because anaerobic bacteria generally grow better on agar than in broth media, a simple, rapid, and reliable agar method for susceptibility testing is desirable. The Etest meets these requirements.
ETEST DESCRIPTION A N D
EVALUATION

juncture of the ellipse with the strip, the MIC of the antibiotic is read from the numerical scale. The prototype Etest strips were evaluated in our laboratory using 105 clinical isolates of a variety of anaerobic bacteria, selected because of growth characteristics and previously determined resistance patterns. ~ Five ATCC control strains were i n d u d e d in the study. The antimicrobial agents were cefoxitin, ce-

The Etest is a 5 x 50 m m plastic strip that is coated with a continuous, exponential gradient of the antibiotic on one side, and an MIC interpretive scale corresponding to 15 twofold MIC dilutions on the other side. A suspension of the organism matching the turbidity of the 0.5 McFarland standard (or greater) is applied to the surface of an agar plate with a cotton swab. After absorption of the inoculum, the Etest strips are applied. If a 150-mm plate is used, six strips per plate can be applied in a radial fashion. If a 100-mm plate is used, two strips may be applied with the high concentration ends of the strips opposite to each other. After incubation in an anaerobic atmosphere, an elhpse of growth inhibition is formed around the strip. At the

Because anaerobic bacteria generally grow better on agar than in broth media, a simple, rapid, and reliable agar method for susceptibility testing is desirable. The Etest meets these requirements.

fotaxime, clindamycin, imipenem, penicillin G, and metronidazole. The reference AD method was used with the two agar media as described in the NCCLS document: unsupplemented Wilkins-Chalgren agar (Difco Laboratories, Detroit MI) (WCA) and Brucella agar (Difco

Laboratories), supplemented with vitamin K1 and hemin and 5% sheep blood (BBA). Laked sheep blood was used for the AD tests, and whole sheep blood for the Etest. Whole blood provides an opaque background and makes endpoints of growth of translucent bacteria sharper, while not affecting the growth of anaerobes. Etest MICs determined on WCA and BBA were compared to AD MICs determined on the same medium. The rapidly growing strains, such as the Bacteroides fragilis group and the dostridia, required only overnight incubation but some of the slower growers required an additional 24 hr before MICs could be interpreted. Overall, on BBA, the MICs obtained by the Etest after overnight incubation were within one dilution of MICs determined by the AD method for 87% of strains. On WCA, 83% of MICs were within one dilution. This is similar to another evaluation that reported 81% of Etest MIC results, determined on WCA and interpreted after 24 hr incubation, within one dilution of AD MICs. 27In this study, agreement increased to 91% after 48 hr incubation. Endpoints of growth on the Etest were clear and easy to read for most strains. Agar dilution MIC tests displayed hazy endpoints for some of the B. fragilis group and fusobacteria strains. This trailing effect has been noted by other investigators24,1s There was a tendency for metronidazole, imipenem, and penicillin MICs obtained by the Etest to be slightly lower than AD MICs, but they were very low by both methods so this finding

0738-1751/92/$0.00 + 2.20

© 1992 ELSEVIERSCIENCE PUBLISHING CO., INC.

56

THE ANTIMICROBIC NEWSLETIER, VOLUME 8, NUMBER 8/9, AUGUST/SEIrFEMBER 1992

had no practical significance. In dilution tests, "the 'true' MIC is somewhere between the lowest concentration that inhibits the organism and the next lower concentration... Under the best of controlled conditions, a dilution test may not yield the same endpoint each time it is repeated. "9 A gradient method does not pose this problem, a fact that may explain, in part, some of the higher AD MICs observed. Another explanation for the slightly lower MICs observed with the Etest and several of the antimicrobial agents tested might be related to the difference in inoculum that is delivered to the plate. The spots of inoculum delivered by the Steers replicator used in the AD method are about 5 m m in diameter, and have an area of approximately 2 ram2; thus the final inoculum is approximately 4 x 10' C F U / m m 2. One tenth of a milliliter of the same inoculum spread over a 15-cm plate produces an inoculum of approximately 6 x 103 C F U / m m 2, a measurement that is almost a full log10lower and could explain some of the lower Etest MICs observed. Additional studies are needed to verify this hypothesis. Although inoculum effects are most pronounced in broth microdilution tests, they also have been observed, to a lesser extent, in agar dilution tests, m* Clindamycin Etest MICs determined after 20 hr of incubation were several dilutions lower than AD MICs interpreted after 48 hr incubation for some strains of the B. fragilis group. These discrepant Etest MICs were I to 2 vg/ml at 20 hr and increased to

4 to 16 ~g/ml after 48 hr incubation. After 48 hr incubation, the Etest MICs determined on BBA were within one dilution of AD MICs for 96% of strains. On repeat testing, MICs were read after 20 hr with both methods, and were very comparable, and both methods demonstrated an increase by several dilutions after the additional 24-hr incubation period. This did not occur with strains that had clindamycin MICs <1 ~g/ml. This probably represents an inducible form of clindamycin resistance in this group of organisms. A slightly higher inoculum, or incubation for a full 24-hr day, may allow for detection of this type of resistance, and is currently under investigation. Many strains of fusobacteria produce trailing endpoints with the AD test, which represent Lforms, usually induced by ~-lactam agents, ls,~ This has made determination of MIC endpoints difficult. In Etest, these strains exhibited an area of heavy growth with good demarcation of the ellipse of inhibition, and a transparent haze extending into the ellipse. Gram-stained smears of this haze revealed Gram-negative, bizarre forms, suggestive of L-forms. Johnson concluded that L-forms have no clinical significance;28therefore, this haze should be ignored when reading MICs. One interpretive discrepancy occurred with a [3-1actamase producing strain of F. nucleatum for which the penicillin AD MIC was 8-16 ~g/ml, and the Etest MIC was 1 ,g/rnl. The reason for this discrepancy is unclear, but might be related to inoculum effect or rate of ~-lactamase production in the two procedures.

Some strains of Prevotella also produce ~-lactamase; yet they exhibit penicillin MICs below the recommended susceptible breakpoint. []-lactamase production should be determined for isolates of Gram-negative bacilli with penicillin MICs >0.25 but <4.0 ~g/ml. The ATCC control strains were tested on at least five separate occasions with each antibiotic and on each agar. The reproducibility of the Etest was 528 of 539 determinations (98%) within a two-dilution interval, and 100% within a three-dilution interval. The P. magnus control strain grew poorly on WCA and yielded MICs that were one to two dilutions lower than those determined on BBA. This observation emphasizes the importance of using media that support the growth of the organism (NCCLS) because poor growth could be misinterpreted as susceptibility to the antimicrobial agent.
SUMMARY

The current NCCLS document, M l l A2, describes two methods for susceptibility testing of anaerobic bacteria. The reference method utilizes an agar dilution procedure, which is labor intensive and not convenient for testing individual patient isolates. The broth microdilution method does not support the growth of 15--40% clinical isolates and demonstrates poor correlation with the reference method for some members of the Bacteroides fragilis group with ~-lactam agents and clindamycin. Etest is a new technique that incorporates an antibiotic gradient onto a plastic

© 1992 ELSEVIERSCIENCE PUBLISHING CO., INC.

0738-1751192/$0.00 + 2.20

THE ANTIMICROBIC NEWSLETTER, VOLUME 8, NUMBER 8/9, A U G U S T / S ~ B E R

1992

57

strip a n d utilizes agar media. This m e t h o d is easily performed, permits growth of all anaerobes, and provides quantitative MICs for rapidly growing strains after overnight (20 hr) incubation. This m e t h o d is convenient a n d reliable and enables the laboratory to provide the clinician with MIC data for individual patient isolates within a clinically relevant time period. REFERENCES 1. Reysset G, Haggoud A, Sebald M: Genetics of 5-nitroimidazole resistance in Bacteroides. Clin Inf Dis 16 (Suppl. 4): 401-403, 1993. 2. Breuil J, Butnat C, Patey O, Dublanchet A: Survey of Bacteroides fragilis susceptibility patterns in France. J Antimicrob Chemother 24:69-75, 1989. . Ueno K, Watanabe K, Bando K, Kato N: The antimicrobial susceptibility of recent clinical isolates of the Bacteroides fragilis group. Clin Inf Dis 16 (Suppl. 4): 382-386, 1993. . Goldstein EJC, Citron DM, Cherubin CE: Comparison of the inoculum effect of cefoxitin and other cephalosporins and of betalactamase inhibitors and their penicillin derived components on the Bacteroides fragilis group. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 35:1868-1874, 1991. . Hecht DW, Osmolski JR, O'Keefe JP: Susceptibility of Bacteroides fragilis isolates from six Chicago hospitals. Clin Inf Dis 16 (Suppl. 4) 357-360, 1988. . Cuchural GJ, Tally FP, Jacobus NV, et al.: Susceptibility of the Bacteroides fragilis group in the United States: Analysis by site of isolation. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 32:717-722, 1988. . Appleman MD, Heseltine PNR, Cherubin CE: Epidemiology, antimicrobial susceptibility, patho-

genicity, and significance of Bacteroides fragilis group organisms isolated at Los Angeles CountyUniversity of Southern California Medical Center. Rev Inf Dis 13:12-18, 1990. 8. Goldstein EJC, Citron DM: Annual incidence, epidemiology, and comparative in vitro susceptibilities to cefoxitin, cefotetan, cefmetazole, and ceftizoxime of recent community-acquired isolates of the Bacteroides fragilis group. J Clin Microbio126: 23612366, 1988. 9. National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards: Methods for antimicrobial susceptibility testing of anaerobic bacteria, 2nd Ed. vol. 9, no. 15. Approved standard M11-A2. National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards, Villanova, PA, 1990. 10. Finegold SM: Susceptibility testing of bacteria. J Clin Microbiol 26:1252-1256, 1988. 11. Amsterdam D, Jones RN: Brothdisk elution method for anaerobic susceptibility testing: a simple unreliable test. Antimicrob Newslett 5:41-42, 1988. 12. Goldstein EJC, Citron DM, Goldman RJ: National hospital survey of anaerobic culture and susceptibility testing methods: Results and recommendations for improvement. J Clin Microbio130:1529-1534; 1992. 13. Zabransky RJ, Birk RJ, Kurzinski TA, Toohey KL: Predicting the susceptibility of anaerobes to cefoperazone, cefotaxime, and cefoxitin with the thioglycolate broth disk procedure. J Clin Microbiol 24:181-185, 1986. 14. Wexler HM, Lavin PT, Molitoris E, Finegold SM: Statistical analysis of the effects of trial, reader, and replicates on MIC determinations for cefoxitin. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 34:22462249, 1990.

15. Brazier JS, Goldstein EJC, Citron DM, Ostovari MI: Fastidious anaerobe agar compared with Wilkens-Chalgren agar, brain heart infusion agar, and brucella agar for susceptibility testing of Fusobacterium species. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 34:22802282, 1990. 16. Hill GB, Schalkowsky S: Development and evaluation of the spiral gradient endpoint method for susceptibility testing of anaerobic gram-negative bacilli. Rev Inf Dis 12 (Suppl. 2):200209, 1990. 17. Wilkins TD, Chalgren S: Medium for use in antibiotic susceptibility testing of anaerobic bacteria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 10:926-928, 1976. 18. Baron EJ, Bruckner DA: Comparison of susceptibilities of anaerobic bacteria determined by agar dilution and by a microbroth method. Rev Inf Dis 6 (Suppl 1):249-253, 1984. 19. Jones RN, Barry AL, Cotton JL, et al.: Collaborative evaluation of the Micro-Media Systems anaerobe susceptibility panel: Comparisons with reference methods and test reproducibility. J Clin Microbio116:245-249, 1982. 20. Aldridge KE, Sanders CV: Antibiotic and method dependent variation in susceptibility testing results of Bacteroides fragilis group isolates. J a i n Microbiol 25:2317-2321, 1987. 21. Aldridge KE, Wexler HM, Sanders CV, Finegold SM: Comparison of in vitro antibiograms of Bacteroides fragilis group isolates: Differences in resistance rates in two institutions because of differences in susceptibility testing methodology. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 34:179-181, 1990. 22. Brook I: Growth of Bacteroides fragilis group in agar and broth media. J. Applied Bacteriol.

0738-1751/92/$0.00 + 2.20

© 1992 ELSEVIERSCIENCE PUBLISHING CO., INC.

58

THE ANTIMICROBIC NEWSLETrER, VOLUME 8, NUMBER 8/9, AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 1992

69:697-700, 1990. 23. Wexler HM, Reeves D, Finegold SM: Effects of inoculum size and medium on activity of seven antimicrobial agents against Bacteroides fragilis strains. Clin. Ther. 11:828-833, 1989. 24. Jacobus GJ, Cuchural GJ, Tally FP: In vitro susceptibility of the Bactero/desfragl//s group and the inoculum effect of newer beta-lactam antibiotics on this group of organ-

isms. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 24:675-682, 1989. 25. Lorian V: In vitro simulation of in vivo conditions: Physical state of the culture medium. J. a i m Microbiol. 27:2403-2406, 1989. 26. Citron DM, Ostovari MI, Kaflsson A, Goldstein EJC: Evaluation of the E test for susceptibility testing of anaerobic bacteria. J. Clin. Microbiol. 29:2197-2203, 1991.

27. Wust J, Hardegger U: Evaluation of the Etest for susceptibility testing of anaerobic bacteria. Abstract G4. In: Abstracts of the Fourth European Congress & Second International Symposium on Anaerobic Bacteria and Infections. Vienna, Austria. 1992. 28. Johnson CC, Wexler HM, BeckerS, et al.: Cell-wall-defectivevariants of Fusoh~.cterium. Antin~crob. Agents Chemother. 33:369-372, 1989.

OVERVIEW OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NEW CLASS OF [3-LACTAM ANTIBIOTICS: THE CARBACEPHEMS
DAVID A. PRESTON
Senior Research Scientist, Infectious Disease Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, Indiana

One of the great triumphs of chemotherapeutics in the twentieth century has been the discovery of antibiotics and the utilization of that discovery to develop many safe and effective drugs. The antibacterial agents that have proven useful in h u m a n medicine readily segregate into distinct chemical classes, each of which acts by a specific biochemical mechanism. Some of the better k n o w n and highly useful classes of antibacterial agents are the sulfonamides, the penicillins, the macrolides, the glycopeptides, the tetracyclines, the

aminoglycosides, the cephalosporins, and the quinolones. The penicillins and cephalosporins can be classified together into a broader class, the [3-1actams, on the basis of a comm o n structural feature, the [~-lactam ring, and a c o m m o n mechanism of antibacterial action, the inhibition of essential cell wall synthetic enzymes. This mechanism of antibacterial action is particularly attractive because the target enzymes in bacteria do not exist in h u m a n cells. Thus, a major benefit of the [3-1actam antibiotics is their high degree of safety in humans. The decades of the 1970s and 1980s were particularly exciting for the discovery and development of new [3-1actam antibiot-

ics. During this time a myriad of n e w and different penicillins and cephalosporins emerged, many of which are still useful today. Improvements that were made included increases in potency, broadening of the range of susceptible organism types, evasion of bacterial resistance mechanisms, improvements in patient acceptability, changes in the bioavailability and pharmacokinetic characteristics, and alterations in acceptable route of administration. In parallel with the development of new penicillins and cephalosporins came the discovery and development of other classes of ~-lactam antibacterial c o m p o u n d s that share the general mechanism of action and the c o m m o n structural fea-

© 1992 ELSEVIERSCIENCE PUBLISHING CO., INC.

0738-1751/92/$0.00 + 2.20

