Protein Expression and Purification 25, 73­80 (2002) doi:10.1006/prep.2001.1611

Expression of Recombinant Human Betaine: Homocysteine S-Methyltransferase for X-Ray Crystallographic Studies and Further Characterization of Interaction with S-Adenosylmethionine
Nandita Bose, Phillip Greenspan, and Cory Momany1
Department of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30605

Received October 5, 2001, and in revised form December 13, 2001

Elevated homocysteine as a result of dysfunctional metabolic enzymes is an independent risk factor for arteriosclerosis. Betaine:homocysteine S-methyltransferase (BHMT) (EC 2.1.1.5) is an important enzyme in the pathway of homocysteine metabolism in that it recycles methionine from homocysteine and nonfolate methyl donors. To initiate X-ray crystallographic structural studies, we created a BHMT expression construct for use in Escherichia coli that has a polyhistidine purification tag with no extraneous protein, usually found in commercial vectors, between the tag and protein sequence. The extra amino acids can hinder the crystallization process. A modified pET28b vector was designed to produce N-terminal polyhistidine-tagged proteins with a simple construction scheme having broad applicability because of the use of rare SapI cloning sites. BHMT expressed using this vector could be rapidly purified using metal chelate chromatography. Gel exclusion chromatography analysis showed that recombinant polyhistidine-tagged human BHMT is a tetramer. S-Adenosylmethionine (SAMe) has no effect on the recombinant BHMT's ability to methylate homocysteine nor does the enzyme appear to bind SAMe when examined by microcalorimetry. 2002 Elsevier
Science (USA)

Homocysteine, an intermediate in the active methyl cycle, is an independent risk factor for the development of arteriosclerotic heart disease (1). Elevated homocysteine levels can result from deficiencies in any one of the enzymes used to process homocysteine in the body. The enzyme betaine:homocysteine S-methyltransferase (BHMT)2 catalyzes the conversion of betaine and homocysteine to dimethylglycine and methionine, respectively. The better-known folate/vitamin B-12-dependent methionine synthase (EC 2.1.1.13) is the only other enzyme known to methylate homocysteine in mammalian cells. BHMT plays a key role in the regulation of methionine metabolism by maintaining hepatic concentrations of methionine during periods of inadequate intake of this amino acid (2, 3) and by removing excessive homocysteine (4). In addition to the role of BHMT in methionine conservation, the utilization of betaine by BHMT is an obligatory reaction in the catabolism of choline in mammalian tissues (5). Earlier in vitro studies have indicated that the recycling of homocysteine to methionine by remethylation is shared equally between BHMT and methionine synthase (1). Oral doses of betaine have been used therapeutically to reduce homocysteine (6­8) in patients
2 Abbreviations used: BHMT, betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase; SAMe, S-adenosylmethionine; DL-Hcy, DL-homocysteine; BME, -mercaptoethanol; EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; IPTG, isopropyl- -D-thiogalactopyranoside; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; SDS­PAGE, sodium dodecyl sulfate­polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; ITC, isothermal titration calorimetry; NEB, New England Biolabs; MCS, multiple cloning site; LB, Luria­Bertani; NTA, nitrilotriacetic acid; CBS, cystathionine -synthase.

Key Words: homocysteine; betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase; S-adenosylmethionine; betaine; atherosclerosis; crystallization; expression vector.

1 To whom correspondence should be addressed at Room 372, Wilson Pharmacy, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30605. Fax: (706) 542-3398. E-mail: cmomany@rx.uga.edu.

1046-5928/02 $35.00 2002 Elsevier Science (USA) All rights reserved.

73

74

BOSE, GREENSPAN, AND MOMANY

suffering from homocystinuria due to cystathionine -synthase deficiency and nonresponsive to vitamin B6 therapy. The efficacy of betaine treatment, which could be partly due to increased methylation of homocysteine by the BHMT-catalyzed reaction, makes BHMT a pharmacologically interesting target for the treatment of homocystinuria. BHMT is a zinc metalloenzyme (9) that shares limited homology to the N-terminal region of Escherichia coli methionine synthase (10) and also E. coli S-methylmethionine:homocysteine methyltransferase (11). Human BHMT (subunit MW 45,000) isolated from liver has a reported Mr of 270,000 making it a hexamer in solution. Studies on the enzyme isolated from rat liver have demonstrated that S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) inhibits BHMT (12). However, a lack of sequence similarity between BHMT and other SAMe binding proteins suggests that BHMT does not have a SAMe binding motif. The recent discovery of a new BHMT gene in humans and mice, betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase-2 (BHMT-2) that has 73% amino acid identity to BHMT (13) may clarify some of these discrepancies. Since BHMT preferentially utilizes betaine as the methyl donor and simultaneously reduces the choline levels, BHMT-2 might interact with SAMe as an alternative methyl donor. All these biochemical aspects of the enzyme could be better understood if the atomic structure of the enzymes were known. Structural information obtained by X-ray crystallographic studies could be helpful to identify the critical residues involved in its mechanism, predict mutations in BHMT that could make individuals predisposed to heart disease, and discover better methyl donors since they could be more potent than betaine in lowering plasma homocysteine (10). Here we report the overexpression of recombinant human liver BHMT in E. coli using a modified pET28b vector designed by us. The modified vector uses SapI restriction sites, which because of its seven-base recognition sequence, occur rarely in particular in human genes. We produced amino terminal histidine-tagged BHMT, which enabled us to purify the enzyme by a quick, two-step process using metal affinity and ionexchange chromatography. The molecular weight determination of the purified BHMT using size-exclusion chromatography supports our crystallographically derived suggestion that the recombinant enzyme is a tetramer (14). We also studied the effect of SAMe on the activity of BHMT to compare the human enzyme to the one in the rat using the same strategy, a radiochemical assay, performed in the rat enzyme study. Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) of BHMT was done to confirm our finding that SAMe does not directly interact with BHMT.

MATERIALS AND METHODS Materials. A sample of an expanded human liver cDNA library (Stratagene) was provided by Dr. H. Dailey's lab at the University of Georgia. PCR-Script, Seamless, and Quick-Change kits and BL21 (DE3) RIL cells for expression were purchased from Stratagene. The expression vector, pET28b, was from Novagen. Betaine and Dowex-OH were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO). American Radiolabeled Chemicals, Inc. (St. Louis, MO) was the source of [14C]betaine labeled in the methyl groups. The Molecular Genetics Instrumentation Facility at the University of Georgia performed DNA sequencing and synthesis of oligonucleotides. Oligonucleotide sequences are shown in Table 1. Restriction enzymes were obtained from Promega, Boehringer Mannheim, and New England Biolabs. SapI (2000 U/ml) came from New England Biolabs (NEB). All other reagents were of the highest analytical or molecular grade available from commercial vendors. Creation of SapI-based expression vector for crystallization purposes. A T7-promoter-based vector, pET28b, was used as the template vector for further modification. The single SapI site of the vector at position 3108 was knocked out by site-directed mutagenesis (primers, Sap-knockout Prim1 and Sap-knockout Prim2) using the Quick-Change protocol (Stratagene), which entails PCR amplification of the template with Pfu polymerase using mutation primers, followed by DpnI digestion of the original template. The vector with the correct mutation was identified by restriction analysis using SapI. Utilizing the NcoI and EcoRI sites present in the original pET28b vector's multiple cloning site (MCS), DNA encoding a polyhistidine tag (His5) was introduced after the initiating ATG with a double overlapping SapI site placed between the ATG and a double stop codon (primers, NHSap-Forward and NHSapReverse). The resulting vector called pET28b-NHSap can incorporate any DNA of interest with SapI sites flanking at both ends of the DNA (Fig. 1). Digestion with SapI detaches the recognition site from both the vector and the desired insert which allows the sticky ends flanking the desired sequences to ligate and form a seamless junction. Despite the removal of the SapI restriction site near the origin of replication, the vector appears stable. Cloning of BHMT into the pET28b-NHSap construct. The DNA encoding BHMT was amplified by PCR from a human liver cDNA library (Stratagene). The PCR reactions were performed using Pfu Turbo DNA polymerase (Stratagene) with the oligonucleotide primers BHMT forward and BHMT reverse (Table 1) and analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis. The resulting 1220-bp PCR product was then ligated into the

BHMT EXPRESSION AND CHARACTERIZATION FOR CRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STUDIES

75

TABLE 1 Oligonucleotides Used for the Creation of the SapI Knockout Vector and the Cloning of BHMT
Primer BHMT forward BHMT reverse Sap-knockout Prim1 Sap-knockout Prim2 NHSap-Forward NHSap-Reverse NHSap BHMT-Forward NHSap BHMT-Reverse
a

Sequence 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 TGTCTGGACACCACAAAGATGCC 3 TTGTAGGAACTGTGACCCAAACACC 3 GAAAATACCGCATCAGGCWCTWTTCCGCTTCCTCGCTCAC 3 a GTGAGCGAGGAAGCGGAAWAGWGCCTGATGCGGTATTTTC 3 a CATGCACCATCATCATCACTGAAGAGCTCTTCATAAT 3 GTGGTAGTAGTAGTGACTTCTCGAGAAGTATTATTAA 3 CGCTCTTCTCACATGCCACCCGTTG 3 TGCTCTTCGTTACTGTGATTTGAATTTTTG 3

W

A or T.

PCR product compatible vector pCRScript, and the desired clone was identified as white colonies on IPTG/ X-GAL plates. The DNA sequence of one clone containing the BHMT insert was confirmed by restriction analysis and sequencing. The PCR vector containing the protein coding sequence of BHMT was further PCR amplified with SapI restriction sites engineered upstream of the first ATG of the cDNA and with a C-terminal stop codon so that the gene was in the proper reading frame with an N-terminal purification tag (primers, NHSap BHMT-Forward and NHSap BHMTReverse). Synthesis of the desired PCR product was again verified by agarose electrophoresis, and the product was purified using a PCR Quick Spin kit (Qiagen). This PCR product was then inserted into the expression construct pET28b-NHSap using the "Seamless Strategy" of Stratagene, but using SapI rather than Eam1104 as the restriction enzyme. Seventy-five nanograms of the modified pET28b vector and 50 ng PCR

product (1:2 molar ratio) were digested together with 2 units of SapI in a 10- l reaction overnight at 37 C (NEB-Buffer 4). To the digested mix, 1 unit T4 DNA ligase (Gibco), 4 l of 5 ligase buffer, 6 additional units of SapI restriction enzyme (3 l), and 2 l of water were added to get a 20- l reaction volume. After overnight ligation, 1 l of the ligation reaction was transformed into 40 l E. coli strain XL1-Blue (Stratagene) by electroporation. The colonies were screened for the vector containing the insert by single colony screening and restriction analysis. The resulting expression construct was then verified by DNA sequencing and named pET28b-NHBhmt. Expression of N-terminal polyhistidine-tagged BHMT. The expression construct, pET28b-NHBhmt, was then transformed into electrocompetent BL21 Codon Plus (DE3) RIL cells (Stratagene) by electroporation. Two liters of LB medium (1 L per Fernbauch flask),

FIG. 1. Scheme for constructing the SapI based expression vector.

76

BOSE, GREENSPAN, AND MOMANY

each containing 50 g/ml kanamycin and 250 M zinc chloride, were inoculated with a 2-ml overnight culture. The zinc chloride is added to ensure adequate occupancy of the Zn in this metalloenzyme. After growing the culture to A600 0.6 at 37 C, the culture was transferred to room temperature and then induced with 0.5 mM IPTG for 4 h and maintained at room temperature. Following the induction period, the cells were collected by centrifugation at 13,000g for 20 min (4 C) and resuspended in 40 ml of extraction buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate, 0.5 M NaCl, pH 7.4) containing a EDTAfree protease tablet (Boehringer-Mannheim) and either used immediately or frozen at 20 C for later use. The cell suspension was cooled in ice to 10 C and sonicated for 3 min in 1-min increments with a Fisher Scientific 550 sonic dismembrator set at 50% duty cycle while maintaining the temperature below 15 C. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 60,000g for 15 min (4 C), and the clarified supernatant was purified by chromatography. A small aliquot was frozen at 20 C for further assay. Purification of recombinant BHMT. The entire puri¨ fication process was done on a Pharmacia AKTA HPLC system at room temperature. The first step of purification was by Ni2+-metal chelate affinity chromatography with a Pharmacia NTA HiTrap chelating 5-ml column. The clarified lysate was applied (1 ml/min) to the nickelcharged NTA column that had been equilibrated with 20 mM sodium phosphate, 0.5 M NaCl, pH 7.4. After washing unbound protein off, the protein was then eluted using a linear gradient of imidazole (0­0.5 M imidazole, 0.5 M NaCl, 20 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.4) over 20 column vol. The protein eluted out as two closely associated peaks. The fractions corresponding to the two peaks were pooled separately and the purity was checked by SDS­PAGE gel electrophoresis using a Pharmacia PHAST system. Even though SDS­PAGE analysis showed a single band after the metal chelate column, a second purification step, utilizing anion-exchange chromatography, was performed to improve the prospects of obtaining better quality crystals. After the metal chelate chromatography, the major protein peak was dialyzed into 50 mM Tris­HCl buffer (pH 8.0), 5 mM -mercaptoethanol (BME), and 0.5 mM EDTA using 2 1-L changes. The dialyzed protein was then loaded onto the Pharmacia HiTrap Q column (5 ml) equilibrated with 50 mM Tris­HCl (pH 8), 5 mM BME, and 0.5 mM EDTA. The protein was eluted using a linear gradient of 0­1.0 M NaCl over 20 column vol. The purity was again checked by SDS­PAGE analysis. At all stages of the purification, small aliquots of protein were saved at 20 C. Later, the protein concentrations of the frozen aliquots were determined by the Lowry method (15) using bovine serum albumin as a standard and then assayed for BHMT activity.

In vitro assay for BHMT activity. The standard radiochemical assay for BHMT activity that has been previously described (10, 16) was used with some modifications. DL-Hcy was prepared fresh as described by Garrow (10). All the reaction tubes were capped with rubber stoppers and kept on ice until the assay was started. The final concentrations of the assay components were 10 mM DL-homocysteine, 2.5 mM betaine (1 Ci/ml), 5 mM BME, and 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0). The reaction was initiated with the addition of protein sample to give a total volume of 0.5 ml and the reactants were incubated at 37 C for 1 h. Following the incubation, the samples were chilled in ice water and 2.5 ml of ice-cold water was added. The samples were applied to a Dowex 1-X4 (OH-; 200­400 mesh) column (5 ml), which was previously equilibrated with 50 mM Tris­ HCl buffer, pH 8.0. The unreacted betaine was washed from the column with water (4 5 ml). Dimethylglycine and methionine were eluted into scintillation vials with 6 ml of 1.5 N HCl. The exact volume of the elution for each sample was noted. To 1 ml of the eluted sample, 750 l of 2 N NaOH and 12 ml of scintillation mixture (Ecolume, ICN) were added and then counted. Of the counts measured, methionine contributed one-third and dimethylglycine, two-thirds. For each assay, blanks were prepared from the same buffer conditions as the sample to be measured. All samples were assayed in triplicate. Molecular weight determination. The molecular weight of the native BHMT was determined by gel filtration on a Sephacryl S-300 high-resolution column (26 60 cm) (Pharmacia Biotech). Calibration was done with the following protein standards: thyroglobulin (669,000 Da), apoferritin (443,000 Da), -amylase (200,000 Da), alcohol dehydrogenase (150,000 Da), albumin (66,000 Da), and carbonic anhydrase (20,000 Da). Aliquots of the post-Q column BHMT sample (1 ml of 1 mg/ml) were applied to the column that had been previously equilibrated with 50 mM Tris­HCl, 5 mM BME, and 0.5 mM EDTA, pH 8. SAMe inhibition study using the radiochemical assay. SAMe was added to the previously described radiochemical assay conditions to achieve three concentrations of 100, 200, and 400 nM. This study was done in two parts. In the first part the enzyme was preincubated with the above concentrations of SAMe at 37 C for 30 min. The preincubated enzyme was then assayed by the normal radioactive assay. In the second part of the study, the same concentrations of SAMe were added to the enzyme assay mixture immediately before starting the assay. The specific activities of the enzyme samples from both parts of the study were compared to look for SAMe inhibition of BHMT. All the samples of enzyme were assayed twice. The purity and the

BHMT EXPRESSION AND CHARACTERIZATION FOR CRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STUDIES

77

stability of SAMe were verified by electrospray mass spectroscopy. Qualitative ITC. ITC experiments were performed using an isothermal titration calorimeter of the MCS system from Microcal, Inc. (Northampton, MA). The reference cell was filled with water. All solutions were degassed for 10 min with gentle stirring under vacuum. Solutions of the protein were filled in the sample cell (cell volume 1.3424 ml) and titrated with DL-homocysteine and SAMe. Ligand solutions were prepared in the same buffer as the protein sample. The ligand concentration in the injection syringe was usually 25 times higher than the concentration of protein binding sites. In individual titrations, injections of 5 l of 1 mM SAMe were added from the computer-controlled 250- l microsyringe into the protein solution (2 mg/ml) at 4-min intervals with stirring at 350 rpm. A positive control experiment was performed by injecting DL-homocysteine (1 mM) into the protein solution. Control experiments to nullify the effects of dilution were performed by making identical injections of homocysteine and SAMe into a cell containing buffer with no protein. RESULTS Cloning of BHMT and preparation of expression construct pET28b-NHBhmt. The PCR-amplified BHMT from the human cDNA liver library was cloned into pCRScript cloning vector using the vector's SrfI site. Successful selection of the right clone containing the gene in the desired orientation was achieved by blue­ white selection and restriction analysis. The sequence analysis of the clone matched with the published sequence (10). The T7-based expression vector pET28b was modified so that it contains two SapI sites and a polyhistidine tag oriented on the amino terminus of the protein sequence (pET28b-NHSap). The sequenced BHMT gene within the PCR vector was then PCR reamplified with SapI sites flanking the gene. Digestion of both the vector and the PCR product together with SapI was followed directly by ligation. After transformation into electrocompetent E. coli (XL1-Blue) cells, kanamycin-resistant colonies were screened for proper insertion using restriction analysis. The correct clone (pET28b-NHBhmt), rechecked by restriction analysis and sequencing, was used for further transformation into the expression strain. Expression and purification of BHMT. The expression of the N-terminal histidine tagged BHMT was carried out in BL21 Codon Plus (DE3) RIL cells, a strain that increases the concentrations of several rare (but common for eukaryotes) E. coli codons. Initially some solubility problems at 37 C were encountered, but they were overcome by growing the cells at room temperature. BHMT was then purified by metal chelate chromatography. BHMT eluted out as two closely associated

peaks. The SDS­PAGE analysis of the two peaks could not differentiate between them (Fig. 2). It could be because of some proteolytic degradation presumably caused by bacterial exopeptidase activity as shown in earlier work (9). The two peaks were assayed and were found to have approximately the same specific activity. So the main peak of the protein was considered for further analysis. This single step of purification reported here enriched the activity about 15-fold with a final yield of 40% and the preparation was judged to be homogenous after SDS­PAGE yielding a single band of Mr 45,000 as shown in Fig. 2. The preparation shown in Table 2 had a specific activity of 1432 U/mg with 1 unit defined as nanomoles of methionine formed per hour. The protein purification took a total of 4 h up to this step. The single most important factor in the success of a crystallization experiment is the quality of the macromolecule. Thus our major emphasis was to ensure that the protein is of the highest purity. So we decided to add an additional purification step using anion-exchange chromatography. Total purification time including dialysis was 8 h. This final purification step yielded a homogenous protein of specific activity of 1531 U/mg. This is in the similar range of the activity found for protein isolated from human liver (1100 U/mg) or recombinant enzyme (1957 U/mg) (9). Size-exclusion chromatography. Protein standards were used to generate a calibration curve of log molecular weight versus elution volume (Fig. 3). BHMT eluted as a single symmetric peak between alcohol dehydrogenase (150,000 Da) and -amylase (200,000 Da). When

FIG. 2. SDS­PAGE analysis of BHMT purification. BHMT samples after each purification step were treated with SDS­PAGE sample buffer and loaded (0.2 l) onto a Pharmacia PHAST homogeneous 20% gel and then silver stained. Lane 1, molecular weight markers with the masses marked along the side of the lane; lane 2, crude extract (1:25 dilution); lane 3, crude extract (1:10 dilution); lane 4, first (major) peak of BHMT after affinity chromatography; lane 5, second (minor) peak of BHMT after affinity chromatography; lane 6, BHMT after ion-exchange column.

78

BOSE, GREENSPAN, AND MOMANY

TABLE 2 Purification Table of Recombinant Human Liver BHMT
Fraction 1. Crude 2. Nickel affinity Peak I Peak II 3. Anion exchange
a b

Volume (ml) 81 29 1 18

Activitya (U) 767 859 958 1074

Proteinb (mg/ml) 8 0.6 0.6 0.7

Sp act (U/mg) 96 1432 1558 1531

Purification (x-fold) 1 14.9 16.2 15.9

Yield (%) 100 40.1 1.5 31.1

Units are nmol methionine formed per hour. Protein determined by Lowry assay.

calculated, the BHMT peak was found to elute at a volume consistent with a molecular mass near 180,000 Da. This result, when combined with the fact that BHMT is composed of 45,000 Da subunits, suggests that the recombinant His-tagged human BHMT is a tetramer. SAMe inhibition study using radiolabeled assay. As indicated by Table 3, the activity of BHMT was found to be unaffected by the incorporation of SAMe in the assay. When the enzyme was incubated with the given concentrations of SAMe, the specific activity of the enzyme remained the same. Contrary to the results obtained from previous rat liver study, no inhibition of human BHMT by SAMe was observed (12).

Qualitative isothermal titration calorimetry. In order to confirm BHMT's possible affinity for SAMe, binding studies were conducted employing isothermal titration calorimetry. During the course of these experiments, DL-homocysteine and SAMe were titrated individually into a solution of BHMT at an experimental temperature of 30 C. For each injection of the ligands, the heat change inside the protein was recorded. For each ligand, a control was performed by titrating the ligand into a buffer solution with no protein. If binding between the protein and the ligand occurs, a clearly measurable positive or negative heat change, which is considerably different from the control, should be observed and, as the experiment proceeds and binding

FIG. 3. Standard curve of log molecular weight versus elution volume of the protein standards and BHMT.

BHMT EXPRESSION AND CHARACTERIZATION FOR CRYSTALLOGRAPHIC STUDIES

79

TABLE 3 Effect of S-Adenosylmethionine on Betaine:Homocysteine Methyltransferase
Concentration of SAMe in 0.5 ml reaction (nM) 0 100 200 400 100 200 400 Sp act of BHMT (U/mg)a 1536 1469 1520 1450 1442 1400 1500

Study Control: No addition of SAMe Preincubation of BHMT with SAMe at 37 C for 30 min Addition of SAMe immediately before the assay reaction

a All values indicate the average of three readings taken for each concentration of SAMe.

is saturated, this heat change should decrease in value finally falling to zero. When DL-homocysteine was titrated into the buffer with no protein, no significant heats of dilution were observed. But the titration of BHMT against DL-homocysteine was characterized by a significant exothermic heat change. The binding isotherm of DL-Hcy showed negative heat change at the beginning of the experiment and then it gradually decreased as binding sites were saturated. Thus DL-Hcy binds to BHMT. However, titration with SAMe showed a different behavior. The control titration of SAMe into the buffer solution showed a negative heat change. Also the titration of the SAMe into the protein showed the same heat signals as with the buffer but no heat effect typical of a binding reaction was observed. When the heat change per injection of SAMe was plotted versus the injection number, no titration curve could be obtained (results not shown). This supports the radiochemical assay data suggesting that BHMT does not bind SAMe. Due to the commercial unavailability of L-homocysteine, no exact determination of a binding constant was possible. Only a qualitative statement about BHMT's ability to bind homocysteine and SAMe could thus be obtained. DISCUSSION Commercial expression vectors tend to introduce additional amino acids, beyond a simple purification tag, that confer undesired conformational flexibility and thus decrease the likelihood of crystallization. The earlier methods of expressing BHMT as a fusion protein with -galactosidase was not considered appropriate for crystallization studies (10, 17). So a short purification tag like the polyhistidine tag that does not require protease cleavage was preferred. The seamless strategy

used to make the expression construct simplifies cloning and also decreases the number of superfluous amino acids on the amino or carboxyl ends. Further, the use of SapI ensures that most genes can be inserted into this vector because of the rare occurrence of the sevenbase restriction recognition sequence. Introduction of the His-tagged protein allowed us to adopt a simple one-step purification protocol. A complete purification could be performed within 4 h on our system compared to the earlier purification procedures, which took 16 to 18 h (10, 17). But for crystallization purposes we did include one additional step of purification by anion-exchange chromatography that added an extra 4 h including dialysis time. As published in our preliminary X-ray crystallography studies of the recombinant human BHMT crystals, the noncrystallographic twofold symmetry and the crystallographic C2 (monoclinic) symmetry supported the likelihood that the protein is a tetramer with molecular 222 symmetry (14), but this finding was inconsistent with the earlier reports that human BHMT is a hexamer (18). So to support the crystallographic observations, a gel filtration study of the recombinant enzyme was performed. The elution profile of the recombinant BHMT proved to be consistent with the native BHMT being a homotetramer with a molecular mass of 180,000 Da. This observation is contrary to the results obtained by Skiba et al., wherein the BHMT isolated from human liver was shown to be a hexamer with molecular mass around 270,000 Da. This discrepancy could be a result of either our recombinant protein having a His-tag at the N-terminus or some posttranslational modification, both of which could confer different oligomerization properties to the protein. Alternatively, the presence of stabilizing agents like N,N-dimethylglycine and DLhomocysteine used by Skiba et al. may change the physical behavior of BHMT (18). The isothermal titration calorimetry and SAMe inhibition studies showed that SAMe does not inhibit or interact with BHMT. BHMT has significant similarity with E. coli methionine synthase, but only to the Nterminal part of methionine synthase (residues 2 to 353), which is the homocysteine and zinc binding site (10, 19). The SAMe binding domain of methionine synthase is at the C-terminal end (10). So it seems illogical that BHMT should have a SAMe binding site based on sequence similarity arguments. The rat liver BHMT study showed that rat BHMT is inhibited by SAMe suggesting a negative regulatory aspect of SAMe on BHMT. Downregulation of BHMT by SAMe is metabolically sensible as high SAMe would indicate adequate methionine and less need for the remethylation pathway. This action of SAMe on BHMT is in contrast to its action on cystathionine -synthase (CBS), the enzyme in the transsulfuration pathway, where SAMe

80

BOSE, GREENSPAN, AND MOMANY (1982) Regulation of hepatic betaine-homocysteine methyltransferase by dietary methionine. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 108(1), 344­348. Finkelstein, J. D., Martin, J. J., Kyle, W. E., and Harris, B. J. (1978) Methionine metabolism in mammals: Regulation of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase content of rat tissues. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 191, 53­160. Finkelstein, J. D., Harris, B. J., Martin, J. J., and Kyle, W. E (1983) Regulation of hepatic betaine-homocysteine methyltransferase by dietary betaine. J. Nutr. 113, 519­521. Smolin, L. A., Benevenga, J. N., and Berlow, S. (1981) The use of betaine for the treatment of homocystinuria. J. Pediatr. 99(3), 467­472. (1984) Betaine therapy for homocystinuria. Nutr. Rev. 42(5), 180­ 181. Mudd, S. H., Levy, H. L., and Skovby, F. (1995) "The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease" (Scriver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S., and Vale, D., Eds.), pp. 1279­1327, McGraw­Hill, New York. Millian, N. S., and Garrow, T. A. (1998) Human betaine-homocysteine methyltransferase is a zinc metalloenzyme. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 356, 93­98. Garrow, T. A. (1996) Purification, kinetic properties, and cDNA cloning of mamalian betaine-homocysteine methyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 22831­22838. Thanbichler, M., Neuhieri, B., and Bock, A. (1999) S-Methylmethionine metabolism in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 181(2), 662­665. Finkelstein, J. D., and Martin, J. J. (1984) Inactivation of betainehomocysteine methyltransferase by adenosylmethionine and adenosylethionine. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 118, 14­19. Chadwick, L. H., McCandless, S. E., et al. (2000) Betaine-homocysteine methyltransferase-2: cDNA cloning, gene sequence, physical mapping and expression of the human and mouse genes. Genomics 70, 66­73. Bose, N., and Momany, C. (2001) Crystallization and preliminary X-ray crystallographic studies of recombinant human betaine: homocysteine S-methyltransferase. Acta Crystallogr. D57, 431­433. Lowry, O. H., Rosenbrough, N. J., Farr, A. L., and Randall, R. J. (1951) Protein measurement with the Folin­phenol reagent. J. Biol. Chem. 193, 265. Skiba, W. E., Wells, M. S., et al. (1987) Betaine-homocysteine Smethyltransferase (human). Methods Enzymol. 143, 384­390. Breska, A. P., and Garrow, T. A. (1999) Recombinant human liver betaine-homocysteine S-methyltransferase: Identification of three cysteine residues critical for zinc binding. Biochemistry 38, 13991­13998. Skiba, W. E., Taylor, P. M., et al. (1982) Human hepatic methionine biosynthesis, purification and characterization of betaine:homocysteine S-methyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 257(24), 14944­14948. Goulding, C. W., and Matthews, R. G. (1997) Cobalamin-dependent methionine synthase from Escherichia coli: Involvement of zinc in homocysteine activation. Biochemistry 36, 15749­15757. Neuhierl, B., Thanbichler, M., et al. (1999) A family of S-methylmethionine-dependent thiol/selenol methyltransferases: Role in selenium tolerance and evolutionary relation. J. Biol. Chem. 274(9), 5407­5414.

activates the enzyme. One consequence of the possible opposing actions of SAMe on CBS and BHMT is that any therapeutic approach that utilizes a SAMe-like molecule will in turn activate CBS while inhibiting BHMT. Since the active methyl cycle is involved in many important metabolic pathways, it seems important not to inhibit methionine synthase or BHMT. Activation of BHMT alone may be adequate to significantly reduce homocysteine levels since this will increase SAMe levels and thus in turn activate CBS. Recently the discovery of a second BHMT homologue (BHMT-2) in humans and mice, which has 73% amino acid identity to BHMT, was reported. BHMT and BHMT-2 have sequence similarity to S-methylmethionine­homocysteine S-methyltransferases found in E. coli and Astragalus bisculatus, which interact with both S-methylmethionine and SAMe (11, 20). There is thus a possibility that BHMT-2 preferentially uses one of the alternative substrates like SAMe as a methyl donor (9). The results of the rat liver BHMT showing that SAMe inhibits BHMT have to be scrutinized more closely because the assay was done on a partially purified enzyme. It could contain a mixture of BHMT and BHMT-2. If so, BHMT-2 might utilize SAMe preferentially as a methyl donor over the 14C-labeled betaine. Since SAMe is not radiolabeled in the assay, nonradiolabeled methionine would be produced giving a false interpretation of SAMe inhibition of BHMT. Alternatively, it is also important to concede that the lack of SAMe interaction with our recombinant BHMT could be a result of the N-terminal polyhistidine residues that might be sterically hindering the larger ligand SAMe, while allowing L-homocysteine to bind unhindered. Structural studies of BHMT and BHMT-2 could help to unravel this discrepancy. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Tammy Dailey for a sample of the cDNA library used for construction of the expression vector. We also thank Dr. Harry Dailey and Florian Schubot for their help in the use of microcalorimeter.

4.

5.

6.

7. 8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16. 17.

18.

REFERENCES
1. Finkelstein, J. D., and Martin, J. J. (1984) Methionine metabolism in mammals: Distribution of homocysteine between competing pathways. J. Biol. Chem. 259, 9508­9513. 2. Finkelstein, J. D., Martin, J. J., Harris, B. J., and Kyle, W. E. (1982) Regulation of the betaine content of rat liver. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 218, 169­173. 3. Finkelstein, J. D., Harris, B. J., Martin, J. J., and Kyle, W. E. 19.

20.

