Structure, Vol. 10, 1151­1157, September, 2002, 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

PII S0969-2126(02)00833-X

Previews

Polynucleotide Kinase: A Versatile Molecule Makes a Clean Break

The structure of T4 polynucleotide kinase reveals a tetramer that could process eight ends of four substrates simultaneously. T4 polynucleotide kinase (PNK) is one of the most frequently used enzymes in molecular biology. In vivo, T4 PNK employs 5 -kinase and 3 -phosphatase activities to repair the damaged termini of nicked tRNA molecules during a host-cell suicide response. Now, the structure of T4 PNK has been described in two recent papers, one of which appears in this issue of Structure [1, 2]. Where they overlap, the two studies are remarkably congruent. The polypeptide is comprised of two distinct domains of approximately equal size separated by a flexible loop, with the N- and C-terminal domains harboring 5 -kinase and 3 -phosphatase activity, respectively (see Figure, panel A). The kinase domain is comprised of a central four-stranded parallel sheet flanked by six helices. Four of the helices and their interconnecting loops form a lid-like structure over the kinase active site and create a positively charged tunnel through the middle of the enzyme. The phosphate tail of ATP is buried within one end of the tunnel and bound by the tunnel lid and the active site, and the second tunnel opening comprises a basic groove capable of accommodating the single-stranded 5 terminus of a polynucleotide. The 5 -OH terminus points into the tunnel and is bound by the basic groove and the first 3 -phosphate of the polynucleotide. Consequently, the ATP phosphodonor and 5 -OH phosphoacceptor are located ° 3.3 A apart and face each other within the tunnel, ready for the in-line phosphoryl transfer reaction catalyzed by PNK. Confirmation of this elegant model will surely emerge when the structure of PNK bound to a polynucleotide is determined. The phosphatase domain of T4 PNK is a compact structure with an acidic cleft on one side that contains the active site. Those residues previously identified as critical for phosphatase activity cluster in this cleft. The structure of the phosphatase domain is less informative than that of the kinase domain with respect to how the polynucleotide substrate is bound. The crystal structure of the phosphatase domain bound to its substrate should clarify this issue. Perhaps the most intriguing aspect of the PNK structure is its quaternary structure. An interface between the phosphatase domains of two monomers creates a dimer, and an additional interface between the kinase domains of two dimers creates a tetramer (see Figure, panel B). A key feature of the tetramer is that the kinase and phosphatase active sites of adjacent monomers are ° only 35 A apart and face each other across a surface valley. In contrast, the kinase and phosphatase subunits

within each single monomer face in opposite directions and are physically separated by three helices and a sheet. Consequently, Galburt et al. propose that the 5 -OH and 3 -P termini of a single polynucleotide molecule might be processed simultaneously by the opposing active sites of adjacent monomers within the tetramer (see Figure, panel B). Theoretically, all eight termini of four separate polynucleotide molecules could be processed at the same time. What might be the advantage of this arrangement? Perhaps this enables T4 PNK to cope with the large and rapid increase in nicked tRNA molecules during the host-cell suicide response. If monomeric and if a single subunit is unable to process both ends of a single molecule simultaneously, then each tRNA molecule would require two separate binding events for the repair of both termini. Bifunctional PNK homologs have been identified in eukaryotic cells [3­5]. The homology between these polypeptides, which are generally larger than T4 PNK, is restricted to the kinase and phosphatase domains (see Figure, panel C). While it is likely that the structures of the kinase and phosphatase domains are very similar to those of T4 PNK, on the basis of different substrate specificities of these enzymes, one might predict several differences. For example, whereas T4 PNK is poorly active on recessed termini within duplex DNA, the mammalian enzyme prefers such substrates [6]. The structure of the T4 PNK kinase domain can nicely explain the preference of this enzyme for single-stranded termini because the tunnel entrance that putatively receives the polynucleotide is too narrow to accommodate a duplex. It will be of interest to determine whether the corresponding tunnel entrance is wider in mammalian PNK. A further difference is that, whereas T4 PNK can phosphorylate 3 -nucleoside monophosphates, mammalian PNK requires a minimum chain length of 8 nucleotides [6]. The likely explanation for this is that mammalian PNK lacks the residue that, in T4 PNK, binds the 3 -phosphate of a 3 -NMP (R38). Perhaps mammalian PNK binds its substrate solely via the basic groove at the tunnel entrance, thereby necessitating nucleotide substrates with longer chain length. There are a number of other differences between the eukaryotic and T4 enzymes. Whereas the T4 protein is a homotetramer, the mammalian enzyme appears to be a monomer [7]. The reversal in order of the kinase and phosphatase domains in the eukaryotic protein may be relevant in this respect [3­5]. One possible reason why mammalian PNK is not a homotetramer is that, unlike T4 PNK, this enzyme is not routinely required to deal with a large and acute increase in a small molecule substrate. Rather, eukaryotic PNK appears to be involved in the repair of chromosomal strand breaks that arise continuously, but at a low frequency [8, 9]. Moreover, unlike nicked tRNA, the majority of endogenous nicked DNA most likely arises from oxidative attack and would require PNK activity at just one terminus. Thus, having PNK as a tetramer capable of processing both ends of multiple molecules simultaneously may not be an advantage. In contrast to T4 PNK, mammalian PNK

Structure 1152

Organization of Protein Domains in T4 and Human PNK (A) Organization of the kinase (red box) and phosphatase (blue box) domains of a T4 PNK polypeptide. (B) Organization of a T4 PNK tetramer. The interfaces between the kinase domains and phosphatase domains that form the tetramer are indicated by overlapping red and blue boxes, respectively. The kinase and phosphatase domains proposed to cooperate to repair opposite ends of the same polynucleotide molecule are indicated by small circles of the same color. Note that the domains that cooperate in this manner are provided by different monomers and that there are potentially four such cooperating pairs per tetramer. (C) Comparison of the domain structure of T4 and human PNK polypeptides. (D) Alignment of the putative FHA domain of human PNK with the consensus FHA domain (NCBI, CDD pfam 00498.5). Identical residues are boxed, and those residues most highly conserved in FHA domains are underlined. FHA residues underlined in red are those that directly contact the phosphopeptide [10]. The sheet structure of FHA domains, as previously defined for Rad53 FHA1 [10], is also indicated.

is required to locate relatively rare, but potentially lethal, chromosomal breaks. This may explain why mammalian PNK interacts with XRCC1, a scaffold protein that helps recruit repair enzymes at sites of single-strand breakage [8]. The need to interact with other proteins may also explain why eukaryotic PNK is larger than T4 PNK. Indeed, a careful analysis of the extended amino terminus of mammalian PNK identifies a putative phosphopeptide binding FHA domain (see Figure, panel D). Thus, future structural studies should illuminate not only how the core enzymatic domains of different PNK polypeptides are adapted to their respective substrates, but also how these versatile enzymes are recruited to the appropriate place at the appropriate time. Keith W. Caldecott Genome Damage and Stability Centre University of Sussex Falmer Brighton BN1 9RQ United Kingdom

Selected Reading 1. Wang, L.K., Lima, C.D., and Shuman, S. (2002). EMBO J. 21, 3873­3880. 2. Galburt, E.A., Pelletier, J., Wilson, G., and Stoddard, B.L. (2002). Structure 10, 1249­1260. 3. Vance, J.R., and Wilson, T.E. (2001). J. Biol. Chem. 276, 15073­ 15081. 4. Jilani, A., Ramotar, D., Slack, C., Ong, C., Yang, X.M., Scherer, S.W., and Lasko, D.D. (1999). J. Biol. Chem. 274, 24176­24186. 5. Karimi-Busheri, F., Daly, G., Robins, P., Canas, B., Pappin, D.J., Sgouros, J., Miller, G.G., Fakhrai, H., Davis, E.M., Le Beau, M.M., et al. (1999). J. Biol. Chem. 274, 24187­24194. 6. Karimi-Busheri, F., and Weinfeld, M. (1997). J. Cell. Biochem. 64, 258­272. 7. Mani, R.S., Karimi-Busheri, F., Cass, C.E., and Weinfeld, M. (2001). Biochemistry 40, 12967­12973. 8. Whitehouse, C.J., Taylor, R.M., Thistlethwaite, A., Zhang, H., Karimi-Busheri, F., Lasko, D.D., Weinfeld, M., and Caldecott, K.W. (2001). Cell 104, 1­11. 9. Chappell, C., Hanakahi, L.A., Karimi-Busheri, F., Weinfeld, M., and West, S.C. (2002). EMBO J. 21, 2827­2832. 10. Durocher, D., Taylor, I.A., Sarbassova, D., Haire, L.F., Westcott, S.L., Jackson, S.P., Smerdon, S.J., and Yaffe, M.B. (2000). Mol. Cell 6, 1169­1182.

Structure, Vol. 10, September, 2002, 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

PII S0969-2126(02)00834-1

New Light on the Integrin Switch

Recent structures of the integrin ectodomain and the cytoplasmic tail complex suggest a model for both "inside-out" and "outside-in" integrin signalling, whereby ligand binding and unclasping the cytoplasmic tails can shift integrin to a high-affinity form.

Among the most compelling problems in structural biology are those for which it is completely mysterious how a particular molecule accomplishes its function. Until recently, integrins posed just such a problem. Integrins are heterodimeric cell surface receptors with a large extracellular region, a single transmembrane region for each subunit, and typically small (20­70 amino acids) cytoplasmic tails. Integrins bind to other cell surface receptors and components of the extracellular matrix to mediate cell adhesion and signaling events in a wide variety of physiological processes [1, 2]. Electron micrographs of integrins reveal a globular head region of

