Gene 364 (2005) 108 ­ 113 www.elsevier.com/locate/gene

Role of inter and intramolecular interactions in protein­DNA recognition
M. Michael Gromiha a,, Joerg G. Siebers e , Samuel Selvaraj b , Hidetoshi Kono c,d , Akinori Sarai e
Computational Biology Research Center (CBRC), National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), AIST Tokyo Waterfront Bio-IT Research Building, 2-42 Aomi, Koto-ku, Tokyo, 135-0064, Japan b Department of Bioinformatics, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirapalli 620 024, India Neutron Science Research Center and Center for Promotion of Computational Science and Engineering, Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute (JAERI), 8-1, Umemidai, Kizu-cho, Souraku-gun, Kyoto 619-0215, Japan d PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Japan e Department of Biochemical Engineering and Science, Kyushu Institute of Technology (KIT), 680-4 Kawazu, Iizuka 820-8502, Japan Received 2 February 2005; received in revised form 27 June 2005; accepted 18 July 2005 Available online 24 October 2005 Received by K. Gardiner
a

c

Abstract Protein­DNA recognition plays an essential role in the regulation of gene expression. Regulatory proteins are known to recognize specific DNA sequences directly through atomic contacts between protein and DNA, and/or indirectly through the conformational properties of the DNA. In this work, we have analyzed the specificity of intermolecular interactions by statistical analysis of base­amino acid interactions within protein­ DNA complexes as well as the computer simulations of base­amino acid interactions. The specificity of the intramolecular interactions was studied by statistical analysis of the sequence-dependent DNA conformational parameters and the elastic properties of DNA. Systematic comparison of these specificities in a large number of protein­DNA complexes revealed that both intermolecular and intramolecular interactions contribute to the specificity of protein­DNA recognition, and their relative contributions vary depending upon the protein­DNA complex. We demonstrated that combination of the intermolecular and intramolecular energies leads to enhanced specificity and the combined energy could explain experimental data on binding affinity changes caused by base mutations. These results provided new insight into the relationship between specificity and structure in the process of protein­DNA recognition, which would lead to prediction of specific protein­DNA binding sites. © 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Protein­DNA recognition; Specificity; Statistical potential; Elastic properties; Structural data; Stiffness

1. Introduction Protein­DNA interactions play a key role in many vital processes, including regulation of gene expression, DNA replication and repair, and packaging. The remarkable specificity with which proteins recognize target DNA sequences is of considerable theoretical and practical importance, and its basis has been demonstrated through structural analysis of large numbers of protein­DNA complexes (Mandel-Gutfreund and Margalit, 1998; Nadassy et al., 1999; Luscombe and Thornton, 2002; Pailard and Lavery, 2004). Within these structures recognition involves, in part, direct contacts between amino acids and base pairs. These contacts are both redundant and flexible, suggesting that there is no simple code for the
 Corresponding author. Tel.: +81 3 3599 8046; fax: +81 3 3599 8081. E-mail address: michael-gromiha@aist.go.jp (M.M. Gromiha). 0378-1119/$ - see front matter © 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.gene.2005.07.022

specificity of DNA­protein interactions (Matthews, 1988; Pabo and Nekludova, 2000). In addition, the fact that mutation of bases not in direct contact with amino acids often affects the binding affinity (Szymczyna and Arrowsmith, 2000), which implies that water molecules bridging between amino acids and bases (Schwabe, 1997), conformational changes in the DNA (Harrington and Winicov, 1994), and/or flexibility (Hogan and Austin, 1987; Sarai et al., 1989; Olson et al., 1998) also affect protein­DNA binding specificity. However, the relative contribution of inter and intramolecular interactions to the overall specificity is not yet completely explored. We have developed a method for quantifying the specificity of intermolecular interactions based on the statistical analysis of the structures of protein­DNA complexes. We derived empirical potential functions for the specific interactions between bases and amino acids and used these potentials to examine the structure and specificity in protein­DNA

M.M. Gromiha et al. / Gene 364 (2005) 108­113

109

recognition. Further, we have systematically analyzed the specificity of protein­DNA interactions by computer simulations, in which the free energies of interactions between amino acid side chains and base pairs are computed by systematic sampling and Monte Carlo sampling methods. The specificity of the intramolecular interactions has been quantified from the calculation of conformational energy using base-pair step parameters of DNA obtained from protein­DNA complexes. Further, the influence of the elastic properties of DNA to protein­DNA binding specificity has been revealed from the relationship between DNA stiffness and binding free energy change. Our results showed that both intermolecular and intramolecular interactions contribute to the specificity of protein­DNA recognition and their relative contributions vary depending upon the protein­DNA complex. The combination of the intermolecular and intramolecular interaction energies derived from the statistical potentials lead to enhanced specificity. We discuss the relationship between structure and specificity in protein­DNA recognition by considering several examples. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Dataset We have considered a set of 62 non-redundant protein­ DNA complexes in which the pair-wise sequence identity is less than 25%. The same set of proteins was used elsewhere for understanding the symmetric/asymmetric and cooperative binding of protein­DNA complexes, predicting the DNA binding sites from three dimensional structures and the analysis of cation­ interactions in protein­DNA interface (Selvaraj et al., 2002; Gromiha et al., 2004a,b; Gromiha, 2005a). The coordinates of all the protein­DNA complex structures have been taken from the Protein Data Bank (Berman et al., 2000). 2.2. Computation of statistical potentials for intermolecular interactions The statistical potential of interactions between bases and amino acids has been derived from the distribution of amino acids around each base as explained earlier (Kono and Sarai, 1999). We defined a coordinate system by taking an origin N9 atom for A and G, and N1 atom for T and C. We considered the amino acids within a given box, and the box was divided into grids. Each amino acid residue has been represented by its C atom and the distributions of C atoms of amino acid residues have been transformed into statistical potentials using the following equations (Sippl, 1990): DEab ðsÞ ¼ -RT ln f ab ðsÞ ¼ f ab ðsÞ f ðsÞ

where mab is the number of observed pairs (amino acid a and base b), w is the weight given to each observation, f(s) is the relative frequency of occurrence of any amino acids at grid point s, and gab(s) is the equivalent relative frequency of occurrence of amino acid a against base b. R and T are gas constant and absolute temperature, respectively. Here, we used a box of |x| = |y| = 13.5 Å and |z| = 6 Å and a grid interval of 3 Å, which was determined by examining various intervals. By threading a set of random DNA sequences onto the template structure, we calculated the Z-score of the specific sequences against the random sequences, which represents the specificity of the complex. Assuming the additivity of potential energies, the sum of the potential energies [EPD = ab,s Eab(s)] for a given DNA sequence in a complexed form was defined as the energy for the sequences. The energy for a particular sequence, in a crystal structure for example, was normalized to measure specificity by the Z-score against random sequences. The Z-score was defined as (X - m) / , where X is the energy of a particular sequence, m is the mean energy of 50,000 random DNA sequences, and  is the standard deviation. 2.3. Computation of base­amino acid interaction energy by systematic sampling In this calculation, we placed the C atom of an amino acid around the base pair at different positions on the base plane. An initial side chain orientation is generated by specifying the polar angles,  and  formed by the direction cosines of the C­C bond vector. Side chain rotamers were generated by systematically varying the torsion angles. For each position about 1 million conformations are generated and Boltzmann averaging is carried out to calculate the thermodynamic quantities (Pichierri et al., 1999). We have used the AMBER force field for calculating the free energy, enthalpy and entropy (Cornell et al., 1995). We have obtained a contour map of interaction free energy, which shows preferable positions of C of amino acid around a base pair by calculating the free energies for different C positions and subtracting a reference free energy at a large separation. We have also used Monte Carlo sampling technique for the distribution of amino acids around bases (Sayano et al., 2000). 2.4. Computation of statistical potentials for intramolecular interactions We have derived statistical potential functions for intramolecular interactions from the conformational energy of DNA using protein­DNA complex structural data (Gromiha et al., 2004c). To estimate the sequence-dependent DNA conformational energy, we mostly followed the approach described by Olson et al. (1998). The conformation energies were approximated using a harmonic function, EDNA = 1 / 2  fijij, in which i represents the base-step parameters, and fij are the elastic force constants impeding deformation of the given base step and i = i - i0, in which i0 is the average

1 mab w f ðsÞ þ g ab ðsÞ 1 þ mab w 1 þ mab w

110

M.M. Gromiha et al. / Gene 364 (2005) 108­113

base-step parameter. The base-step parameters used were shift, slide, rise, tilt, roll, and twist. The unknown parameters fij and i0 were determined by statistical analysis of the same nonredundant protein­DNA complexes. Setting up a covariance matrix from observed distributions of i thus refers to an effective inverse harmonic force­constant matrix. Inversion of this matrix transformed it to a force­constant matrix in the original coordinate basis. We removed all parameters of a base step for which one parameter exceeded three standard deviations, in an iterative manner. Then the final force field was calculated. The conformational energy of DNA in a given complex structure was calculated as the sum of all the base steps. We assigned the energy corresponding to the threshold value when any parameter exceeded three standard deviations. Then, these potentials were used to quantify the specificity of intramolecular interactions of protein­DNA recognition, as a Zscore, by using the same threading procedure as that of intermolecular interactions. 2.5. Relationship between DNA stiffness and protein­DNA binding specificity Each DNA sequence has been represented by overlapping segments of trinucleotide units. The stiffness values for each trinucleotide were assigned appropriately from the structure based stiffness scale (Gromiha, 2000) and the average Young's modulus was computed using the equation: E ¼ REi =n: Where Ei is the Young's modulus for the ith trinucleotide and n is the total number of trinucleotide units. The relationship between average stiffness (E) and protein­ DNA binding specificity was computed using the familiar formula: r ¼ ½N RXY -ðRX RY Þ=f½N RX 2 -ðRX Þ2 ½N RY 2 -ðRY Þ2 g
1=2

3. Results and discussion 3.1. Major role of intermolecular interactions in Zn fingers DNA recognition by zinc finger proteins has been extensively studied and the specificity of DNA sequence recognition by Zn fingers has been explained by intermolecular interactions quite well (Kono and Sarai, 1999; Choo and Klug, 1994). Indeed, the calculated Z-scores (- 3.6 for intermolecular interactions and - 2.2 for intramolecular interactions) for the zinc finger protein, 1MEY, show that the intermolecular readout makes the larger contribution to specificity (Gromiha et al., 2004c). The complex structure, 1MEY, contains three fingers, each recognizing a three-base-pair DNA subsite with a different sequence. In order to dissect the contribution of the intermolecular interactions, we fixed the DNA sequence (GAGGCAGAA) in the protein­DNA complex structure and swapped the seven amino acid residues (positions from - 1 through 6) responsible for sequence recognition among the three fingers. Thus, there are 3 × 3 × 3 = 27 possible combinations of the finger configuration. We then calculated the Z-score for each structure. The calculated Z-scores range from - 3.6 to - 1.9, with the original finger combination in the crystal structure giving the lowest Z-score (- 3.6). Since this result is based on protein mutations without changes in DNA sequence, the selection reflects only the intermolecular interactions. The finding that the lowest Z-score corresponds to the original finger combination indicates an important role for the intermolecular interactions in DNA recognition by Zn fingers. 3.2. Cognate/non-cognate and cooperative binding It is interesting to compare two structures, cognate and noncognate complex structures, in order to understand the interactions, which are important for specific binding. We examined NF-B, glucocorticoid receptor DNA binding domain, EcoRV endonuclease and BamHI endonuclease, for which both the cognate and non-cognate complex structures are available in PDB (Berman et al., 2000). We could distinguish the two structures as differences in the Z-scores using statistical potentials (Kono and Sarai, 1999; Selvaraj et al., 2002). In NF-B, the Z-score for the cognate structure is - 3.8 whereas that for the non-cognate one is - 1.0. This result clearly distinguishes the specificity of cognate and non-cognate structures. We also applied this method to examine the relationship between structure and specificity in cooperative protein­DNA binding. The effect of cooperative binding was examined by comparing the monomer and heterodimer complexes of MATa1/2 (Kono and Sarai, 1999). The cooperativity was revealed when MAT2 was extracted from the MATa1/2/ DNA complex and Z-score was compared with that of MAT2/ DNA complex i.e., the extracted MAT2 showed a significantly higher Z-score (Z = - 4.3) than MAT2 complex (Z = - 1.5). We have also examined other examples of heterodimer complexes such as MCM1/MAT2 (Tan and Richmond, 1998) and NFAT/ AP-1 transcription factors and found that the heterodimer

where, r is the correlation coefficient, N, X and Y are, respectively, the number of data, average stiffness values and experimental protein­DNA binding data. 2.6. Combination of inter and intramolecular interactions from statistical potentials We combined the intermolecular and intramolecular energies obtained from statistical potentials to calculate the total energy. Because the derivations of these empirical energies are based on different statistics, we cannot simply make a summation. We need to introduce a weighting factor: Etot = cEPD + (1 - c)EDNA, where EPD and EDNA are the energies of the intermolecular and intramolecular interactions, respectively, and c is a weighting coefficient ranging between 0 and 1. This coefficient is determined by maximizing the total Z-score--i.e., the Z-score is calculated from random sequences, and a value of c is sought that gives the highest total Z-score.

M.M. Gromiha et al. / Gene 364 (2005) 108­113

111

binding enhances the specificity in a non-additive manner. This result indicates that the conformational changes introduced by the heterodimer binding play an important role in enhancing the specificity. 3.3. Free energy maps of interactions between amino acids and base pairs We applied our approach to the interactions between Asn side chain and base pairs, and the free energy map for the pair Asn­AT is shown in Fig. 1. We observed that the preferable position of C is localized in a narrow region around A in the case of A­T. In this region, Asn and A form specific double hydrogen bonds, C_O···HN6 and NH···N7, which are found frequently in the Asn­A pair in the experimental structures of DNA­protein complexes (Pichierri et al., 1999). Also, the distribution of C is in agreement with the statistical potential obtained by the database analysis (Kono and Sarai, 1999). On the other hand, Asn tends to be more broadly distributed around G­C. The lowest G values are located in the middle of G­C, and the following lower G's extend towards C5 atom of C, where C does not have a methyl group. This comparison indicates that the interaction of Asn is more specific towards A­ T than G­C. This example illustrates how we can quantify the specificity in the base­amino acid interactions and complement the statistical method. Further, we have examined the effect of side chain length by comparing the interactions of Gln and Asn side chains with base pairs, AT and GC. We observed that the conformational entropy of side chain plays an important role to enhance the specificity (Gromiha et al., 1999). 3.4. Major role of intramolecular interactions in ETS proteins Evidence for intramolecular interactions has sometimes been derived experimentally. For instance, Szymczyna and Arrowsmith (2000) measured the binding affinity between ETS family proteins and various DNAs containing mutations in their flanking regions outside the core GGA trinucleotide sequence.

They concluded that the recognition mechanism used by ETS proteins is partially governed by an intramolecular readout. Our calculated Z-scores for intermolecular and intramolecular interactions were - 1.1 and - 2.7, respectively, for the PU.1 ETS complex (1PUE) and - 0.5 and - 3.1 for SAP-1 ETS (1HBX), confirming the major role played by intramolecular interactions in recognition. The experiment by Szymczyna and Arrowsmith (2000) provides an opportunity to validate our calculations for the contribution of intramolecular interactions. The 2nd C of the target sequence (ACCGGAAGT) of the SAP-1 ETS domain has no contact with any amino acids, while the 3rd C has a contact with Arg69. As expected from the presence of Arg69, substitution of C by G at the 3rd position substantially lowered the calculated energy due to intermolecular readout (by 1.0 Zscore unit), though C to G mutation at the 2nd position slightly lowered the energy (by 0.3 Z-score units). These results are not consistent with the experimental observation that these are the two most deleterious mutations (Szymczyna and Arrowsmith, 2000), indicating that intermolecular readout cannot explain the experimental result. On the other hand, the same substitutions increased the energy due to intramolecular interactions (by 0.6 and 1.3 Z-score units, respectively), which is consistent with the experimental affinity changes. A similar result was obtained for mutations at the 7th and 8th positions. Experimentally observed affinity changes caused by these mutations were much smaller than those at the other end. The calculated energy changes due to intermolecular interactions were opposite to the experimental affinity changes. On the other hand, A to T mutation at the 7th position caused a small but positive energy change, and G to C mutation at the 8th position gave slightly lower energy (by 0.1 Z-score units) due to intramolecular interaction. 3.5. Influence of DNA stiffness in protein­DNA binding specificity We have analyzed the influence of DNA stiffness to protein­ DNA binding specificity for several protein­DNA complexes,

Fig. 1. Free energy maps of the interaction between Asn and A­T. Darker region corresponds to low free energy, where C position of Asn is stable.

112

M.M. Gromiha et al. / Gene 364 (2005) 108­113

such as ETS proteins, 434, , Mnt and trp repressors, cro protein, EcoRV endonuclease V and zinc finger proteins. In most of the complexes, we observed a strong relationship between DNA stiffness and protein­DNA binding specificity and the correlation coefficient varies in the range of 0.65­0.97 (Gromiha et al., 1997; Gromiha, 2005b). This result indicates that the elastic properties of DNA are also important for understanding the mechanism of protein­DNA recognition, which may be included in the contribution of intramolecular interactions. 3.6. Combination of intermolecular and intramolecular interactions obtained from statistical potentials In previous sections, we have quantified the specificities of intermolecular and intramolecular interactions separately. We are also able to combine the two energies to calculate the total energy. As an example, we considered 1YRN, a complex of DNA with MATa1 and 2, two proteins involved in determining mating type in yeast. Fig. 2 shows the total Z-score obtained from the combination of intermolecular and intramolecular interactions as a function of the weight factor c. Interestingly, the total Z-score (-5.3 at c = 0.32) was higher than either the Zscore for the intermolecular (-4.4) or intramolecular (- 2.9) interactions. One interpretation of this result is that the energies of the intermolecular and intramolecular interactions each contain independent information that in combination enhances the specificity of the recognition. If both energies are totally dependent or correlated, the total Z-score would not increase. We examined this effect for a set of 62 protein­DNA complexes and found that the total Z-score did indeed increase for those having two negative Z-scores.

3.7. Comparison of calculated energies with experimental activity data Analysis of the three dimensional structure of MAT2/ MCM1-DNA heterodimeric complex with DNA (1MNM) (Tan and Richmond, 1998) showed the DNA to be bent to a significant degree, and the calculated Z-scores showed that the specificity is contributed by both the intermolecular and intramolecular interactions (Gromiha et al., 2004c). Zhong and Vershon (1997) investigated the binding specificity of the complex by systematically substituting all bases at each position of the target sequence (CATGTAATT). We predicted the effect of single base mutations within 1MNM on the affinity change based on the combined energies of the intermolecular and intramolecular interactions. We observed that the lowest calculated energies agreed with the strongest experimental repression activities in 8 of 9 cases and hence the present method can predict quite well the correct activity among others. When we inspect the results more carefully, we are able to dissect individual contributions made by the intermolecular and intramolecular interactions. We found that energy changes due to intermolecular interactions agree with the experimental data better than those of intramolecular interactions. This result is reasonable, as there are many intermolecular contacts between amino acids and base pairs, which is reflected in the higher Zscore for intermolecular interactions than for intramolecular interactions (- 4.4 and - 3.0, respectively). However, within the mutated region (CGTGTAAAT) of the MAT2/MCM1-DNA complex, the base pair at position 2 is not in contact with any amino acids. At this position, the energy of intramolecular interactions is the lowest for A, which is in agreement with the experimental data, whereas the energy of intermolecular interactions is the lowest for G. Thus, at this position, intramolecular interactions can explain the experimental observation better than intermolecular interactions. Although the predicted patterns of energy changes are similar to the experimental data, the matching of detailed values is rather modest. Since transcriptional repression involves many steps, we may not be able to compare the binding energy to experimental repression data directly. 4. Conclusions The analysis based on the interactions between amino acids and base pairs using systematic sampling procedure showed that the distribution of amino acids towards base pairs agrees well with experimental structures of protein­DNA complexes. The analysis of DNA stiffness with protein­DNA binding specificity revealed the presence of strong correlation between them in several complexes. Further, we have quantified the specificities of the intermolecular and intramolecular interactions and compared them in various protein­DNA complexes. This has enabled us to show that, generally, both intermolecular and intramolecular interactions contribute to the specificity of protein­DNA recognition and their relative contributions vary depending upon the proteins within the complex. The combination of the intermolecular

Fig. 2. Enhanced specificity caused by the combination of intermolecular and intramolecular readouts for the MATa1/2/DNA complex (1YRN). The Z-score was calculated for the combined total energy, Etot = cEPD + (1 - c)EDNA, and plotted as a function of the weighting coefficient c.

M.M. Gromiha et al. / Gene 364 (2005) 108­113

113

and intramolecular interaction energies leads to enhanced specificity and the target sites for DNA binding proteins can be predicted based on analysis of the structure­specificity relationship.

References
Berman, H.M., et al., 2000. The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 235­242. Choo, Y., Klug, A., 1994. Toward a code for the interactions of zinc fingers with DNA: selection of randomized fingers displayed on phage. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 91, 11163­11167. Cornell, W.D., et al., 1995. A second generation force field for the simulation of proteins, nucleic acids, and organic molecules. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 117, 5179­5197. Gromiha, M.M., 2000. Structure based sequence dependent stiffness scale for trinucleotides: a direct method. J. Biol. Phys. 26, 43­50. Gromiha, M.M., 2005a. Distinct roles of non-covalent and cation­ interactions in protein stability. Polymer 46, 983­990. Gromiha, M.M., 2005b. Influence of DNA stiffness in protein­DNA recognition. J. Biotechnol. 117, 137­145. Gromiha, M.M., Munteanu, M.G., Simon, I., Pongor, S., 1997. The role of DNA bending in Cro protein­DNA interactions. Biophys. Chem. 69, 153­160. Gromiha, M.M., Kono, H., Sayano, K., Pichierri, F., Aida, M., Sarai, A., 1999. RIKEN Rev. 25, 134­135. Gromiha, M.M., Santhosh, C., Suwa, M., 2004a. Influence of cation­ interactions in protein­DNA complexes. Polymer 45, 633­639. Gromiha, M.M., Santhosh, C., Ahmad, S., 2004b. Structural analysis of cation­ interactions in DNA­binding proteins. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 34, 203­211. Gromiha, M.M., Siebers, J.G., Selvaraj, S., Kono, H., Sarai, A., 2004c. Intermolecular and intramolecular readout mechanisms in protein­DNA recognition. J. Mol. Biol. 337, 285­294. Harrington, R.E., Winicov, I., 1994. New concepts in protein­DNA recognition: sequence-directed DNA bending and flexibility. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 47, 195­270. Hogan, M.E., Austin, R.H., 1987. Importance of DNA stiffness in protein­DNA binding specificity. Nature 329, 263­266. Kono, H., Sarai, A., 1999. Structure-based prediction of DNA target sites by regulatory proteins. Proteins 35, 114­131.

Luscombe, N.M., Thornton, J.M., 2002. Protein­DNA interactions: amino acid conservation and the effects of mutations on binding specificity. J. Mol. Biol. 320, 991­1009. Mandel-Gutfreund, Y., Margalit, H., 1998. Quantitative parameters for amino acid-base interaction: implications for prediction of protein­DNA binding sites. Nucleic Acids Res. 26, 2306­2312. Matthews, B.W., 1988. Protein­DNA interaction. No code for recognition. Nature 335, 294­295. Nadassy, K., Wodak, S.J., Janin, J., 1999. Structural features of protein­nucleic acid recognition sites. Biochemistry 38, 1999­2017. Olson, W.K., Gorin, A.A., Lu, X.J., Hock, L.M., Zhurkin, V.B., 1998. DNA sequence-dependent deformability deduced from protein­DNA crystal complexes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95, 11163­11168. Pabo, C.O., Nekludova, L., 2000. Geometric analysis and comparison of protein­DNA interfaces: why is there no simple code for recognition? J. Mol. Biol. 301, 597­624. Pailard, G., Lavery, R., 2004. Analyzing protein­DNA recognition mechanisms. Structure 12, 113­122. Pichierri, F., Aida, M., Gromiha, M., Sarai, A., 1999. Free energy maps of baseamino acid interaction for protein­DNA recognition. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121, 6152­6157. Sarai, A., Mazur, J., Nussinov, R., Jernigan, R.L., 1989. Sequence dependence of DNA conformational flexibility. Biochemistry 28, 7842­7849. Sayano, K., Kono, H., Gromiha, M., Sarai, A., 2000. Multicanonical Monte Carlo calculation of free-energy map for base­amino acid interaction. J. Comput. Chem. 21, 954­962. Schwabe, J.W., 1997. The role of water in protein­DNA interactions. Curr. Opin. Struck. Biol. 7, 126­134. Selvaraj, S., Kono, H., Sarai, A., 2002. Specificity of protein­DNA recognition revealed by structure-based potentials: symmetric/asymmetric and cognate/ non-cognate binding. J. Mol. Biol. 322, 907­915. Sippl, M., 1990. Calculation of conformational ensembles for potentials of mean force: an approach to the knowledge-based prediction of local structures in globular proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 213, 859­883. Szymczyna, B.R., Arrowsmith, C.H., 2000. DNA binding specificity studies of four ETS proteins support an intramolecular readout mechanism of protein­ DNA recognition. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 28363­28370. Tan, S., Richmond, T.J., 1998. Crystal structure of the yeast MATalpha2/ MCM1/DNA ternary complex. Nature 391, 660­666. Zhong, H., Vershon, A.K., 1997. The yeast homeodomain protein MATalpha2 shows extended DNA binding specificity in complex with Mcm1. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 8402­8409.

