Poster Abstracts
of the disease. Meanwhile, the mutation was also identified in other 7 family members, who age from 7 to 59 and remain asymptomatic up till now. Contusions: Our results confirmed that the S105L mutation in exon 4 of SOD-1 gene is pathogerfic, and the phenotype from tiffs mutation is associated with a form characterized by relatively variable clinical symptoms, in which its penetrance is incomplete and might largely depend upon some environmental or other factors.
0432 Tile vascular endothelial growth factor gene polymorphis~ns and age at onset of amyolrophic lateral sclerosis

Tuesday, November 8, 2005

$209

proband. We found no other abnormality in the PCR products of other exons. To determine whether the E133V mutation could be a polymorphism in Chinese population or not, 50 control subjects were tested by the same method but no abnormality was found. Discussion: In the present study, we have shown that a Chinese kindred with ALS is associated with a missense mutation in exon 5 o f SOD 1 gene. The region affected by the E133V mutation is VII active site loop, which has also been the region affected by more than 10 mutations. The clinical phenotype within members of this family is relatively variable.
0434 Caspase-independent cell death pathway in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophie lateral sclerosis Inoue, H 1, Suzuki, y2, Nagao, M 3, Takahashi, R 1. 2Department Of

Chen, D 2, Shen, L 3, Zhang, J~, Wang, L a, Lu, A 3, Zhang, H ~, Zhang, X 3, Zhang, Y~, Li, L 3, Fan, D ~. 1Department of Neurology, Peking

University Third Hospital, China; 2Department of Medical Genetics, Peking University, China; 3Peking University Stem Cell Research Center, China
Background: This study investigated the association between polymorphisms in vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) gene (- 1558C-T, -1190A-G and -1154A-G) and age at onset of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Methods: Between July 2000 and June 2004, we conducted a clinic genetic study at Peking University Third Hospital, China. The analyses included a total of 100 ALS subjects. Genotypnig was performed by using the 5~-nuc.lease assay technology (Applied Biosystems) with TaqMan ~) allelespecific fluorogenic oligonucleotide probes. We used multiple linear regression modeling and Haplotype-based association test to analyze the association of VEGF gene polynlorphisnls with the age onset, adjusting for irfitial symptoms and sex. Results: The results indicated the patients with the -II90A/G and -I190G/G genotypes exhibited about a 4.1 and 9.4 years greater shortening of age of ALS onset than did the patients with the - 1190A/ A genotype. A similar pattern emerged when VEGF -1154A-G gene was considered: the [~was -7.9 (SE, 1.9) years and -11.7 (SE, 3.0) years f o r - l 1 5 4 A / G and -l154G/G genotypes, respectively. Whereas, the VEGF -1558C-T had a positive effect in the -1558C/T group (P -0.007, [3 -- 7.0) and -1558T/T (P < 0.001, [3 -- 9.6) compared to -1558C/C group. We did neither observe an interaction, nor haplotype association with age onset among - 1558C-T, - 1190A-G and - 1154A-G. Conclusion: Our results indicate, for the first time, that there was an important association between the polymorphism of VEGF gene and age o r A L S onset. This suggests a possible role for VEGF variability in the etiology of individual differences in age onset. 0433 A novel mutation (Glu133Val) in Cu/Zn superoxide di$1ilUtaSe causing faJlfilial amyotrophie lateral sclerosis in China

Neurology, Kyoto University Graduate School Of Medicine; 2The 4~aDivision, National Institute of Neuroscience; 3Department of Neurology, Tokyo Metropolitan Neurological Hospital
Background: Cell death is executed by caspases as well as caspaseindependent death effectors including a serine protease (Omi/HtrA2) which is released fi'om the mitochondrial intermembrane space upon permeabilization of the outer membrane, although such proteins also have important roles in cellular redox metabolism and/or mitochondrial biogenesis. Method: Protein chemistry and histology. Results: In this study, we show that HtrA2, an inhibitor of inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) including cellular rAP- 1 (cIAP1), -2 (cIAP2), and X-linked rAP (XIAP), translocates from the mitochondria to the cytosol in motor neurons in the spinal cords of transgenic mouse model o f amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) harboring human superoxide dismutase-I (SOD1) with a point mutation (G93A). Contusion: These results suggest that caspase-independent cell death signaling may participate in motor neuron degeneration produced by mutant SOD 1. 0435 A SPECF slaty using eZIS and SPM97 in ALS with dementia eases

Islfikawa, T, Morita, M, Nakano, I. Department of Neurology,

Yichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan
Background: Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) study has been applied for evaluation of regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) of various neurodegenerative disorders. Although recent advances in computer-assisted analysis o f SPECI" images using easy-Z score imaging system (eZIS) or statistical parametric mapping (SPM97) have made it easier to detect slight change of rCBF, there have been few studies to discriminate amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with dementia (ALS-D) from ALS using these objective methods. Using eZIS and SPM97, we investigated the rCBF patterns in ALS-D patients. Method: 123I-IMP SPECT data on 5 ALS-D and 19 obviously alert patients with ALS were analyzed and compared with our standardized data for normal controls by means of eZIS and SPM97 analysis. Results: Both analyses demonstrated a sharp reduction of rCBF in the bilateral prefrontal lobes in all five ALS-D patients, and a mild decrease in the unilateral temporal lobe in four of the five ALS-D cases, while such changes were subtle in the ALS patients without dementia. Although one of the five ALS-D cases malfffested mild degree of cognitive impairment at which time SPECT study was done, eZIS and SPM97 analyses clearly disclosed hypoperfusion of prefrontal region. Contusion: Our present study indicated that SPECT study using eZIS can clearly and objectively distinguish ALS-D from ALS, and provide powerful evidence for all early diagnosis of ALS-D in ALS patients with only negligible or questionable mental changes.

Zhang, H a, Zhao, H 2, Lu, M :, Zhang, ya, Wang, L a, Zhang, ja, Ma, D ~, Fan, D ~. 1Department of Neurology, Pelting University Third

Hospital, china; 2Center for Human Disease Genomies, Pelting University, China
Background: More than 100 mutations in SOD-1 gene have been described in ALS. We here present a two-generation family with ALS from Liaoning province, North China, which have a novel mutation in SOD- 1 gene. Method: We studied the family including 4 ALS patients and 50 unrelated healthy controls. Exon 1 through 5 of SOD-1 gene were amplified, the fragments were gel purified and sequencing analysis was performed. Results: The proband is a member o f a family of Chinese descent in which at least 4 individuals in two successive generations have displayed clinical evidence of ALS. The pattern of inheritance of the disease trait suggests autosomal dominance. A novel mutation (A to T) in exon 5 of SOD-1 gene, which is predicted to result in the replacemerit of Glu by Val at codon 133 (E133V), was identified in the

