doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2007.01.091

J. Mol. Biol. (2007) 369, 108­128

Crystal Structure of Tryptophanyl-tRNA Synthetase Complexed with Adenosine-5 Tetraphosphate: Evidence for Distributed Use of Catalytic Binding Energy in Amino Acid Activation by Class I Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases
Pascal Retailleau 1 , Violetta Weinreb 2 , Mei Hu 3 and Charles W. Carter Jr 2 
Service de Cristallochimie, ICSN-CNRS, Gif/Yvette, 91198, France Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7360, USA Department of Microbiology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA
3 2 1

Tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase (TrpRS) is a functionally dimeric ligase, which specifically couples hydrolysis of ATP to AMP and pyrophosphate to the formation of an ester bond between tryptophan and the cognate tRNA. TrpRS from Bacillus stearothermophilus binds the ATP analogue, adenosine-5 tetraphosphate (AQP) competitively with ATP during pyrophosphate exchange. Estimates of binding affinity from this competitive inhibition and from isothermal titration calorimetry show that AQP binds 200 times more tightly than ATP both under conditions of induced-fit, where binding is coupled to an unfavorable conformational change, and under exchange conditions, where there is no conformational change. These binding data provide an indirect experimental measurement of + 3.0 kcal/mol for the conformational free energy change associated with induced-fit assembly of the active site. Thermodynamic parameters derived from the calorimetry reveal very modest enthalpic changes, consistent with binding driven largely by a favorable entropy change. The 2.5 Å structure of the TrpRS:AQP complex, determined de novo by X-ray crystallography, resembles that of the previously described, pre-transition state TrpRS:ATP complexes. The anticodon-binding domain untwists relative to the Rossmann-fold domain by 20% of the way toward the orientation observed for the Products complex. An unexpected tetraphosphate conformation allows the  and d phosphate groups to occupy positions equivalent to those occupied by the  and  phosphates of ATP. The -phosphate effects a 1.11 Å extension that relocates the phosphate toward the tryptophan carboxylate while the PPi mimic moves deeper into the KMSKS loop. This configuration improves interactions between enzyme and nucleotide significantly and uniformly in the adenosine and PPi binding subsites. A new hydrogen bond forms between S194 from the class I KMSKS signature sequence and the PPi mimic. These complementary thermodynamic and structural data are all consistent with the conclusion that the tetraphosphate mimics a transition-state in which the KMSKS loop develops increasingly tight bonds to the PPi leaving group, weakening linkage to the P as it is relocated by an energetically favorable domain movement. Consistent with extensive mutational data on Tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase, this aspect of the mechanism develops high transition-state affinity for the adenosine

Abbreviations used: aaRS, aminoacyl tRNA-synthetase; TrpRS, tryptophanyl tRNA-synthetase; AQP, adenosine 5-tetraphosphate; PPi, pyrophosphate; RMSD, root-mean-square deviation; MCD, minimal catalytic domain. E-mail address of the corresponding author: carter@med.unc.edu
0022-2836/$ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

109

and pyrophosphate moieties, which move significantly, relative to one another, during the catalytic step.
© 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. *Corresponding author

Keywords: induced-fit; mechanistic enzymology; phosphoryl-transfer; catalytic use of binding energy; class I aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases

Introduction
Because of its widespread use in biosynthetic, biomechanical, and regulatory processes, nucleophilic substitution at phosphoryl groups is among the most studied bimolecular reactions in biology.1 Uncatalyzed rates of phosphoryl-solvolysis are quite slow, in the range of 10- 5/min, and bimolecular reactions such as amino acid activation are slower, about 10- 8/mol per min.2 Metal ions (Mg2+) accelerate these rates by only perhaps three-fold.1,3 Understanding the relative roles of general acid or base catalysis, emerging charge stabilization, mechanical distortion, and other catalytic effects in enzyme mechanisms that accelerate this reaction 1010­1014-fold requires characterization of the transition state in relation to the ground state(s). Phosphoryl transfer is usually described with reference to two extreme transition-state configurations: a fully dissociative, SN1-like mechanism and a fully associative, SN2-like mechanism (Figure 1;1,4­6). These extremes are distinguished by the extent to which the nucleophile and leaving group participate in bond-making and bond-breaking. In transition states with dissociative character, the bond to the leaving group is weakened or broken first, while in those with associative character, the approach of the nucleophile is strengthened before the bond to the leaving group weakens.

Figure 1. Limiting transition states for phosphoryltransfer reactions involving nucleophilic displacement at P of ATP.1 The relationship between the structure of adenosine tetraphosphate and a dissociative transition state is based on the potential equivalence of the  and -phosphates to the  and -phosphates of the PPi leaving group (ellipse).

Participation of both bond-making and bondbreaking processes leads in general to a continuous, two-dimensional surface.5 This surface is characterized by approximately equal barrier heights along many different possible trajectories, any of which might be stabilized by a variety of different interactions with enzymatic active sites,6 making it difficult to assess which path is taken by a particular enzyme. The amino acid activation step catalyzed by class I aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRS), in which the leaving group is inorganic pyrophosphate instead of phosphate, deserves renewed attention in this context. The amino acid activation mechanism has been extensively studied by site-directed mutagenesis and pre-steady-state kinetics,7­10 and by crystallographic methods.9,11­21 However, despite these efforts, mechanistic descriptions have been limited to modelling in-line displacement of the PPi leaving group by the -carboxylate of the amino acid without identifying specific interactions that develop in the transition-state complexes. Most enzymes that catalyze phosphoryl transfer and which have been characterized structurally, exhibit significant potential transition-state complementarity to a pentavalent phosphate group, consistent with associative character. In contrast, the Class I Bacillus stearothermophilus tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase (TrpRS) structural reaction profile 11­13,15 suggests a different transition state with dissociative character. First, active site residues do not appear to provide specific interactions capable of differentiating between ground-state and transition-state configurations of the -phosphate. Second, those catalytic residues identified by mutation of the closely related TyrRS active site interact either with the ribose or the pyrophosphate moieties.8 Finally, TrpRS catalysis is associated with a large domain rearrangement between the Pre-transition state (PreTS) and Products structures, in which the pyrophosphate binding site formed by the KMSKS loop relocates by  1.6 Å. The relative absence of interactions to the -phosphate, the abundance of distributed catalytic interactions to the adenosine and pyrophosphate moieties, and the implication that the TrpRS transition state occurs during dynamic domain movement consistently point to a novel mechanism to stabilize the phosphoryltransfer transition state involved in amino acid activation by TrpRS, TyrRS, and perhaps class I aaRS in general. One effective way to characterize enzymatic transition states structurally is to mimic them with stable compounds, or transition-state analog inhibitors.22 Transition state mimics are a mixed blessing. On the one hand, it is impossible in principal to

110 imitate precisely in a stable analog the geometry and electron distributions of a transition state which, by definition is the least stable, and hence shortest-lived species along a reaction path.23 For this reason all such analogs mimic only a subset of the features of the actual transition state. The descriptive phrase, transition-state analog, therefore evokes a variety of interpretations, and examples of compounds designated as transition-state mimics approach the transition state more or less adequately. On the other hand, such inhibitors can provide useful, approximate structural models. When they can be crystallized with the enzymes they inhibit, interactions that strengthen in the transition state complex and possibly accelerate the reaction rate can be identified. Thus, such analogs provide a valuable link between structure and function. The validity of inferences drawn from structural analogs of transition states depends on several criteria expected for such complexes.22,24 First, the compounds themselves should capture stably some distinctive aspect (geometry, charge distribution, polarity) of the altered substrate configuration in the transition state. Second, their affinities should substantially exceed those for the substrates they mimic. Third, to attribute the increased affinity to transition-state-like features, enzyme:transitionstate-analog complex structures should reveal strengthening of interactions already present in the binding of substrates, together with new interactions evoked by those parts of the analogs that mimic changes in the transition state. Fourth, it is also reasonable that the active site will intensify the physical enclosure of the analog and limit the access of solvent, relative to what is observed for substrates. Finally, experimental variables that alter the enzymatic rate acceleration should have parallel effects on the analog binding affinity. We describe here experiments with the ATP analog, adenosine tetraphosphate (AQP). The affinity and crystal structure of a TrpRS:AQP complex appear to meet each of the first four criteria. Moreover, protein engineering experiments to identify a minimal, functionally active TrpRS catalytic domain, MCD2 suggest an important experimental test along the lines of the fifth criterion. These data provide a novel and coherent structural representation of the distributed interactions by which class Ic enzymes use binding energy for catalysis, first outlined experimentally by Fersht and co-workers7,8 who showed that catalytically relevant interactions occur throughout the surface of the nucleotide.7,8

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

acylated tRNATrp). It is an inhibitor, competitive with ATP. The inhibition constant, measured by steady-state kinetics, is 2.0 mM. Although Ki is a true thermodynamic dissociation constant, several considerations condition its interpretation. AQP, like ATP, has a high affinity for Mg2+, which is present in excess under the assay conditions. Yet, as described below, the bound form of AQP does not contain Mg2+. Nor are there any water molecules near the ligand that might represent this ion. The binding equilibrium leading to inhibition is therefore coupled to an equilibrium in solution between AQP and Mg2+ AQP that heavily favors the complexed form, so that the concentration of the uncomplexed AQP is very much smaller than Ki (see, for example, Frick et al.25). Put another way, the TrpRS­AQP interaction is strong enough to compete with the AQP­Mg2+ interaction. Thus, as the Ki is based on the total AQP concentration in the assay rather than that of the uncomplexed form, a correct estimate for the affinity, Ki*, requires estimating the concentration of free AQP in the assay from the dissociation constant for the Mg2+ AQP complex in solution:

·

·

(1) We estimate the Mg2+ AQP dissociation constant following26 to be,  2.18 × 10- 6 M. Under this assumption, the actual concentration of uncomplexed AQP at half-saturation is  2.2 M. Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) Titrations of two TrpRS concentrations (6 M and 60 M) were carried out with AQP in the absence of Mg2+. Data were fitted to a sequential binding model with two different kinds of binding sites27 as described in Experimental Procedures (Figure 2(a)). Calorimetric determinations were noisy, owing to the small enthalpy changes and the limiting amount of AQP that we had synthesized. Use of two different protein concentrations sharply constrained the combinations of binding affinity and binding enthalpy parameters (Table 1) that would fit both curves simultaneously, reducing their uncertainty to less than 5%. Dissociation constants for the two successive AQP molecules are 18 M and 40 M, respectively.
 These calculations make several assumptions, extrapolating conservatively from the values given by Adolfson and Moudrianakis26 for the intrinsic affinity of Mg for ADP (12,000) and ATP (140,000) and the mu values (1.5 and 3.1, respectively), to values of 800,000 and 3.8, respectively. These two values are highly correlated. So, this extrapolation is subject to revision by experimental data that we cannot provide without synthesizing more AQP.

·

Results
AQP binding affinity Competitive inhibition AQP is not a substrate; it does not support incorporation of [32P]pyrophosphate into adenine nucleotide (we did not test for its ability to generate

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

111 finities of TrpRS for ATP11 (Figure 2(b)). In particular, AQP affinity is stronger by 200-fold both in exchange and in induced-fit binding processes, which have been determined for both nucleotides. As the enthalpy changes associated with successive binding events are rather small, ± 1 Kcal/mol, AQP binding is largely entropy-driven (Table 1). This result is consistent with the large reduction in the entropy of water molecules that results from dissolution of polyphosphates into water.29 The binding affinity for both adenine nucleotides therefore likely results from replacing water molecules bound to the phosphate groups with protein sidechains. The structural results also suggest that the differential binding affinity for AQP, relative to ATP, arises largely from an increase in the number and strength of such hydrogen-bonded interactions and the release of water molecules bound to the TrpRS ATP complex in the case of AQP.

·

The conformational free energy change associated with induced-fit The thermodynamic data from Figure 2 are sufficient to allow an experimental determination of the free energy change for the conformational equilibrium between Open and Closed, PreTS states in the presence and absence of ligands, using the thermodynamic cycle in Figure 3. The latter value is equivalent to the allosteric constant.24 The cycle in Figure 3 resolves the free energies associated with the inducedfit active-site assembly into purely conformational and purely ligand binding equilibria, which implicitly include any proton transfers associated with binding (we have not measured the pH dependence of either ATP or AQP affinity). We assume in addition from the crystallographic symmetry of the Closed, PreTS state that dissociation constants for both nucleotide-binding events to that form are identical. Successive dissociations from the fully liganded Open state are distinct; experimental determination of the first is convolved with the free energy change associated with the induced-fit assembly in the doubly liganded form. The determinations of comparable equilibrium constants for both ATP and AQP, however, allow us to de-convolve the ligand binding and conformational free energies of this process by regression analysis (Table 2), which is motivated by the near exact differences between the two ligands in the induced-fit and exchange binding scenarios. The regression model is: DG ¼<DGQ;T > þDGQvsT xLig þ DGinducedÀfit xIF ð2Þ where the dependent variable, G, is the observed free energy obtained from each equilibrium constant
Table 1. Thermodynamic parameters for AQP binding
KD (M) 1.8 × 10- 5 4.0 × 10- 5 G (Kcal/mol) - 6.56 - 6.08 H (Kcal/mol) + 0.85 - 1.10 ­TS (Kcal/mol) - 7.45 - 4.98

Figure 2. Affinity measurements. (a) Isothermal titration calorimetry. Experimental data are blue triangles for titration of 60 M TrpRS and green diamonds for titration of 6 M TrpRS. Black symbols and broken lines represent the fit of the binding model whose thermodynamic parameters are in Table 1. (b) Binding data from (a) in the context of other affinity determinations for AQP and ATP. The logarithmic scale represents measured dissociation constants. Three types of binding processes, exchange into assembled active sites measured by PPi exchange (Ki for AQP, Km for ATP; bold red lines below the scale, green logos), binding to the open form (bold blue arrow; shaded blue logos) and binding accompanied by inducedfit (ITC for AQP; small angle X-ray scattering for ATP11; bold green lines above the scale, blue to green logos) are compared. The differential between AQP and ATP affinities is comparable in the two cases where all quantities have been determined. The same is true for the estimate of the free energy of the conformational change, given by the difference between the induced-fit and exchange dissociation constants.

Comparison of the three AQP binding processes * reflected in KI and the ITC titrations is complicated by the fact that binding can induce conformational changes with non-negligible intrinsic free energies.11,28 There are three, distinct binding scenarios, indicated by the schematic logos in Figure 2(b). These include: (i) binding to the Open conformation (blue) and (ii) rebinding into the assembled active site vacated by a ligand (exchange; green), neither of which involve conformational changes, and (iii) binding of a second ligand to the singly liganded dimer (induced-fit; blue=>green), which confounds the conformation change with the nucleotide-binding affinity. In light of these three scenarios, the AQP binding affinities in Figure 2(a) are consistent with other, related thermodynamic measurements, including the AQP inhibition constant and the af-

112

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

energies are given by the exchange dissociation constants. The bottom branch is the allosteric constant describing the conformational equilibrium in the absence of adenine nucleotides and can be calculated by completing the cycle. Allosteric constants for the two nucleotides, + 3.08 (for T) and + 3.00 (for Q) are in excellent agreement, placing an upper limit on the error in the simplifying assumptions. Structure of TrpRS crystallized with AQP A binary crystalline complex was obtained by cocrystallization of TrpRS with AQP. The crystallizing solution buffered at pH 7.5 was made up with sodium citrate and Mg2+, in addition to the cyclohexylammonium counter ion accompanying AQP. The crystal grew in the tetragonal P43212 space group with unit cell dimensions close to those of the pre-transition state (PreTS) crystalline complexes with ATP (1M83) and ATP plus tryptophanamide (1MAU), also grown in citrate (a = b = 62.18 Å, c = 220.88 Å versus a = b = 62.13 Å, c = 217.81 Å) suggesting the closed, PreTS TrpRS conformation as defined previously.11 The slight non-isomorphism of the 1.3% increase along the c axis is consistent with conformational changes described below with respect to PreTS state ATP complexes. The polypeptide chain runs from the N-terminal (Met1) to the Cterminal (Arg328) through the electron density map defined by unbiased experimental phases. As the asymmetric unit contains a single monomer, crystal packing imposes symmetry on the functionally asymmetric dimer. Nevertheless, for low-energy hydrogen-bonding interactions to form between the two, symmetry-related Gln94 side-chains across the molecular dyad they must assume alternate, complementary configurations in each monomer, breaking the crystallographic symmetry. Isotropic B-values, <BCA> = 46.5, are substantially elevated in this complex relative to those in the two PreTS crystals <BCA> = 30.23 (1MUA), 20.41 (1M83). Consistent with elevated B-values (Figure 4), density

Figure 3. Thermodynamic cycle for adenine nucleotide binding and induced-fit conformation change. Conformational equilibria are horizontal, ligand-binding equilibria vertical. Free energies for both dissociations from the closed, PreTS conformation are identical by virtue of crystallographic symmetry. Corresponding values for the open conformation are distinct and obtained from ITC (Figure 2) and from regression analysis (Table 2), respectively, as is the free energy for the induced-fit conformational change associated with binding the second nucleotide ligand to the open conformation.

in Table 2, Lig is either 0 or 1 depending on whether the ligand is ATP or AQP, and IF is 0 or 1 depending on whether or not the process involves a conformational change. The three adjustable parameters are <GQ,T>, the average free energy for binding either T or Q to either state, GQvsT, the incremental free energy for binding Q, relative to T, and Ginduced-fit, the conformational free energy for reversing the induced-fit closure of the fully liganded, open dimer. The model accounts for the four measured equilibrium constants associated with the cycle with R2 = 0.999 and an F-ratio probability of 0.007. The Ginduced-fit value, together with the dissociation constants, provide estimates for the free energies of top and side equilibria of the thermodynamic cycle in Figure 3. The right-hand side equilibrium free

Table 2. Joint estimation of conformational and binding free energies from binding data in Figure 2
Input parameters Ki(Q) Km(T) KIF(Q) KIF(T) Regression parameters binding> Incremental G(QvsT) GIF(induced-fit) Successive binding events T1 T2 Q1 Q2
<G

Keq 2.18E-06 4.00E-04 4.00E-05 8.00E-03 Estimate (Kcal/mol) -4.68 -3.16 1.77 G estimate (Kcal/mol) -3.40 -1.13 -6.56 -4.31

G (Kcal/mol) - 7.82 - 4.69 - 6.08 - 2.90 Std error 0.22 0.25 0.25 Keq 3.5 × 10 1.5 × 10- 1 1.8 × 10- 5 7.6 × 10- 4
-3

Ligand 1 0 1 0 t - 216.04 - 126.2 70.6 Notes GQ­G(QvsT) GIF(T)+ GIF From Table 1 GIF(Q)+ GIF

Induced-fit 0 0 1 1 P(t) 0.0029 0.005 0.009

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

113

Figure 4. Plot of the variation of the average main chain temperature factors (blue) and the realspace correlation coefficient per residue with the final SigmaA map output by O (red). The orange arrows delineate the putative anchorage sites of the tRNA.

is poorly defined for a certain number of side-chains (D28, R104, E116, K178, R182, K191, K211, E225, K233, R259, R327 and R328). These sites are either accessible to solvent and/or belong to loops (loop 112­119 in the RF is expected to anchor the CCA acceptor stem and loop comprising residues 220­235 and 259­266 in the SD to bind the anticodon) that recognize the cognate tRNA. The refined model consists of 2613 protein atoms in accordance with the monomer sequence. A bound AQP nearly coincident with the location of Mg2+ ATP in 1M83 and 1MAU was modelled and subsequently refined into difference density in the nucleotide-binding cavity (Figure 5).

·

TrpRS conformation The TrpRS monomer consists of two domains, a Rossmann dinucleotide binding fold of  200 residues (RF), which starts with the N-terminal beta strand A, and a smaller domain of 90 residues that includes a four-helix bundle, the C-terminal helix of which extends back by  35 residues with a pronounced kink, past the RF, where it interacts across the dimer interface. Binding sites for tryptophan and ATP are created opposite each crossover connection in the RF. The highly twisted -sheet brings three peptide signatures, TIGN from helix A, GxDQ from helix E, and KMSKS together to bind the nucleotide, helix D providing specificitydetermining elements for amino acid binding whose configurations remain essentially unchanged in the course of catalysis. From comparisons between several TrpRS structures,11­13,15 it appeared that the functional TrpRS domain boundary actually falls between the TIGN and KMSKS signatures, on one hand, and the GxDQ signature with the main body of RF, on the other hand. Coordinated movements between the two domains can be resolved into two internal coordinates, reflecting the hinge opening between domains

and their relative twist.28 The hinge motion is effected via rotation of the axis of helix A, relative to the rest of the RF. Its motion is tightly coupled to that of the four-helix bundle via the hydrophobic side-chains of I16 and M193, from TIGN and KMSKS, respectively, together with I20, which join a substantial hydrophobic core within the four-helix bundle containing the anticodon-binding site to form what we have called the small domain (SD). The rigid-body motions of the SD provide an important link between active-site chemistry and the orientation of the anticodon-binding site. The twist involves internal rotations within the interface between helix A and the SD, for which the largest displacement resides in the KMSKS loop. The overall conformation of TrpRS in complex with AQP is quite similar to that from the pretransition state complex with ATP, obtained under identical crystallizing conditions.11 Formation of this conformation implies that AQP provides binding energy comparable to that for ATP, apparently necessary and sufficient to trigger both the 7.5° hinge-closing and 9° twisting rotations of the SD28 relative to the RF, closing the active site around the nucleotide to form the closed, PreTS state and restraining access to the tryptophan-binding pocket. Structural differences between the AQP complex and those reported previously for the PreTS conformations, 1MAU and 1M83, are subtle (Figure 6). Naïve superposition of the AQP complex and the PreTS complexes yields RMSD values of 0.707 Å (1M83) and 0.746 Å (1MAU), while the two PreTS complexes agree with an RMSD of 0.384 Å. The two previously described PreTS structures afford the opportunity to test the significance of these differences. For this purpose, the Rossmann folds of all structures were superimposed as described at the end of Experimental Procedures, and then the r.m.s. coordinate differences were determined between the C atoms of all aligned structures and separately for the domains.

114

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

Figure 5. Electron-density maps in the region of the nucleotide pocket superimposed with the arpwArp first model for the two first views and with the refined final model (PDB ID 2OV4). These maps were calculated (a) with experimental SIRAS phases output by SHARP, (b) after density modification by SOLOMON (black contour aims at highlighting the nucleotide) and (c) final SIGMAA 2Fo­Fc map within BUSTER. Contouring level was 1.2 except for the SOLOMON map (2).

The main contribution to the RMSDs between PreTS and AQP complexes comes from a reorientation of the SD, which untwists toward the Products conformation (Figure 6(a)). This shift, albeit small (the r.m.s. coordinate difference over the RF excluding the loop 111­119 is less than 0.3 and that over the SD is more than 0.7), places the SD in between positions assumed in the PreTS states and in the adenylate Products complex (Figure 6(b)). Multiple regression models indicate that both replacing ATP by AQP and the SD orientation (twist angle) are significant contributors of the RMSD values, with t-test probabilities of 2 × 10- 4, and 3 × 10- 3, respectively. Untwisting of the SD in the Products conformation displaces the KMSKS sequence and the leaving PPi group by 1.42 Å from its position in the ATP complex.11 The twist angles of the PreTS, AQP, and

Products complexes are 8.9°, 8.1°, and 4.6°. The AQP structure therefore places the KMSKS loop approximately 20% (0.19) of the way toward the Products conformation, consistent with a similar estimate based on RMSDs (0.16). We return to the possible dynamic participation of domain orientation in the catalytic process in the Discussion. A last, conspicuous difference between the two binary, closed complexes lies in the path of the loop (112­119) that forms a gate over the active site and probably helps anchor the tRNA's 3 terminus for aminoacylation. The terminal residues (112­113) of the -helix (106­113) in the PreTS state unwind, creating a significantly modified path for the main chain in this region. The effect is to move this loop in the opposite direction from the KMSKS loop across the active site, thereby slightly opening the crevice to the active site.

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

115 More unexpected was the accommodation of a longer phosphate tail by the TrpRS active site. Thermodynamic linkage between binding free energies and conformations implies that different enzyme conformations selectively bind different ligands. By this reasoning, the , , and  phosphates of AQP might be expected to superimpose on the ATP triphosphate, with its terminal phosphate extending beyond the exit gate of the active site, delimited by side-chains of Ser196 and Lys111. However, rather than extending fully, the AQP terminal pyrophosphate moiety occupies very nearly the same position as the pyrophosphate leaving group in the ATP complexes, "scrunching" the -phosphate in between it and the AMP moiety. Major differences between the two adenine nucleotide ligands are thus confined to the configuration of the P phosphate and Mg2+ in the ATP complexes and the P and P phosphate groups of AQP. Fitting the P and P phosphates into the pocket formed by the KMSKS loop compels the polyphosphate to turn sharply at the -phosphate, which therefore overlaps the volume occupied by the Mg2+ in PreTS complex structures. The extra phosphate relocates the -phosphate by  0.4 Å toward the tryptophan carboxylate nucleophile while pressing the PPi mimic deeper into the KMSKS loop. As a consequence, the bridging oxygen atom between P and P (O3) assumes a position 2.73 Å from P, compared to the corresponding distance in ATP (1.62 Å; Figure 7(a)). This arrangement is quite close to that expected for a dissociative transition state. The presence of the additional -phosphate group imposes two unusual interactions on nearby electronegative groups: O1_146-O2 and O1­O1 (Figure 7(c) and bottom two rows in Table 3). The distances of these contacts, 2.41 Å, implies that they must share protons to minimize electrostatic repulsion. Both interactions therefore entail an increase of several pH units in the pKas of the respective constituent acidic groups. Their contributions to binding affinity therefore are likely to be unfavorable.32 The P oxygen atoms also form weak hydrogen bonds to N2-Gln147 and N2-Gln9. The former interaction is absent entirely, while the latter is directed toward the -phosphate (3.08 Å) and Mg2+ (3.8 Å) in the PreTS ATP complexes. Thus, the -phosphate seems to exploit an environment similar to that of the Mg2+ whose volume it replaces. Comparison of binding interactions in the ATP and AQP complexes The subtle repositioning of the PPi mimic significantly improves its interactions with the KMSKS and loop (Figure 7(c)). Notably, a hydrogen bond between S194 and K192 in the ATP complexes is broken in the AQP complex, and both residues make hydrogen bonds to phosphate oxygen atoms, one of which (S194-O3) is new. The novelty of the S194 interaction motivated us to inventory all contacts between TrpRS and both adenine nucleotides.

Absence of magnesium and effective binding affinity of AQP The electron density for the nucleotide-binding site is shown in Figure 5 and modelling of an AQP molecule into Fourier difference maps is unambiguous. P and P show up in the density at the level of sulphur atoms whereas P and P are at a level equivalent to the most stable backbone carbon atoms. Curiously, no density appears for a counter cation in the AQP complex. Polyphosphates have high affinity for magnesium ions in solution, and Mg 2+ was present in excess in crystallization. However, the position of the -phosphate replaces much of the volume occupied by magnesium in the ATP complexes, and no density appears elsewhere near the phosphate groups. As noted above, there appears to be a competition between Mg2+:AQP and AQP:TrpRS interactions, such that AQP binds to TrpRS at least as tightly as it does to Mg2+. AQP configuration and environment The adenosine moiety superimposes remarkably precisely on the position taken in the ATP complex (Figure 7), making in most cases essentially the same interactions with the protein. Carbonyl oxygen atoms from Ile183 and Met193 recognize the N6 amino group, and the purine ring is centered on the carbonyl-carbon of the conserved Gly21 as in all TrpRS adenine nucleotide complexes.11,15 If the RF domains are aligned (Figure 6(b)), the adenosine, ribose, and terminal pyrophosphate moieties of ATP and AQP superimpose closely (Figure 7(a)). The ribose position has also changed little from its position in the closed ATP complex, and therefore differs from its unique position observed in the ATP-indolmycin complex.30 However, Gly144 from the 144GxDQ147 sequence which faces the ribose, has shifted toward the O2 hydroxyl allowing the nitrogen group to make an H-bond with OD2 of Asp146 (Table 3). Three water molecules found in all TrpRS crystal structures that contain the adenosine moiety (five PreTS complexes and six Products complexes) are also preserved in the immediate neighborhood of the nucleotide in the AQP complex (Figure 6(b)). One (W557) stacks over the purine ring bridging the D146 carboxylate to the C-terminal -strand of the Rossmann fold (residue 181). Another (W541) lies between the ribose 3-OH group and the S6 hydroxyl group and the G7 carbonyl oxygen. S6 is structurally homologous to C35 in B. stearothermophilus TyrRS, which plays a significant role in transition stabilization, probably via a homologous bound water molecule.31 The third, W513, links the T15 hydroxyl group of the TIGN signature to the nonbridging O2, of the nucleotide. This water molecule may protonate the transition state configuration of that oxygen, assuming a role played by histidine in the canonical HIGH signature. Three additional water molecules (gray) observed in the ATP complexes are missing from the AQP complex.

·

116

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

Figure 6. (a) Plot of RMSD between TrpRS:AQP coordinates and the pre-transition state complex with ATP (black) and that with the adenylate product complex (magenta). Coloured beige and gray rectangles highlight two groups of RMSD values from domains that move in opposite directions, relative to one another, in the catalytic transition. (b) Ribbon drawing of superimposed backbones for the following monomers: cyan, ATP complex; magenta, AQP complex; and wheat, the Trp-5AMP complex. The dimer interface is at the top, and points upward and to the left.

The resulting inventory, with standard deviations based on the two PreTS crystal structures, 1M83 and 1MAU, is compiled according to binding group subsite in Table 3. All subsites show shortened contacts with the AQP ligand, relative to ATP. These changes amount to seven standard deviations in the pyrophosphate-binding subsite, to five standard deviations in the ribose-binding subsite, and to nine standard deviations in the adenine-binding subsite. The only contact that does not shorten is

that between the 3OH group and W541. The differential contacts include both van der Waals and hydrogen-bonding interactions. They are uniform and widely distributed throughout the entire volume occupied by adenine nucleotide. Notably, the least dramatic changes, both in quantity and in significance occur in the environment of the -phosphate, which shorten by less than one standard deviation. Thus, the strengthened interactions to the adenosine and PPi moieties, together

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding Table 3. Active site binding changes
1M83 (Å) Adenosine C17-C5 C17-C6 C17-N1 C17-C2 C17-N3 C17-C4 C144-N3 Ribose O2-O2_146 O3-Wat541 O2-N144 C5-C1_8 C4-C22 O3-C143 PPi O1-N111 O1-N192 O2-O11 O3-O194 O3-O196 N2_18_O3(O2) P O1-N195 O2-N9 Water molecules HOH_634_O1 HOH_529_O1(O1) HOH_565_O1(O1) HOH_513_O2(O2) HOH_513_O1_15 4.09 4.10 4.01 3.96 3.97 4.00 4.33 1MAU (Å) 4.07 4.06 3.97 3.94 3.96 4.01 4.31 AQP (Å) 4.05 3.91 3.72 3.76 3.87 3.99 4.05 Averages: 2.6 2.85 3.05 3.56 4.025 3.4 Averages: 2.85 2.46 2.20 2.68 2.39 2.84 Averages: 2.65 2.96 Averages: Absent Absent Absent 2.65 2.53 Averages: Delta () (Å) - 0.03 - 0.17 - 0.27 - 0.19 - 0.10 - 0.02 - 0.27 -0.149 - 0.08 0.23 - 1.03 - 0.18 - 0.25 - 0.13 -0.240 - 0.11 - 0.17 - 0.32 - 1.47 - 0.23 - 0.19 -0.414 -0.095 0.025 -0.035 Sigma () (Å) 0.014 0.028 0.028 0.014 0.007 0.007 0.014 0.0162 0.057 0.064 0.042 0.021 0.061 0.035 0.0467 0.057 0.014 0.092 0.071 0.050 0.064 0.0577 0.050 0.050 0.050

117

/sig - 2.1 - 6.0 - 9.5 - 13.4 - 13.4 - 2.1 - 19.1 - 9.19 - 1.4 3.5 - 24.3 - 8.2 - 4.2 - 3.5 - 5.13 - 1.9 - 12.0 - 3.4 - 20.8 - 4.5 - 3.0 - 7.17 - 1.92 0.51 - 0.71

2.72 2.67 4.05 3.75 4.32 3.50

2.64 2.58 4.11 3.72 4.24 3.55

3.00 2.62 2.45 4.20 2.65 2.99

2.92 2.64 2.58 4.10 2.58 3.08

2.71 2.9

2.78 2.97

3.53 3.39 4.17 2.76 2.55

3.65 3.44 4.15 2.77 2.60

- 0.11 - 0.04 -0.0783

0.004 0.031 0.0173

- 31.8 - 1.4 - 3.62

Other catalytically relevant changes P-Nucleophile P-N_TrpNH (1MAU) P-Leaving group P-P; P-P 2.98 Mg2+, P equivalence P- Mg Mg2+-O1_146 Mg2+-O_bridge KMSKS internal O194-N192 Inferred proton-sharing O1-O1 O1_146-O2 1.60 4.44 3.83

3.50 2.96 1.83 4.63 3.92

3.11 4.11

- 0.39 1.14 0.0106 107.3

3.94 2.84 Averages: 4.24 2.41 2.41

- 0.59 - 1.04 -0.814 1.245

0.131 0.064 0.098 0.0071

- 4.5 - 16.1 - 9.21 176.1

2.99

3.00

with the three displaced water molecules (Figure 7(b)) provide the only convincing structural basis for the higher affinity of the TrpRS:AQP complex.

Discussion
The mechanisms by which Class Ic aaRS catalyze amino acid activation have been the object of considerable investigation. Mutational studies of

TyrRS combined with pre-steady-state kinetics8,33 demonstrated catalytic roles for numerous residues remote from the site of chemical changes in the transition state for tyrosine activation. Although lacking in many structural details, these studies sketched convincingly the outlines of a novel source of catalytic rate enhancement. Participation of these residues is both significant and transient; they affect only the nucleotide; and, in the case of the PPibinding subsite, they are limited to a role in

118 transition-state binding. Despite these data, the overall mechanism remains sketchy. While they are crucial, mutational and kinetic data can be interpreted in different ways, because they lack important structural details. Thus, they are hard to match with models of the transition state configuration of ATP itself during the catalyzed in-line displacement of PPi by the -carboxylate. The structure of the TrpRS:AQP complex brings complementary new structural data to bear on how the remote residues implicated by Fersht's studies might contribute to the mechanism. We suggest in this Discussion how data reported here bear on six questions relevant to the catalytic mechanisms of amino acid activation by aaRS: (1) Why is AQP unable to function as a substrate? (2) What is the catalytic role of the single Mg2+ in the rate acceleration observed for class I aaRS? (3) How does the metal interact with other potential sources for electrostatic catalysis? (4) Are AQP:protein interactions similar to any of those responsible for accelerating amino acid activation? (5) Does domain motion (untwisting) play a catalytic role, and if so, how? (6) Do class I and class II aaRS share a common transition state stabilization mechanism? Why is AQP not a substrate? Chemically, triphosphate should be approximately as good a leaving group as pyrophosphate. If the TrpRS active site stabilized only the altered, transition state configuration of the phosphate group, one might expect to see a lag corresponding to the depletion of AQP, followed by rapid formation of [32P]ATP. This does not occur, implying that the interaction of AQP with TrpRS precludes its acting as a substrate. We suggest two, mutually complementary, reasons for this. First, excluding the divalent metal from the active site precludes a catalytic role with AQP. Second, the superimposed structures in Figure 7(a) suggest that the scrunched tetraphosphate, having already positioned the adenosine and PPi moieties to approximate the transition state configurations recognized by TrpRS, has insufficient room in the active site to expand and break the P-P linkage.

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

How does Mg2+ accelerate phosphoryl transfer? Detailed empirical valence bond (EVB) simulations of two nuclease mechanisms34 indicated that the electrostatic interactions with Mg2+ contribute > 10 orders of magnitude in rate enhancement in the phosphodiester hydrolysis catalyzed by enzymes using both one35 and two36 Mg2+ ions. In light of that estimate, it is somewhat startling that Mg2+ accelerates uncatalyzed phosphoryl-transfer reactions by a factor of only 2 or 3.1,31,43 Numerous reports suggest that Mg2+ plays similar roles in the mechanisms of aaRS. Previous estimates for TrpRS catalysis11 suggested that Mg2+ accelerates the catalyzed reaction by a factor of at least 100. However, it is surprisingly difficult to exclude Mg2+ from assays. We therefore have repeated the experiments described by Retailleau et al., using buffers and ATP scrubbed with Chelex 10037 and then supplemented with increasing concentrations to 5 mM EDTA. Equilibrium calculations indicate that under these conditions, the free [Mg2+] should be less than 0.01 nM, while the Km for Mg2+ is around 2 M.11 At the highest EDTA levels, TrpRS activity plateaus at rates about four orders of magnitude slower than that with Mg2+. The divalent metal therefore appears to contribute a major fraction of the TrpRS transition stabilization free energy. The contrast between the strong dependence of aaRS catalysis on Mg2+ and its minimal impact on the uncatalyzed rate implies that the protein itself must link the Mg2+ mechanistically to the transition state. The TrpRS active-site Mg2+ configuration compounds the question: no active-site residues interact directly with the Mg2+ in any of the ground-state structures, although simulations suggest that Q9 may play a role in the transition state Mg2+ configuration (H. Hu, personal communication). We recently identified a "minimal catalytic domain" (MCD) in the TrpRS Rossmann dinucleotide-binding fold, which we have excised and engineered for stability.2 This 130-residue fragment includes all but one of the residues (K111) that interact with the two substrates. It catalyzes tryptophan activation roughly five orders of magnitude more slowly than the intact protein. Transition state stabilization of 109-fold by the MCD is comparable to that from the metal in nuclease reactions.34 A

Figure 7. Differences between the closed, pre-transition state ATP complex and the complex formed with AQP. (a) The two ligands are supeimposed and precisely aligned, once the RF domains are aligned. The adenosine, ribose and terminal pyrophosphate moieties of ATP (functional color) and AQP (wheat) compounds superimpose closely; the differences being largely in the configuration of the P phosphate and Mg2+ in the ATP complexes and the P and P phosphate groups of AQP. A consequence of the sequestration of the P and P phosphates into the pocket formed by the KMSKS loop is that the bridging oxygen atom between P and P (O3) is 2.73 Å from P, compared to the corresponding distance in ATP (1.62 Å). (b) Three water molecules (blue) conserved in all TrpRS crystal structures that contain the adenosine moiety (five PreTS complexes and six Products complexes) are also preserved in the AQP complex. Three additional water molecules (gray) observed in the ATP complexes are missing from the AQP complex. (c) Detailed changes are conspicuous in the interactions between the KMSKS loop and the PPi mimic. Notably, a hydrogen bond between S194 and K192 in the ATP complexes is broken in the AQP complex, and both residues make strong hydrogen bonds to phosphate oxygen atoms. Dashed lines denote close contacts between negatively charged oxygen atoms, expected to increase pKa values for associated protons.

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

119

Figure 7 (legend on previous page)

120 reasonable inference is that the rudi-mentary MCD active-site, while providing no direct linkage to Mg2+, nonetheless provides an environment in which electrostatic catalysis can function at a significant level. The functional linkage between the protein and Mg2+, therefore, depends strongly on as yet unspecified interactions within the active site. How does Mg2+ interact with other potential sources of electrostatic catalysis present in TrpRS? Figure 8 shows a transition-state model derived from the AQP:TrpRS complex coordinates. The

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

pyrophosphate atoms and the AMP moiety are taken directly from the  and -phosphate groups and adenosine of AQP; the -phosphate was converted to a metaphosphate. The Mg2+ was located to equilibrate its average distances from surrounding coordinating groups. Admiraal and Herschlag1 describe five characteristics of the dissociative character in the uncatalyzed transition state for terminal phosphate hydrolysis.1 Uncatalyzed pyrophosphoryl transfer, associated with synthetic reactions like amino acid activation, proceed by a transition state with somewhat less dissociative character than the terminal phosphate hydrolysis (38; D. Herschlag,

Figure 8. Structure-based, schematic representation of the transition state for phosphoryl transfer by TrpRS. (a) The environment of the carboxylate nucleophile. (b) The active site showing the environment of the leaving pyrophosphate group. Light red and blue shaded ellipses indicate regions of negative and positive electrostatic potential arising from active site residues, and illustrated in Figure 9.

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

121 ative charge on the oxygen bridging the  and phosphates of ATP. Interactions with the bridging oxygen atom in the scissile bond also include a contact (2.9 Å) with N2 of N18 in the TIGN signature and one (3.0 Å) with N of K195 in the KMSKS signature. The special focus on this bridging oxygen atom is in keeping with the expectation that it develops the greatest increase in negative charge in the transition state (iii). (iv) Modest increases in negative charge develop on the non-bridging oxygen atoms of the leaving group. Groups arrayed about the  and phosphates of AQP (K111, K192, K195, S194, S196; Figure 8(b)), and in particular the novelty of the interaction of S194 with the -phosphate, provide considerable evidence that were the PPi leaving group of ATP to move into the same position as the - phosphate groups of AQP, the PPi binding subsite would stabilize increased negative charge on the leaving group. T15 from the TIGN signature also interacts via a conserved, bound water molecule with the nonbridging oxygen O2 (2.9 Å). This notable interaction could donate a proton to the newly formed PPi. These multiple electropositive interactions are all consistent with (iv). (v) Items (ii), (iii), and (iv) together imply that the change in electrostatic potential between ground state and transition state is dipolar. For amino acid activation, the -phosphate becomes relatively more positive, the PPi leaving group more negative, relative to the ground state. The graphic representation of the electrostatic field in the active site (Figures 8 and 9) reveals that the immediate environment of the scissile bond is indeed complementary to

personal communication). The TrpRS active site in the AQP complex nevertheless reflects each of the following properties: (i) The nucleophile is little changed between ground state and transition state. Warshel34 argues from simulations that the hydroxy nucleophile in hydrolytic cleavage of phosphodiester bonds must be stabilized, and implicates the metal in this role in both single and twometal mechanisms. The tryptophan carboxylate nucleophile is four orders of magnitude more acidic than water, and therefore requires correspondingly less electrostatic stabilization. The hydrogen-bonding arrangement involving Y125, water W613, the Mg2+, and the tryptophan NH2 group all appear to influence the electronic configuration of one carboxylate oxygen atom (arbitrarily O2) in such a way that the other oxygen atom can serve more effectively as the nucleophile (Figure 8(a)). The NH2 group may ensure that the tyrosine hydroxyl group serves as a hydrogen bond donor to the O2 atom, while the polarity of W613 imposed by its proximity to the catalytic Mg2+ ensures that the O2 atom remains conjugated, freeing the O1 pi electrons for nucleophilic attack. The Mg2+ may, therefore, indirectly sustain the requisite properties of the inline carboxylate oxygen, in keeping with Fothergill et al.34. Notably, however, the tryptophan subsite undergoes little, if any rearrangement throughout the known catalytic cycle, from which we infer that there is little modulation of the nucleophile, consistent with (i). (ii) The non-bridging oxygen atoms of the chemically changing phosphoryl group (P in this case) show a modest decrease in electron density. Although the O1 atom interacts with the Mg2+, the non-bridging oxygen atoms of the phosphate in Figure 8(b) do not interact with any active-site cationic residues that might further stabilize increased negative charge. The sole polar interaction from the protein that appears poised to assume such a role is the backbone amide nitrogen of Q9. This group would form a better hydrogen bond to the non-bridging -phosphate oxygen, O2, as the three phosphate oxygen atoms become planar in either a metaphosphate or pentavalent phosphate transition state. Indeed, this interaction is reminiscent of the use of backbone amide groups to form the "oxyanion hole" in serine proteases.39 The electostatic neutrality of this group, however, is consistent with (ii). (iii) The bridging oxygen atom of the leaving group develops the greatest increase in negative charge. In contrast to the relative lack of attention to the -phosphate, the similar positions of the -phosphate of AQP and the Mg2+ position in the PreTS state suggest that the Mg2+ is potentially suited to compensate increased neg-

Figure 9. Electrostatic surface charge density in the TrpRS active site. Blue and red colors represent positive and negative charge, respectively, on a range from -30 to 30 electron volts/Å2. The ligand is AQP, and the  and phosphate groups are nestled into the leaving group subsite, which is entirely surrounded by positive charge density. The -phosphate and nucleophile are deep within the pocket and are surrounded by negative charge density (prepared with SPOCK).

122 a dipolar transition state. The minus charges on D146 and the tryptophan carboxylate provide a negative field proximal to the -phosphate and on the face of the metaphosphate facing the nucleophile, while the plus charges of basic residues just enumerated provide a positive field around the leaving group, consistent with (v). Do TrpRS:AQP interactions resemble any that accelerate amino acid activation? The 105-fold activity deficit in the MCD implies additional interactions between the active site and the other parts of the protein, which alter either the structure of the MCD active site, or how it functions, or both. If, as we suggested above, the TrpRS MCD provides a rudimentary environment facilitating electrostatic catalysis by Mg2+, the remainder of the protein must enhance that rate by five orders of magnitude by some sort of fine-tuning, which may complement and "supercharge" the catalytic effect of the Mg 2+ . The AQP thermodynamics and structure shed new light on the possible nature of this amplified catalytic contribution in the intact protein. The affinity of TrpRS for AQP falls short of values observed for close transition state mimics of other reactions.25 Moreover, the geometry and charge distribution of the configurations immediately surrounding the scissile bond are radically different in AQP and in the putative transition state derived for Mg2+ ATP. The -phosphate has a ground state configuration, while the bound form significantly distorts the charge distribution expected from the transition state Mg2+ ATP configuration. Yet, AQP binding is 200-fold tighter than ATP and results directly in crystals nearly isomorphous to those of the Pre-transition state complexes reported previously.11 The energetics of the dramatic differences between the AQP -phosphate and the Mg2+ cannot be evaluated on the basis of data reported here. It is likely, however, that since the -phosphate cannot mimic anything like a transition state configuration, its interactions with TrpRS contribute unfavorably to the AQP binding affinity. If the 200-fold greater affinity of AQP does, as we believe, represent binding interactions similar to those in the transition state, these must lie elsewhere in the complex. To what extent, then, might AQP resemble the transition state? The additional -phosphate group in AQP has a distinctive structural consequence: it pushes the terminal PPi mimic and the -phosphate away from each other by approximately the amount expected for a transition state with dissociative character (Figure 7(a)). Mimicking that separation drives the adenosine and PPi moieties deeper into binding pockets on opposite sides of the domain boundary, the adenosine toward the Rossmann fold and the PPi toward the KMSKS loop and C-terminal anticodon-binding domain, where each benefits from enhanced binding interactions. The  and -phosphate groups of the PPi mimic intensify all of the interactions seen between

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

the KMSKS loop and the  and -phosphates of the PPi leaving group of ATP, and a new interaction develops from S194 of the KMSKS loop. These and corresponding interactions to the adenosine are strengthened (Table 3). The 200-fold greater affinity of AQP, relative to Mg2+ ATP, suggests that these distributed interactions must be strong enough to compensate for the unfavorable electrostatic substitutions near the -phosphate plus -3.2 Kcal/mol of additional binding free energy. Complementarity of the active site to the actual transition state may therefore be extensively delocalized into the TrpRS adenosine and PPi-binding subsites, as suggested by the TyrRS mutational and kinetic studies.

·

AQP appears to meet in a novel way the usual criteria for a transition state mimic AQP is not a substrate. It binds to TrpRS with substantially higher affinity than does ATP. It interacts with the active site in a manner suggesting the distributed origins of enhanced transition state affinity. TrpRS responds to the altered configurations of adenosine and the PPi mimic by enhancing previously identified interactions to ATP and by forming novel binding interactions. Table 3 documents that the active site closes more or less uniformly on the inhibitor. The broad distribution of interactions responsible for the higher affinity of AQP throughout the adenine nucleotide-binding subsites is fully consistent with the extensive mutational data for the homologous TyrRS system,8 which implicated comparable interactions in transition state binding. Both the high binding affinity of AQP and the crystal structure therefore verify in unexpected detail many expectations for a transition state in which transient, strong binding to the adenosine and PPi moieties are important for transition state stabilization. In summary, introduction of the -phosphate between P and the PPi leaving group lengthens the distance between the leaving group and P, moving the former into the KMSKS loop and the latter toward the nucleophile. The resulting configuration strengthens a variety of distributed binding interactions that, we suggest, contribute to transition state stabilization. What is the role of domain motion? The free energy cost of induced-fit, + 3.0 Kcal/mol, measured for the first time here, is quite substantial. How might this stored free energy be utilized during catalysis? A partial, qualitative, solution to this puzzle emerged from MD simulations, which revealed a significant interaction between the PPi oxygen distances to Mg2+ and to the -NH2 groups of K111 and K192,28 implicating that interaction directly in the endergonic twist angle between domains in the PreTS state. The exergonic untwisting domain motion observed in the Products conformation,40,41 and the strengthening of interactions to PPi in the AQP

·

·

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

123 reaction carried out by nucleic acid polymerases36 and the associated exonucleolytic reaction.50 In most Class I active sites, on the other hand, the KMSKS loop has been implicated by mutational7,8,51 and structural52,53 studies as a (dynamic) binding site for the pyrophosphate leaving group. Further, the KMSKS loop weakens ATP binding in the pretransition state ground state, while strengthening transition-state binding. 28,51,54 Thus, conserved lysine residues and a single Mg2+ in Class I active sites play slightly different roles to those played by conserved arginine residues and multiple Mg2+ ions in Class II enzymes. Mg2+ therefore must function somewhat differently in Class I and Class II aaRS. An important consequence is that there is likely a requirement for the single Mg2+ in Class I mechanisms to be more mobile than the multiple metals in Class II acive sites, consistent with the absence of protein ligands and the previously observed weakening of Mg2+­phosphate oxygen interactions by lysine -amino groups observed in TrpRS.28 There are two exceptions to the Class I pattern in which the second lysine is missing from the KMSKS signature. Arginyl-tRNA synthetases provide a second lysine from upstream of the HIGH signature.16 Eukaryotic cytoplasmic TrpRSs provide instead an arginine from a similar position homologous to Q9.55 In these enzymes, this upstream arginine residue might help stabilize a pentavalent phosphoryl moiety, rather than the metaphosphate that appears more appropriate in B. stearothermophilus TrpRS. Concluding remarks The path actually taken by a particular enzymatic or non-enzymatic system through the two-dimensional surface of bond-breaking and bond-making is difficult to determine, but can be studied experimentally by kinetic isotope effects,56,57 and theoretically by quantum-mechanical simulations.58,59 In particular, the low-energy path may depend critically on the balance between the electrostatic charges developed on the participants and the ability of the environment (solution or enzymatic) to complement it.6 Release of pyrophosphate in biosynthetic reactions can generate altered negative charges on a relatively large number of phosphate oxygen atoms, making such determination especially difficult. For this reason, any conclusion regarding the precise nature of the transition state for tryptophan activation by TrpRS must remain speculative without further experimental and computational work. The data reported here underscore the importance of doing such studies. The affinity of a transition state analog should respond in the same way as the enzymatic rate to any perturbation that changes the rate,23 leading to a linear free energy relation. An orthogonal experimental test of the extent to which AQP mimics the transition state would thus be to measure AQP affinity for a range of variant TrpRSs with different activities. The activity of the TrpRS MCD is reduced

complex demonstrated here imply that breaking the bond between the bridging oxygen atom and the phosphorus would allow the PPi leaving group to form stronger bonds to the KMSKS loop as it rotates away from the -phosphate, likely accompanied by the Mg2+ , which is not present in the Product complex with Trp-5AMP.13,15 Moreover, the domain re-orientation associated with AQP binding, which rotates the KMSKS loop toward the Products conformation, is exergonic.28 Two reinforcing effects therefore contribute to higher AQP affinity; the separated adenosine and PPi fit better into their respective binding subsites, and the enabling domain re-orientation is energetically favorable. Loss of the twist takes the ribose and PPi-binding subsites in opposite directions, suggesting an element of strain in the catalytic mechanism. The structural re-organization of the TrpRS active site, in the conversion of the PreTS to the Products conformation via the intermediate AQP-bound state suggests that relocation of the leaving group could occur prior to the approach of the nucleophile, as in a fully dissociative transition state. The problem with this notion is the well-known presumption that protein conformations are stabilized by non-bonded interactions far too weak to distort chemical bonds.42 Essentially, this argument is that van der Waals forces change rapidly with distance, so strain can be relaxed by small atomic movements. The development of incremental binding energy in the AQP complex suggests a novel formulation of the strain that is not vitiated by the argument of Levitt and Warshel. Coordinated increases in binding to the dissociating pyrophosphate leaving group, coupled to its mechanical relocation can effectively strain the P-P linkage statistically, by selecting those bondlength fluctuations that lead to bond breaking without actually changing equilibrium bond distances. By coupling the unfavorable free energy changes associated with the induced-fit to the stronger binding interactions to the dissociated leaving group, the domain relocation therefore could have a significant catalytic effect. Do Class I and Class II aaRS use different mechanisms? The distinction between the class-defining consensus motifs, HIGH and KMSKS for Class I,43­45 and motifs 2 and 3 for Class II,46 probably reflects differences in the detailed mechanism by which they catalyze phosphoryl transfer. Class II aaRS appear poised to stabilize developing negative charges on the non-bridging oxygen atoms in a pentavalent phosphate group using a conserved arginine residue from Motif 2. Moreover, Class II active sites do not provide an extensive, mobile binding site for the PPi leaving group, whose negative charges appear to be neutralized primarily by multiple Mg2+ ions coordinated by active-site glutamic acid residues.47­49 This arrangement is reminiscent of that in the "two-Mg2+ mechanism" suggested for the analogous synthetic

124 by five orders of magnitude.2 This fragment should not be inhibited by AQP, because the free AQP concentration cannot be increased by that relative amount. Within the range between native TrpRS and its minimal catalytic domain lie a number of engineered fragments and point mutants with different specific activities. It should therefore be possible to compare the AQP affinity and activity of such variants, along lines suggested by Wolfenden.23

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

Crystallography of the TrpRS:AQP complex Recombinant native and selenomethionylated TrpRS of B. stearothermophilus were overexpressed in E. coli and purified as described.12 Binary native complex crystals were grown by microdialysis (5 l of 4 mg/ml protein versus 2000 ml well). The protein stock buffer (0.6 M potassium phosphate solution in the presence of 50% (v/v) glycerol) was then extensively exchanged by a precipitant solution containing only  1 M sodium citrate (pH 7.5 0, 10 mM MgCl2 and 10 mM (freshly in solution) tri (cyclohexylammonium) adenosine 5 tetraphosphate (AQP) (commercial source SIGMA). One mono crystal appeared within two weeks and then grew rapidly to suitable dimension 0.3 mm × 0.3 mm × 0.3 mm for X-ray diffraction experiment. Prior to the flash-cooling performed directly in the stream of liquid nitrogen at 100 K, the crystal was quickly dipped into a 15% (v/v) glycerol cryoprotectant solution containing 0.1 M cæsium chloride. Refined value for crystal mosaicity during data reduction was equal to 0.56°. Data were recorded on a RAXIS-RIGAKU IV setup, at the copper K wavelength, using a 18 cm Mar image plate, in a single sweep of 70 images with 1° of oscillation. Diffraction data were processed using the HKL package61 (see Table 1 for statistics). Dataset was 95% complete to 2.5 Å but the reflections in the last resolution shell present an average I/ of 2.0 (between 2.59 and 2. 5 Å) and a Rsym < 0.5. Native and derivative structure-factor amplitudes were calculated using TRUNCATE62,63 and then derivative amplitudes were scaled relative to the natives between 10 and 4.0 Å using the program SCALEIT.64,63 Later, more redundant and higher resolution data were collected from a selenomethionylated crystal complexed with an Mg ++ ATP using the same X-ray diffraction setup (see Table 4). This potential derivative crystal turned out to be more isomorphous with the native AQP complex than former ATP complex crystals (RISO = 0.163 versus 0.428 see Table 4) and therefore was useful for IR phasing. Molecular replacement using the AMoRe software65 was then used to place a model (protein atoms from 1M83) in the asymmetric unit. The best solution obtained after search of rotation function then translation function using X-ray data from 8 to 4 Å resolution had a structure factor correlation coefficient of 69.0 and an R-factor of 33.3%. The output coordinates were divided into five pieces (RF- helix A (residues 1­15 and 30­165), -helix A, (residues Table 4. X-ray data processing
Native, AQP Space group Unit cell parameters a, b (Å) c (Å) Maximum resolution (dmin, Å)a Total reflections measured to dmin Independent reflections to dmin Completeness (%)(a) Rsymb (%)a <I/I)>a Redundancy Riso (8­4 Å)c
a b

Experimental Procedures
Determination of Ki for AQP Pyrophosphate exchange assays were performed as described.11 Assays at AQP concentrations of 4 × 10- 4 M, and 8 × 10- 3 M were analyzed to determine the inhibition constant. Synthesis, purification, and isothermal titration calorimetric analysis of (AQP) When this work started, AQP was commercially available from SIGMA Biochemical (A 4636), and that material was used for all crystallographic experiments and the determination of the inhibition constant, Ki. Once it became clear that AQP represented a potential transition state analog inhibitor, we were unable to purchase more compound. Subsequent titration experiments were therefore carried out using material that we synthesized as follows. The ribonucleotide, 2,3isopropylidineadenosine (SIGMA I 4002; Aldrich 1-2,240-4) was rendered anhydrous by five repeated evaporations of anhydrous dimethylformamide (DMF; Aldrich 22,705-6) and was subsequently maintained under dried (P2O5) nitrogen. The anhydrous nucleotide (0.641 g, 2 mmol) was dissolved in 5 ml of anhydrous DMF and treated with 1.135 g (7 mmol) of 1,1-carbonyldiimidazole (Aldrich 11,553-3) in 10 ml of anhydrous DMF and maintained under dried nitrogen for 12 h, followed by treatment with 21 ml of methanol. After 30 min, the solution was treated with 13.07 g (10 mmol) of tetrabutylammonium tetraphosphate (prepared from Ca2-tetraphosphate, City Chemicals 59415-82-6 by ion exchange chromatography) in 20 ml of anhydrous DMF and maintained under anhydrous conditions for 24 h. The crude 2,3 isopropyllidineadenosinetetraphosphate was filtered, evaporated to dryness, and deblocked using 10% (v/v) triflouroacetic acid/water for 12 h. The tetraphosphate was purified from less highly charged components using ion-exclusion chromatography on Dowex 50W-X4-400. 60 Subsequent purification was achieved by adsorption to acid-washed charcoal and elution at 55 °C with pyridine. The resulting compound was characterized, relative to a commercial sample of AQP, ATP, and ADP by thin-layer chromatography on DEAEcellulose plates using 1.0 M phosphate (pH 3.4), and on Silica gel plates in ethanol:NH3:water, 90:1:9 (by vol.). AQP concentration was determined using 254 = 15,400/ mol/cm. Isothermal titration calorimetry with AQP was performed using a Microcal VP-ITC calorimeter at two different concentrations of ligand (2.4 × 10- 4 M, 8.5 × 10- 5 M) and protein (6 × 10- 6 M, 6 × 10- 5 M) and corrected for dilution of macromolecule and ligand by separate titrations.

SeMet, ATP P43212 62.163 219.937 25­2.16 337,468 23,153 95.6 (74.6) 0.073 (0.44) 12.9 (2.8) 7.8 0.198

P43212 62.178 220.882 20­2.5 125,997 15,946 95 (95) 0.076 (0.58) 9.3 (2.0) 4.1

Highest resolution shell (2.59­2.50 Å)/(2.24­2.16 Å). Rsym = h,k,li <I(h,k,l)>­Ii(h,k,l) /iII(h,k,l) where Ii(h,k,l) is the ith observation of reflection h,k,l and <I(h,k,l)> is the weighted mean of all observations (after rejection of outliers). c Riso = h,k,l FPH­FP /h,k,lFP.

|

|

|

|

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding Table 5. Phasing statistics
Native (1 Cs) Anomalous (acentric reflections) Phasing power RCullis FOM Ave. phase difference to final model (°) 0.178 0.992 SHARP SOLOMON SHARP SOLOMON ARP/wARP Derivative (9 Se) Isomorphous (all reflections) 1.267 0.740 0.329 0.853 67.2 44.1 38.0 Anomalous (acentric reflections) 0.198 0.984

125
and | o­Fc, refined model electron densities that delineates F | the solvent boundary was checked continuously during the refinement process for strongly protein-bound molecules. Few (55) water molecules were included in the model with confidence, as they were (for most of them) already present in the 2.2 Å ATP complex, id PDB code 1M83. The AQP was refined with restrained topology and parameter files established by xplo2d74 and atomic Bfactors were kept correlated. At the end of the refinement, ligand occupancy was refined until convergence after keeping all coordinates and atomic B-values fixed, those for the ligand were set equal to the overall B-value of the protein region surrounding the ligand. Refinement came up with an occupancy value of 0.85. This was followed by another round B-factor refinement (overall value nearly the same as the protein backbone), individual atomic values increasing toward the flexible phosphate tail, attaining almost 60 Å2 for the -phosphate. Two catalytic water molecules, the one (W541;5) that interacts with the hydroxyl group O3 of the ribose and that (W5113; 6.5) that bridges the hydroxyl of Thr15 with an oxygen of a nucleotide phosphate (beta-phosphate in the ATP binary complex) were not among the top list peaks in the difference Fo­Fc Fourier map after protein model completion. They were nevertheless conserved in the final model with B-factor values refined to reasonable values (< 47 Å2). On the top of the list was a strong, round (12) peak of density showing up in the cationic site previously noticed.15 This was modelled as a caesium cation that diffused during crystal post-soaking. A low occupancy (0.3) was attributed to this very heavy atom element to comply with the SHARP refinement statistics and also with a reasonable value of refined thermal parameter. Its coordination sphere is four in this complex, making short interactions (3.5 Å) with three carbonyl oxygen atoms of Q30, Y33 and 74. Q74 and N34 amide groups, sulphur atoms from Met 1 (and possibly that of C35) are also in the vicinity of the cation. The potential of this site to offer variable coordination sphere and chemical nature of neighbors, O, N or S suggests that a large variety of cations could be accommodated, and we previously have identified K+ at this site in crystals grown from potassium salts. However, the present result contrasts to some extent with weak evidence for sodium binding in the binary ATP complex crystallized in sodium citrate. Although this cation function is likely to be structural (this site is located far from the adenylation site, in the first half of the RF domain in a pocket created by two helices that connect the C terminus of helix A to the -strand B on one side and the C terminus of helix B to the -strand C on the other, additional mono or di-valent metal-dependent Table 6. Refinement statistics
Resolution range (Å) R-factor (%) R-free (%) No. of reflections used No. of protein atoms No. of solvent atoms (waters) Av. B-value, protein atoms (Å2) Av. B-value, ligand atoms (Å2) Av. B-value, solvent atoms (Å2) Weighted RMSD from ideality Bond length (Å) 20­2.5 19.1 25.8 15,082 2613 75 (55) 49.3 50.8 (Occ 0.85) 49.3 0.012

Phasing power=<[|FH(calc)|/phase-integrated lack of closure]> RCullis=<phase-integrated lack of closure>/<|FPH­FP|>.

16­29), long belt (residues 166­199), SD (residues 200­ 265), helical long path (residues 266­328) and subjected to a rigid-body fitting using the appropriate macro in CNS66: R-factor decreased from 49% to 44% after significant reorientation of the SD with respect to the RF. Phases derived from the fitting coordinates were then used to calculate isomorphous and anomalous difference Fourier maps to locate positions of heavy atoms. Phasing was provided by isomorphous differences for nine of ten Se-S atoms, plus one cæsium cation whose atomic coordinates were input into SHARP67 to start heavyatom parameter refinement for SIR phasing. The weak anomalous signal was also treated by refining scattering factors for Se-S and Cs at the CuK wavelength. SIR(AS) phases were derived to 2.5 Å with overall figures of merit > 0.3 (see Table 5). Phase quality was sufficient to draw an accurate molecular envelope that permitted solvent-density modification (SOLOMON),68 as implemented within SHARP, to output a detailed electron density map using an optimized starting solvent fraction of 48.7%. The quality of this 2.5 Å map was assessed by the autotracing of about 90% of the protein backbone model in 120 cycles by the wARPNtrace protocol69 through the interface with SHARP. Attempts of side-chain docking with respect to the sequence were performed every 15 cycles and geometry adjustments were done by REFMAC70 and constrained by the SHARP phase distribution. Structure refinement was completed using the program BUSTER71,72 and interfaced with TNT.73 The core of this program implements statistical treatment of both experimental and model structure factors according to the maximum-likelihood and maximum-entropy methods.71 The first part of the process was driven by the maximum likelihood refinement of the atomic parameters of the incomplete {poly-Gly,-Ala,-Ser} ArpWarp model. SIR(AS) phase information output by SHARP as the HendricksonLattman coefficients constrained the partial structure refinement whose stereochemical and geometrical restraints were handled in TNT. During the atomic parameter refinement process, bulk solvent and the random distribution of missing atoms were kept fixed. The missing atoms were utilized as a model-based non-uniform prior to output low-resolution distributions and together with the bulk solvent envelope and the fragment model, accounted for the realspace picture of the crystal content. Maximum-entropy modulation of the envelope for missing atoms aims at recovering accurate density in their expected regions. Although measured amplitudes did not exceed 2.5 Å of resolution, the overlapped part of | o­Fc, refined model 2F |

BUSTER/TNT refinement. R=||Fo|­k|Fc||/|Fo|; R-free=Rfactor for 10% of reflections randomly omitted from the refinement.

126
activities of B. stearothermophilus TrpRS should be worth being investigated. Another residual, significant (9) feature in the Fourier difference was located in the tryptophan-binding pocket, addressing again the issue of contamination of the Trp pocket. This density was fitted as hexylammonium, the counterion of commercially supplied AQP, with the aliphatic group within the hydrophobic cavity, and the carboxylic group of the Trp-binding determinant, D132 directed to the ammonium group. Statistics at the completion of the model refinement are given in Table 6. The final crystallographic R-free is equal to 25.8 and the R-factor is 19.1 for all data between 20.0 and 2.5 Å resolution. The standard deviation on coordinates estimated from the Cruickshank approach within SFCHECK75 is 0.5 Å. Agreement between the model and the SIGMAA 2Fo­Fc final map is assessed by an overall real-space correlation coefficient of 0.85 calculated by the macro rs_fit within O. A plot of these coefficients for each residue is displayed in Figure 4 in relation with the corresponding main chain temperature factors. Geometry of the model was analysed by PROCHECK,76 revealing that almost 93% of residues in the structure are in the most favored regions of the Ramachandran plot (Figure 2). For purposes of coordinate comparisons, all the models were superimposed by LSQKAB using 42 C atoms taken from the first half of the RF domain, which has been used as a reference orientation for previous comparisons among class I aaRSs (Doublié et al, 1995). Color Figures were prepared using MOLSCRIPT77 rendered by RASTER3D78 and PYMOL.79 Protein Data Bank accession code 11. The coordinates for the binary complex of the AQP: TrpRS of B. stearothermophilus and the observed structure factors have been deposited with the RCSB Protein Data Bank, with accession code 2OV4. 12.

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

3. 4. 5.

6. 7.

8. 9.

10.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NIGMS-48519. We are grateful also to Globalphasing Ltd for licenses for SHARP and BUSTER/TNT and for their assistance. We gratefully acknowledge substantive discussions with Barry Lentz and Jan Hermans, which clarified several important issues addressed in determining AQP affinity; with Hao Hu for discussion of his unpublished quantum mechanical and MD simulations. We thank Eric First, Dan Herschlag, Gordon Hammes, Chris Halkides, Jan Hermans, and Richard Wolfenden for their comments on the manuscript. Several reviewers made key suggestions that improved the presentation.
13.

14. 15.

16.

References
1. Admiraal, S. J. & Herschlag, D. (1995). Mapping the transition state for ATP hydrolysis: implications for enzymatic catalysis. Chem. Biol. 2, 729­739. 2. Pham, Y., Li, L., Kim, A., Erdogan, O., Weinreb, V., Butterfosss, G. et al. (2006). A minimal TrpRS catalytic

17. 18.

domain supports sense/antisense ancestry of Class I and II aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Mol. Cell, 25, 851­862. Tetas, M. & Lowenstein, J. M. (1963). The effect of bivalent metal ions on the hydrolysis of adenosine diand tri-phosphates. Biochemistry, 2, 350­357. Mildvan, A. S. (1997). Mechanisms of signaling and related enzymes. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 29, 401­416. Åqvist, J., Kolmodin, K., Florian, J. & Warshel, A. (1999). Mechanistic alternatives in phosphate monoester hydrolysis: what conclusions can be drawn from available experimental data? Chem. Biol. 6, R71­R80. Florian, J. & Warshel, A. (1998). Phosphate ester hydrolysis in aqueous solution: associative versus dissociative mechanisms. J. Phys. Chem. B, 102, 719­734. Fersht, A. (1988). Dissection of the structure and activity of an enzyme. In Design of Enzymes and Enzyme Models (Kaiser, E. T., ed), vol. XXXI, pp. 159­182. Robert A. Welch Foundation, Houston, TX. Fersht, A. R. (1987). Dissection of the structure and activity of the tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase by sitedirected mutagenesis. Biochemistry, 26, 8031­8037. Mechulam, Y., Dardel, F., LeCorre, D., Blanquet, S. & Fayat, G. (1991). Lysine 335, part of the KMSKS signature sequence, plays a crucial role in the amino acid activation catalyzed by the methionyl-tRNA synthetase from Escherichia coli. J. Mol. Biol. 217, 465­475. Schmitt, E., Panvert, M., Blanquet, S. & Mechulam, Y. (1995). Transition state stabilization by the `high' motif of class I aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases: the case of Escherichia coli methionyl-tRNA synthetase. Nucl. Acids Res. 23, 4793­4798. Retailleau, P., Huang, X., Yin, Y., Hu, M., Weinreb, V., Vachette, P. et al. (2003). Interconversion of ATP binding and conformational free energies by tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase: structures of ATP bound to open and closed, pre-transition conformations. J. Mol. Biol. 325, 39­63. Ilyin, V. A., Temple, B., Hu, M., Li, G., Yin, Y., Vachette, P. & Carter, C. W., Jr (2000). 2.9 A crystal structure of ligand-free tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase: domain movements fragment the adenine nucleotide binding site. Protein Sci. 9, 218­231. Doublie, S., Bricogne, G., Gilmore, C. & Carter, C. W., Jr (1995). Tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase crystal structure reveals an unexpected homology to tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase. Structure, 3, 17­31. Brown, K. A., Brick, P. & Blow, D. M. (1987). Structure of a mutant of tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase with enhanced catalytic properties. Nature, 326, 416­418. Retailleau, P., Yin, Y., Hu, M., Roach, J., Bricogne, G., Vonrhein, C. et al. (2001). High-resolution experimental phases for tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase (TrpRS) complexed with tryptophanyl-5AMP. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 57, 1595­1608. Sekine, S.-i., Shimada, A., Nureki, O., Cavarelli, J., Moras, D., Vassylyev, D. G. & Yokoyama, S. (2001). Crucial role of the HIGH-loop lysine for the catalytic activity of arginyl-tRNA synthetase. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 3723­3726. Cavarelli, J. (2003). Pushing induced fit to its limits: tRNBA-dependent active site assembly in Class I aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Structure, 11, 484­486. Delagoutte, B., Moras, D. & Cavarelli, J. (2000). tRNA aminoacylation by arginyl-tRNA synthetase: induced conformations during substrates binding. EMBO J. 19, 5599­5610.

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

127
staphylococcal nuclease. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 112, 2860­2868. Beese, L. S. & Steitz, T. A. (1991). Structural basis for the 3 5 exonuclease activity of Escherichia coli DNA polymerase 1: a two metal ion mechanism. EMBO J. 10, 25­33. Holmquist, B. (1981). Elimination of metals. Methods Enymol. 158, 6­12. Messmore, J. M. & Raines, R. T. (2000). Pentavalent organo-vanadates as transition-state analogues for phosphoryl transfer enzymes. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122, 9911­9916. Robertus, J. D., Kraut, J., Alden, R. A. & Birktoft, J. J. (1972). Subtilisin: a stereochemical mechanism involving transition state stabilization. Biochemistry, 11, 4293­4303. Doublié, S., Bricogne, G., Gilmore, C. J. & Carter, C. W., Jr (1995). Tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase crystal structure reveals an unexpected homology to tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase. Structure, 3, 17­31. Retailleau, P., Hu, M., Bricogne, G., Vonrhein, C., Roversi, P., Blanc, E. et al. (2001). High resolution experimental phases for tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase (TrpRS) complexed with tryptophanyl-5AMP. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 57, 1595­1608. Levitt, M. & Warshel, A. (1976). Theoretical studies of enzymic reactions: dielectric, electrostatic and steric stabilization of the carbonium ion in the reaction of lysozyme. J. Mol. Biol. 103, 227­249. Barker, D. G. & Winter, G. (1982). Conserved cysteine and histidine residues in the structures of the tyrosyl and methionyl-tRNA synthetases. FEBS Letters, 145, 191­193. Webster, T., Tsai, H., Kula, M., Mackie, G. A. & Schimmel, P. (1984). Specific sequence homology and three-dimensional structure of an aminoacyl transfer RNA synthetase. Science, 226, 1315­1317. Hountondji, C., Dessen, P. & Blanquet, S. (1986). Sequence similarities among the family of aminoacyltRNA synthetases. Biochimie, 68, 1071­1078. Eriani, G., Delarue, M., Poch, O., Gangloff, J. & Moras, D. (1990). Partition of tRNA synthetases into two classes based on mutually exclusive sets of sequence motifs. Nature, 347, 203­206. Arnez, J. G., Augustine, J. G., Moras, D. & Francklyn, C. S. (1997). The first step of aminoacylation at the atomic level in histidyl-tRNA synthetase. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 94, 7144­7149. Belrhali, H., Yaremchuk, A., Tukalo, M., BerthetColominas, C., Rasmussen, B., Bosecke, P. et al. (1995). The structural basis for seryl-adenylate and Ap4A synthesis by seryl-tRNA synthetase. Structure, 3, 341­352. Desogus, G., Todone, F., Brick, P. & Onesti, S. (2000). Active site of lysyl-tRNA synthetase: structural studies of the adenylation reaction. Biochemistry, 39, 8418­8425. Steitz, T. A. & Steitz, J. A. (1993). A general two-metalion mechanism for catalytic RNA. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 90, 6498­6502. First, E. A. & Fersht, A. R. (1993). Mutational and kinetic analysis of a mobile loop in tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase. Biochemistry, 32, 13658­13663. Carter, C. W., Jr, Ilyin, V. A., Yin, Y., Huang, X. & Retailleau, P. (2002). Using Crystallography to Understand Enzyme Mechanism. The American Crystallographic Association, St. Paul, MN. Carter, C. W., Jr (2005). Tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetases. The Aminoacyl-RNA Synthetases (Ibba, M.,

19. Cusack, S., Yaremchuk, A. & Tukalo, M. (2000). The 2 A crystal structure of leucyl-tRNA synthetase and its complex with a leucyl-adenylate analogue. EMBO J. 19, 2351­2361. 20. Sekine, S.-i., Nureki, O., Dubois, D. Y., Bernier, S., Chênevert, R., LaPointe, J. et al. (2003). ATP Binding by glutamyl-tRNA synthetase is switched to the productive mode by tRNA binding. EMBO J. 22, 676­688. 21. Sekine, S.-i., Nureki, O., Vassylyev, D. G., Bernier, S., Chênevert, R., LaPointe, J. & Yokoyama, S. (2003). Structural basis for the tRNA-dependent catalytic activation of glutamyl-tRNA synthetase. EMBO J. 22, 676­688. 22. Wolfenden, R. (1976). Transition state analog inhibitors and enzyme catalysis. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng. 5, 271­306. 23. Radzicka, A. & Wolfenden, R. (1995). Transition state and multisubstrate analog inhibitors. Methods Enymol. 249, 284­312. 24. Fersht, A. R. (1999). Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York. 25. Frick, L., Yang, C., Wolfenden, R. & Marquez, V. E. (1989). Binding of pyrimidine-2one-ribonucleoside by cytidine deaminase as the transition state analogue 3,4-dihydrouridine and the contribution of the 4hydroxyl group to its binding affinity. Biochemistry, 28, 9423­9430. 26. Adolfson, R. & Moudrianakis, E. (1978). Control of complex metal ion equilibria in biochemical reaction systems: intrinsic and apparent stability contants of metal adenin nucleotide complexes. J. Biol. Chem. 253, 4378­4379. 27. Majumbder, R., Wang, J. & Lentz, B. (2003). Effects of water soluble phosphotidylserine on bovine factor Xa: functional and structural changes plus dimerization. Biophys. J. 84, 1238­1251. 28. Kapustina, M. & Carter, C. W., Jr (2006). Computational studies of tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase: activation of ATP by induced-fit. J. Mol. Biol. 362, 1159­1180. 29. George, P., Witonsky, R. J., Trachtman, M., Wu, X., SoeqER, Q., Richman, L. et al. (1970). An enquiry into the importance of solution effects in phosphate ester and anhydride reactions. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 223, 1­15. 30. Yin, Y. (1995). Crystallographic study of Bacillus stearothermophilus tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase in the catalytic reaction. PhD, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. 31. Wells, T. N. C. & Fersht, A. R. (1986). Use of binding energy in catalysis analyzed by mutagenesis of the tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase. Biochemistry, 25, 1881­1886. 32. Butler, P. J. G. & Klug, A. (1978). The assembly of a virus. Sci. Am. 239, 62­69. 33. Fersht, A. R., Knill Jones, J. W., Bedouelle, H. & Winter, G. (1988). Reconstruction by site-directed mutagenesis of the transition state for the activation of tyrosine by the tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase: a mobile loop envelopes the transition state in an induced-fit mechanism. Biochemistry, 27, 1581­1587. 34. Fothergill, M., Goodman, M., Petruska, J. & Warshel, A. (1995). Structure-energy analysis of the role of metal ions in phosphodiester bond hydrolysis by DNA polymerase I. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 117, 11619­11627. 35. Åqvist, J. & Warshel, A. (1990). Free energy relationships in metalloenzyme-catalyzed reactions. Calculations of the effects of metal ion substitutions in

36.

37. 38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45. 46.

47.

48.

49.

50. 51. 52.

53.

128
Francklyn, C. & Cusack, S., eds), pp. 99­110, Landes Biosciences/Eurekah.com, Georgetown, TX. First, E. A. & Fersht, A. R. (1995). Analysis of the role of the KMSKS loop in the catalytic mechanism of the tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase using multimutant cycles. Biochemistry, 34, 5030­5043. Yang, X.-L., Otero, F. J., Skene, R. J., McRee, D. E., Schimmel, P. & Ribas de Pouplana, L. s. (2003). Crystal structures that suggest late development of genetic code components for differentiating aromatic side chains. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 100, 15376­15380. Gerretana, B., Frey, P. A. & Cleland, W. W. (2001). Characterization of the transition-state structure of the reaction of kanamycin nucleotydyltransferase by heavy-atom kinetic isotope effects. Biochemistry, 40, 2972­2977. Schramm, V. L. (1999). Enzymatic transition-state analysis and transition-state analogs. Methods Enzymol. 308, 301­355. Florian, J., Goodman, M. & Warshel, A. (2003). Computer simulation of the chemical catalysis of DNA polymerases: discriminating between alternative nucleotide insertion mechanisms for T7 DNA polymerase. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125, 8163­8177. Florian, J., Goodman, M. & Warshel, A. (2005). Computer simulations of protein functions: searching for the molecular origin of the replication fidelity of DNA polymerases. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 102, 6819­6824. Leigh, C. P. H. & Cashion, P. J. (1980). Rapid separation of nucleoside mono-,di-, and triphosphates on ion-exlcusion/exchange columns. J. Chromatog. 192, 490­493. Otwinoski, Z. & Minor, W. (1997). Processing of X-ray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode. Methods Enzymol. 276, 307­326. French, G. S. & Wilson, K. S. (1978). On the treatment of negative intensity observations. Acta Crystallog. sect. A, 34, 517­525. CCP4. (1994). The CCP4 Suite: a programs for protein crystallography. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 50, 760­76364. Howell, L. & Smith, D. (1992). Identification of heavyatom derivatives by normal probability methods. J. Appl. Crystallog. 25, 81­86. Navaza, J. (1997). AMoRe: an automated molecular replacement package. Methods Enymol. 276, 581­594. Brunger, A. T., Adams, P. D., Clore, G. M., DeLano, W. L., Gros, P., Grosse-Kunstleve, R. W. et al. (1998).

TrpRS:AQP: Distributed Transition State Binding

54.

67.

55.

68.

56.

69.

70.

57. 58.

71. 72.

59.

73. 74. 75.

60.

61. 62. 63. 64. 65. 66.

76. 77. 78. 79.

Crystallography & NMR system: a new software suite for macromolecular structure determination. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 54, 905­921. de La Fortelle, E. & Bricogne, G. (1997). Maximumlikelihood heavy-atom parameter refinement for multiple isomorphous replacement and multiwavelength anomalous diffraction methods. Methods Enzymol. 276, 472­494. Abrahams, J. P. & Leslie, A. G. W. (1996). Methods used in the structure determination of bovine mitochondrial F1 ATPase. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 52, 30­42. Myers, R. J., Perrakis, A. & Lamzin, V. S. (2003). ARP/wARP and automatic interpretation of protein electron density maps. Methods Enymol. 374, 229­244. Murshudov, G. N., Vagin, A. & Dodson, E. J. (1997). Refinement of macromolecular structures by the maximum-likelihood method. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 53, 240­255. Bricogne, G. (1997). Bayesian statistical viewpoint on structure determination: basic concepts and examples. Methods Enzymol. 276, 361­423. Blanc, E., Roversi, P., Vonrhein, C., Flensburg, C., Lea, S. M. & Bricogne, G. (2004). Refinement of severely incomplete structures with maximum likelihood in BUSTER-TNT. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 60, 2210­2221. Tronrud, D. E. (1997). TNT refinement package. Methods Enzymol. 277, 306­319. Kleywegt, G. A. & Jones, T. A. (1996). Efficient rebuilding of protein structures. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 52, 826­828. Vaguine, A. A., Richelle, J. & Wodak, S. J. (1999). SFCHECK: a unified set of procedures for evaluating the quality of macromolecular structure-factor data and their agreement with the atomic model. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 55, 191­205. Laskowski, R. A., Moss, D. S. & Thornton, J. M. (1993). Main-chain bond lengths and bond angles in protein structures. J. Mol. Biol. 231, 1049­1067. Kraulis, P. (1991). MOLSCRIPT: a program to produce both detailed and schematic plots of protein structures. J. Appl. Crystallog. 24, 946­950. Merrit, E. A. & Murphy, M. E. P. (1994). Raster 3D version 2.0: a program for photorealistic molecular graphics. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 50, 869­873. Delano, W. F. (2002). The PYMOL Molecular Graphics System PYMOL X11 Hybrid edit. Delano Scientific, San Carlos, CA.

Edited by J. Doudna (Received 7 December 2006; accepted 24 January 2007) Available online 12 March 2007

