Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1754 (2005) 38 ≠ 49 http://www.elsevier.com/locate/bba

Review

Crystallography for protein kinase drug design: PKA and SRC case studies
Christine B. Breitenlechner a, Dirk Bossemeyer b, Richard A. Engh c,*
c

Proteros GmbH, Martinsried, Germany Deutsche Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany Medizinische Chemie, Pharmaforschung, Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Penzberg, Germany
b

a

Received 22 September 2005; received in revised form 27 September 2005; accepted 28 September 2005 Available online 21 October 2005

Abstract Protein crystallography can be used throughout the drug discovery process to obtain diverse information critical for structure based drug design. At a minimum, a single target structure may be available. Optimally, and especially for protein kinases, a broad range of crystal structures should be obtained to characterize target flexibility, structure modulation via co-factor binding or posttranslational modification, ligand induced conformational changes, and off-target complex structures for selectivity optimization. The flexibility of the protein kinases is in contrast to the need for ``crystallizable'' constructs, that is, proteins that crystallize under varying conditions and in varying crystal packing arrangements. Strategies to produce crystallizable protein kinase constructs include truncation to the catalytic domain, co-crystallization with rigidifying ligands, crystallization of known rigid forms, and point mutation to improve homogeneity or mimic less crystallizable proteins. PKA, the prototypical serine/threonine protein kinase, and SRC, a tyrosine kinase and the first identified oncoprotein, provide multiple examples of these various approaches to protein kinase crystallography for drug design. D 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: SRC; PKA; Crystal structure; Drug design; Protein kinase inhibitor; Flexibility

1. Introduction 1.1. ``Structural genomics'' vs. ``structural proteomics'' Structure-based drug design, in its simplest description, aims to derive a drug from the structure of the drug target. This aligns well with the goals of structural genomics [1,2], namely, to determine the structures of the proteins encoded in the genome, or at least enough of them to enable homology modeling of the rest. Practical drug design is however not possible at this simplistic level, in large part because a single protein target encoded in the genome exists in multiple forms in the cell, varying in terms of splicing, post-translational modifications, substrate and co-factor binding, and cellular

location. Additional multiplicity arises from genetic variations between individuals, but especially in diseases like cancer that involve genetic instability. The massive increase in complexity in moving from the gene and ``genomics'' to actual proteins and ``proteomics'' is further augmented when considering that each individual form is flexible, at least at atomic dimensions and potentially involving much larger scale transformations. It is also not possible to calculate ligand (or drug) binding properties accurately, even using very complete structural information, because of the theoretical complexity of the hydrophobic and electronic interactions that determine binding [3,4]. Finally, the properties required for an effective drug involve much more than drug ≠ target interactions [5], including ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism, elimination) characteristics, and especially toxicities [6]. 1.2. The role of crystallography in drug discovery A single target crystal structure will not lead directly to a drug, but rather provides a template for many facets of drug discovery [7]. In general, knowledge of the relevant structures dramatically reduces the number of compound syntheses

Abbreviations: PKA, Protein kinase A; PIFtide, Phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 interacting fragment peptide; CDK2, cyclin-dependent kinase 2; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; PKB, Protein kinase B; PKC, Protein Kinase C; PKG, Protein kinase G; PKI, protein kinase A inhibitor; LCK, Lymphocyte specific protein tyrosine kinase; PKAB4, four-fold PKB-like mutant of PKA * Corresponding author. E-mail address: Richard.Engh@Roche.com (R.A. Engh). 1570-9639/$ - see front matter D 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.bbapap.2005.09.014

C.B. Breitenlechner et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1754 (2005) 38 ≠ 49

39

necessary for optimization of a potential drug, provided that the structures are not misinterpreted, in particular with regard to rigidity. First target structure(s) do not lead directly to a drug, but the information of potential binding sites and substrate geometries enable a focused approach to screening for potential leads. Further structures may identify alternate conformations possibly critical for alternate scaffolds or selectivity properties. Structures of targets in complexes with leads (potential drugs) suggest synthetic variation strategies, depending on optimization needs: potency can be increased by optimizing interactions, pharmacokinetic properties may be optimized with targeted variation of moieties not essential for binding, selectivity may be enhanced (or decreased) by comparing binding modes in related targets, and new binding modes may be discovered by targeted variation of ``essential'' binding moieties. The diversity of approaches requires a flexible, analytical methodology to drug design [8]. As with any experimental technique, the crystal structures that deliver this information must also be evaluated with regard to potential experimental artifacts [9]. A prerequisite for crystallization is that the structure is highly ordered, or becomes so when packed within a crystal lattice. This fact may upwardly bias the estimation of the rigidity of ``typical'' proteins (a bias possibly aggravated by the crystallographers' pride in finding conditions to produce the ``highest quality'' crystal structures with the highest degree of rigidity). Conversely, however, protein crystals are typically 30 ≠ 80% water [10], with protein concentrations comparable to cellular environments; crystal lattices are thus not rigidifying structures but can form when proteins have sufficiently stable folds. In any case, standardized procedures for crystal structure determination generally assume unique atomic positions unless proven otherwise, and similarly, it is usually expected that a ligand will bind with a single, rigid binding mode. This can lead to structure determinations which overlook significant heterogeneity [11] or analogously lead to searches for crystallization conditions that eliminate naturally occurring heterogeneities. Thus, while a single crystal structure may provide a wealth of information, it can leave questions of rigidity unresolvable; multiple structures in multiple crystal packing arrangements however show which structures are rigid, and to what extent, and which regions may be more malleable. For objectivity, crystal structures must be interpreted with careful consideration of the effects of crystal packing and crystallization conditions, with accompanying data from techniques better suited to evaluate flexibility, including nuclear magnetic resonance, surface plasmon resonance, isothermal calorimetry, fluorescence polarization techniques, and so on [8]. To achieve the ``crystallizability'' necessary for reproducible crystal structure determination, the target proteins usually need some sort of modification. The modifications must be chosen to be suitable for the design problem at hand, and the potential effects on structure must be considered parallel with effects of crystal packing and crystallization conditions. The necessary modifications usually contribute to the homogeneity of the protein preparation, often by removing reactive residues or

inactivating autocatalytic proteins, or increase the overall rigidity of the protein, typically by removing flexible peptide termini, by isolating individual rigid folding domains, or by removing flexible surface residues [12]. Sometimes, crystallizability is achieved by adding or mimicking rigidifying cofactors, as in the case of the PKB kinase domain hybrid with activating ligand PIFtide [13]. 1.3. Protein kinase structures Of the over 500 protein kinases identified in the human genome [14], structures of about 50 have been determined in some form [15], and a search in the Protein Data Bank [16] currently matches nearly 400 entries. The large number of structures, both in terms of unique kinases, and also kinases in unique combinations with inhibitors, substrates, or co-factors, enables characterization of their functional features in an unprecedented way. Both the serine ≠ threonine and tyrosine kinases are well represented among the structures. Common to all is the bi-lobal kinase catalytic domain, with the ATP binding site at the interface between an alpha-helical C-terminal lobe and a beta-sheet N-terminal lobe. Several structural features surrounding the ATP binding site are highly conserved among the protein kinases, including the glycine loop or ``flap'' in a beta ribbon fold that covers the ATP phosphate groups, the hinge strand connecting the N- and C-terminal lobes that also locks the adenine of ATP and many inhibitors in place with two or three hydrogen bonds, the activation loop emerging from the ATP pocket with its DFG. . .APE motif boundaries, usually containing an activating phosphorylation site [17], and an alpha helix (the ``C'' or ``PSTAIRE'' helix of PKA and CDK2, respectively) that borders the ATP site and contributes to phosphate anchoring and catalysis via a glutamic acid side chain. These features comprise the activity modulation sites and are often found to be either flexible, or rigidified by ligands or cofactors into activating or inactivating geometries [18]. 1.4. PKA and closely related kinases PKA (Protein Kinase A or cyclic AMP-dependent kinase) is unique among protein kinases in that the full length single chain protein kinase is constitutively active in monomeric form and possesses only a single folding domain that comprises the core kinase catalytic domain and N- and C-terminal extensions. Signaling activity occurs not via phosphorylation, since PKA apparently retains its activated phosphorylation state throughout its existence, but through cAMP mediated release from a tetrameric bundle of two regulatory ``R'' domains and two catalytic domains [19]. A tight binding natural substrate mimic inhibitory peptide forms a stable complex and synergistically enhances ATP binding. This relative simplicity and rigidity may play a role in its apparent crystallizability, as it was the first protein kinase to be crystallized and is often regarded to be the prototypical protein kinase. PKA and some 60 closely related kinases such as PKB (Akt), PKC, PKG, Rho kinase, PDK1, and Aurora make up the AGC kinase family. Several of these are targets for drug

40

C.B. Breitenlechner et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1754 (2005) 38 ≠ 49

design, notably PKC, for which structures have only recently become available [20,21], and Rho kinase as the target for the first clinically approved kinase inhibitor fasudil [22] . The relatively good crystallizability of PKA, possibly due to a higher rigidity relative to the other kinases, has made it an attractive surrogate or ersatz crystallization system for studies of inhibitors targeting other AGC kinases [23,24]. 1.5. The SRC family c-SRC was the first proto-oncoprotein to be identified [25], and is associated with many human cancers, notably including colon carcinomas [26]. It belongs to a family of some 11 nonreceptor tyrosine kinases that share an N-terminal ``unique''SH3 ≠ SH2 ≠ linker-catalytic-tail domain architecture [27 ≠29]. Until very recently, all crystal structures of SRC were of its principle inactive form, an ``assembled'' or ``bundled'' architecture rigidified by a C-terminal tail phosphotyrosine bound to the SH2 domain, and SH3 and kinase domain interactions with the linker peptide. The kinase domain of LCK could be crystallized to show an active form of a SRC family kinase [30]. Very recently, structures of multidomain SRC in an unbundled form [31] and of the kinase domain of SRC have been reported [32]. 2. Crystallography for kinase inhibitor design 2.1. Enhancing or preserving potency A high resolution crystal structure of an enzyme ≠ inhibitor complex hints at an understanding of the binding properties of the inhibitor. Buried surface areas, specific hydrogen bonding and other interactions can be identified that generally correlate with [33] (but do not fully explain [34]) binding energies. Considering the simplest textbook scheme (Fig. 1), the binding free energy is the difference between the free energies of the noncomplexed and complexed systems. Optimization of potency can involve either the stabilization of the complexed form, or by destabilization of the noncomplexed form. Attempts at stabilization or destabilization of free energies can involve either enthalpic or entropic factors [3,4,33]. Stabilization of the complexed state often aims conceptually at increased order, while destabilization of the noncomplexed state can be as simple as increasing the rigidity of the unbound inhibitor to lower the entropic penalty of binding. Alternative-

ly, the goal of a crystal structure might be simply to preserve potency while modifying other properties of an inhibitor. In this case, the structure serves to identify moieties of the inhibitor that may be replaced without adversely affecting the energy of the bound state or stabilizing the unbound state. Although the basic strategies for inhibitor design remain unchanged, protein kinase inhibition follows a scheme typically much more complex than in Fig. 1. The kinase has more than one state that can be inhibited, including ATP bound or unbound states, various phosphorylation states, and differing cofactor or substrate bound states, most of which involve modulation of the structure at or near the ATP binding site. The binding site best suited for low molecular weight inhibition is the ATP binding site [35], so most protein kinase inhibitors will be sensitive to these variations. As more becomes known about the structures of these states, the strategies for inhibitor optimization may be refined to target specific states as desired, if, for example, certain states might enhance selectivity or optimize inhibitory phenotype. 2.2. Selectivity One can hope that stabilization of the complexed state will automatically optimize kinase inhibitor selectivity. However, the cross-reactivity that is likely and evident [36,37] among at least some of the 500 protein kinases involve very similar binding sites and hence can be independent of optimization. Contrary to earlier skepticism regarding the potential for protein kinase selectivity, many selectivity mechanisms have been discovered [35,38] and their character encourages the expectation that more will be identified in the future. Several crystal structures have identified inhibitor binding modes to inactive kinase configurations, often referred to as allosteric binding modes. Imatinib binding to the ABL kinase domain [39] was found to involve an allosteric transition, as was binding to P38 [40]. Such inhibitors, when they induce or significantly stabilize such states, are likely to be selective at least for kinase families that share similar modulation mechanisms. Similarly, inhibitors that depend on interactions with or modulations of kinase specific domains or co-factors will have high selectivity, such as has recently been reported for PH domain-dependent AKT inhibitors [41]. Inhibitor binding modes may involve special interactions with rare residues, such as reactive cysteines or alcohols, with good selectivity. The discovery of an inhibitor induced peptide flip enabled by the rare occurrence of a glycine reside at the hinge region [42], reversing the character of the canonical hydrogen bond at the position, is simultaneously an example of serendipitous selectivity as well as a reminder of the importance to be critical of dogma based on a limited number of structures. Selectivity among active conformation kinases is also known, although these are all poised for ATP binding and possess the most similar binding pockets. Selectivity here arises from variations among the side chains surrounding the ATP binding site. The best known among these is likely the socalled gatekeeper residue [43], which is bulky in most protein

Fig. 1. Simple schematic representation of the free energy of inhibitor binding.

C.B. Breitenlechner et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1754 (2005) 38 ≠ 49

41

kinases but is small in, e.g., p38 and ABL kinases, accommodating larger substitutions and conferring selectivity to corresponding inhibitors. Other side chains are also variable, and certain combinations may be unique for a particular kinase, offering an opportunity for high selectivity (e.g., [44]) and prediction of cross-reactivities [45]. 2.3. Structure vs. activity: homology modeling One consequence of the practical nature of drug design is that the relevance of the kinase construct used in crystallization is not determined by its activity (``acts like''), but by the correspondence of its structure to the actual target structure (``looks like''). This distinction is particularly true for the kinase activity of the construct, but holds also for many binding kinetic parameters. What is useful in drug design is the identification of specific interactions between the ligand and the kinase target. Other phenomena may play a critical role in determining activity but if they do not involve ligand interactions, or if the phenomena are too subtle for productive analysis, they can be discarded if necessary for designing a crystallization system. An obvious example is crystallization of a ``kinase dead'' mutant, which might be created with the goal of enhancing sample homogeneity by eliminating autophosphorylation. Substitution of phosphorylation sites in the activation loop is another. The use of a surrogate kinase is a third. These examples require a homology modeling approach, supported by biophysical data, to evaluate whether the resultant structure really ``looks like'' the best estimate of the physiological structure. This kind of homology modeling is implicit in all structure based drug design tasks because all involve first a judgement of the relevance to the physiological structure and second the modeling of the effect of ligand alterations. 3. Choice of crystallization system 3.1. Crystallizability A prerequisite for crystallization is that the protein becomes well ordered when packed in a crystal lattice. This is most likely when the protein itself is well ordered, and when the protein surface properties are amenable to ordering crystal contacts, usually via anchoring polar interactions. A consensus that seems to have emerged from high throughput crystallization studies [46,47] is that a few hundred crystallization conditions are generally sufficient to crystallize a ``crystalliz-

able'' protein preparation [48]. Non-crystallizable proteins might also form crystals, but require either highly specialized conditions (e.g., serendipitous inclusion of a co-factor among crystallization additives) or poorly reproducible reactions such as deamidation during the crystallization [49] process. Recognition of the requirements for crystallization of such proteins may enable redesign of the crystallization construct. A crystallizable protein will ideally crystallize in different crystal packing arrangements among the various crystallization conditions, allowing assessment of the structural effects of crystal packing, if any. Because ligands often alter the crystallizability of a protein, especially for protein kinases and their propensity for ligand induced conformational changes, one might best apply the concept of crystallizability to the protein ≠ ligand complex. As a crystallizable protein, PKA has been crystallized in many different crystal packing arrangements (Fig. 2), most in complex with the inhibitory substrate analog PKI, showing variable structural features associated with different functions of the kinase [24,50,51]. The kinase can be purified to homogeneously phosphorylated species via ionic exchange chromatography [52]. The different crystal forms can be associated with different phosphorylation states or with ligand induced structural modifications. The crystallizability of the wild type sequence, full length PKA is unusual for protein kinases and arises from its simple single domain structure and high rigidity, in particular when in complex with PKI (Fig. 3). The first 10 ≠15 residues of the Nterminus are often disordered, and the segment of the C-terminal extension from the kinase domain core often shows disorder. The activation loop is structured, and the phosphorylated Thr197 is anchored to the kinase core via a salt bridge to Arg165; the reactive Cys199 sulfur atom is packed against the Arg165 guanidino group. The inhibitor dependence of crystallization can be rationalized by various mechanisms. Different crystal packing arrangements are associated with different degrees of opening of the ATP site cleft via relative rotations of the N- and C-lobes; inhibitors that bind preferentially to more open forms of the enzyme prevent crystallization of the closed form, and vice versa. In such cases, crystallization may compete with inhibitor binding, and crystallization in the less preferred domain arrangement may show the inhibitor in a minor fraction binding mode. As ATP and PKI binding is synergistic [53], inhibitors may either enhance or compete with PKI binding, depending on how binding affects the structural mechanisms of synergy.

Fig. 2. Various PKA crystal forms.

42

C.B. Breitenlechner et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1754 (2005) 38 ≠ 49

Fig. 3. PKA fold. This view shows how the N-terminal lobe, consisting mostly of a beta sheet (cyan arrows), and the C-terminal lobe, mostly alpha helical (red cylinders), are linked not only by the ``hinge'' segment, but also by the C-terminal strand as it extends from the C-terminal lobe across the ATP binding site to the hydrophobic box motif, and also by the N-terminal helix (right side). Co-crystallization with the pseudo substrate inhibitor PKI adds additional stabilizing interactions. The four sites found phosphorylated (yellow) in E. coli preparations are Ser10 (lower right), Ser139 (lower left), the activation loop position Thr197 (middle), and Ser 338 on the C-terminal extension.

Fig. 5. 1D proton NMR spectra to diagnose protein folding. In this example series comparing full length protein with subdomains, the amide fingerprint region around 8.3 ppm reveals full length protein (top) to have significant unfolded portions, while the N-terminal domain (middle) is most stably folded.

Crystallization of PKA in a new packing arrangement was observed for a bismaleimide inhibitor that apparently abolished PKI binding [54]. The resultant structure possessed a dimer in the asymmetric unit; the monomers showed different opening states and different binding orientations. A third mechanism by

which an inhibitor can affect crystallization properties is by direct participation in crystal contacts. ATP site inhibitors may form such contacts if they extend beyond the ATP site, or secondary binding sites might exist. The inhibitor H1152 was found at a crystal packing interface region at such a secondary binding site (Fig. 4 [44]). 3.2. Alternate methods to monitor flexibility or heterogeneity Methods are needed to screen for a crystallizable kinase construct with structural homogeneity comparable to the crystallizable PKA. Such methods can also diagnose when

Fig. 4. Inhibitor binding site at the PKA crystal packing interface. A second binding site for H1152 (more highly ordered than at the ATP site) is found simultaneously with a new packing arrangement at the packing interface with a symmetry equivalent molecule (blue). PKI peptides (green) bind nearby.

Fig. 6. 1P NMR to monitor phosphorylation. Peaks can be assigned to individual phosphorylation sites by comparing mutants, purification fractions, or results from phosphatase experiments. Linewidths provide an estimate for the rotational diffusion time of the phosphate group and hence the flexibility of the group when comparing the rotation diffusion time of the overall protein. Here, T197 fits to a rotational diffusion time longer than overall molecular tumbling time, evidence that an exchange phenomenon is contributing to the line width.

C.B. Breitenlechner et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1754 (2005) 38 ≠ 49

43

Fig. 7. PKA vapor phase optimization diffraction patterns: crystals damaged by heating, mechanical stress, and evaporation of solvent (top left diffraction image) could be repaired by a schedule of rehydration and optimization in the vapor phase. The final state diffracted more highly and with lower mosaicity compared to the initial state.

crystallization has selected a single configuration from among several in solution. NMR is well suited to characterize flexibility, but the requirements for protein amounts and stability limit its application as a construct screening tool. Two applications that do not require protein labeling are particularly useful for prioritization of kinase constructs for crystallization. One-dimensional proton NMR in the amide region provides an efficient diagnostic tool for the extent of folding (Fig. 5; [55]). The resonances of amide protons of a folded protein are heterogeneously shifted by their local magnetic environments, while resonances of flexible unfolded amides center at around 8.3 ppm. Visual inspection of the amide fingerprint region allows a semi-quantitative estimate of the extent of unfolded protein [56].

For protein kinases, the number, homogeneity, and flexibilities of phosphorylation sites can be estimated with 31P NMR spectroscopy. Comparison of the resonance peaks of 2-, 3-, and 4-fold phosphorylated PKA and the results of phosphatase treatment enabled the assignment of the resonances to the specific phosphorylation sites (Fig. 6; [57]). Peak areas can show the extent of phosphorylation, while the peak widths provide estimates of the overall rotational diffusion time of the phosphate. Rotations faster than the overall tumbling time of the molecule identify flexible or disordered phosphorylation sites, while rotation corresponding to the overall tumbling time show the phosphorylation sites to be anchored to the protein. The rotational correlation times estimated for Thr197, Ser10, Ser338, and Ser139 of PKA are 90 ns, 10 ns, 25 ns, and 25 ns,

Fig. 8. SRC kinase domain crystal plates.

44

C.B. Breitenlechner et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1754 (2005) 38 ≠ 49

respectively. Compared to the overall tumbling time of 25 ns, this shows phosphoserines 338 and 139 to be anchored to the protein, and phosphoserine 10 to be disordered, in agreement with crystal structures of PKA [51,57]. The apparently slower rotation time of Thr197 can be attributed to an exchange between

two states in solution, consistent with the transient existence of open and closed forms of the kinase in solution. 31P NMR thus identifies the extent of phosphorylation and the flexibilities of the phosphorylation sites, with potential to monitor structural effects of ligand and co-factor binding.

Fig. 9. SRC kinase domain crystal packing and flexibility. A) The C-lobes of the kinase domain form tightly packed planes, while the N-lobes are loosely packed between these planes. B) The temperature factors (red = high, blue = low) and variability of N-lobe orientations show a corresponding flexibility of the N-lobe.

C.B. Breitenlechner et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1754 (2005) 38 ≠ 49

45

Fig. 10. Comparison of active SRC KD with inactive assembled form. The inactive assembled form, comprising the SH3 domain (blue), the SH2 domain with linker segment (green), kinase domain N-lobe (orange), and kinase domain C-lobe with C-terminus (red, including C-terminal phosphotyrosine) is assembled via C-terminal phosphotyrosine-SH2 domain interactions, SH3 domain-linker interactions. The active kinase domain structure (yellow) adopts a more open N- and C-lobe conformation, similar to the LCK kinase domain conformation.

3.3. Crystal optimization Once crystallization has been achieved, crystal quality is usually optimized by refinement of crystallization conditions. Crystal nucleation, growth, and diffraction quality may not however each be optimized under the same conditions. Transfer of a grown crystal to new conditions may improve diffraction quality, but the effort required to screen multiple conditions is prohibitive. An alternative is to optimize the crystal via controlled variation of its vapor phase environment while monitoring diffraction quality simultaneously in the Xray beam ([58]; see http://www.proteros.de). PKA crystals grown at 4 degrees C with methanol as precipitant tend to be sensitive to temperature variation and evaporation of methanol. Crystal handling, including soaking of inhibitors, is hampered by these conditions. Optimization via vapor phase hydration could restore damaged PKA crystals to atomic resolution diffraction quality (Fig. 7). 3.4. Soaking vs. co-crystallization The ability to handle the crystal in the vapor phase greatly expands the ability to soak inhibitors into the crystal, because the crystal packing interactions are highly stabilized with respect to any dissolution of the crystal and the concomitant immediate supersaturation of the residual liquid layer. Crystal soaking, whether via the vapor phase or classically in a specially prepared soak solution, can be the preferred method for structure determination when co-crystallization is slow or unpredictable and when suitable (soakable) crystals can be prepared in apo form. Soaking however increases the likelihood that crystal packing effects successfully complete against

ligand induced structural effects when the two are incompatible; different binding geometries for identical inhibitors have been seen when comparing soaked with co-crystallized crystals [59]. Obviously, the most information is available when both methods are used. Structure determination of course can proceed also with difficult crystals. The SRC kinase domain crystallizes in extremely thin plates, with the thinnest dimension often corresponding to some hundred stacked molecules (Fig. 8). Crystals of this form can be highly anisotropic in their diffraction quality, and require synchrotron radiation for measurement. Analysis of the crystal packing interactions should reveal the origin of the anisotropy and possibly suggest strategies to alter the protein construct for easier crystallography. Fig. 9A shows how the asymmetric unit dimer packs in the crystal to form a plane of densely packed C-terminal lobes, while these planes are stacked (in the thin crystal dimension) via sparse interactions between the N-terminal lobes. Fig. 9b shows the backbone of the SRC kinase domain dimer colored according to temperature factor as a measure of flexibility. In this crystal packing arrangement, the flexibility of the N-terminal lobe is plainly apparent. In addition, there are no crystal packing interactions with key elements such as helix C and the glycine loop (unlike e.g. many of the LCK kinase domain structures), so that their flexibilities can be judged as intrinsic to the kinase domain. The orientation of the N-terminal lobe is one key aspect of the activation of the SRC kinase. Fig. 10 shows a wire schematic of the kinase domain backbone superimposed on that of the inactive, multidomain assembled form [32]. The rotation of the N-terminal lobe relative to the C-terminal lobe is apparent, and closely matches the configuration as seen with the LCK kinase domain. Despite the flexibility of the N-terminal lobe and the anisotropy of the crystal, the electron density for the inhibitor is clear and allows

Fig. 11. Purvalanol A in complex with the SRC kinase domain.

46

C.B. Breitenlechner et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1754 (2005) 38 ≠ 49

Fig. 12. Substitutions aiming to improve plasma stability Replacement of the plasma unstable ester with approximate isosteres (amide, ether, amine) improved plasma stability with varying effects on potency. Crystallography verified the conservation of binding modes, assisting rationalization of effects on binding potencies.

structure determination (Fig. 11 shows an example of a complex with Purvalanol A [60]. 4. Crystallography and pharmacokinetic optimization

with substituted groups, entropy effects in bound an unbound states, dehydration energies, etc.) without the need to consider surprising new binding modes. 5. Kinase selectivity using PKA as a surrogate

A valuable but sometimes overlooked application of crystallography in drug design is the identification of moieties available for synthetic optimization without dramatic loss of potency. An example of this can be found in a series of syntheses to improve plasma stability of AGC kinase inhibitors [61] derived from the natural substance balanol (Fig. 12; [62,63]). Plasma esterases result in plasma lifetimes of under one min for the initial lead. Substitution of the approximately isosteric amide, ether, and amine increase plasma stabilities to 160 h, with effects on potency ranging from improvement to a reduction of more than 100-fold. Co-crystallization monitors the effects of the substitution for possible alterations of binding modes. In this example, the binding modes were unchanged, as verified by crystallography. Confirmation allows rationalization of the binding constant variations (binding interactions

5.1. Rho kinase inhibitors PKA and Rho kinase both belong of the AGC kinase subgroup, with ca. 40% similarity between the kinase domains; several exchanges are found at the ATP site as potential sources of selectivity. Fasudil or HA1077 [22] has been in use since 1995 for treatment of cerebral vasospasm with effects attributed to inhibition of Rho kinase [64] It binds to Rho kinase and to PKA with similar K i values. The addition of two methyl groups, forming H-1152P, introduces, however, 400-fold selectivity for Rho over PKA. Co-crystallization of the inhibitors with PKA and homology modeling of their binding to Rho kinase (Fig. 13) identified four exchanges relative to PKA (Thr183Ala, Leu49Ile, Val123Met, and Glu127Asp) that must be responsible for this selectivity. Corresponding mutant studies of PKA confirm this hypothesis (S. Bonn, S. Herrero, C.B. Breitenlechner, A. Erlbruch, W. Lehmann, R.A. Engh, M. Gassel, D. Bossemeyer, Structural analysis of PKA mutants with Rhokinase inhibitor specificity, manuscript in preparation.). 5.2. PKB inhibitors Analogous to the Rho kinase studies, active conformation PKB inhibitors can be studied using PKA, and mutants of PKA can be used to confirm aspects of the homology modeling involved [65,66]. Three residues of the ATP binding site differ between PKA(alpha) and PKB (alpha) (Fig. 14). Two of these, V123A and L173M, alter the shape and character of the adenine pocket, while a third isosteric substitution (V104T) introduces polarity. The crystal structure of the double mutant (V123A, L173M) showed a surprising structural transition of a residue not known for interactions with ATP site (Gln181), as it adopted a new rotamer conformation that placed the amide group at and partially occluding access to the hinge region. Binding studies showed indeed lowered binding energies of inhibitors to the double mutant compared to both PKA and

Fig. 13. Comparison of H1077 and H1152 binding. The additional methyl group of H1152 compare to H1077 at the hinge binding isoquinoline moiety alters interactions with Phe327. The additional methyl group of H1152 at the heptamer ring has a larger consequence for PKA binding, as a hydrogen bond is lost due to an apparent clash with Thr183. Rho kinase has an alanine at the equivalent position, presumably accounting for much of the Rho kinase selectivity of H1152.

C.B. Breitenlechner et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1754 (2005) 38 ≠ 49

47

PKB. However, ATP binding to the double mutant restored the side chain conformation. Thus, the double mutant will be suitable as a structural model for PKB adenine pocket interactions, provided inhibitors bind with sufficient energy

Fig. 15. Inhibitors to probe PKB selectivity. Bulk and positive charge were introduced near the F187L, Q84E sites in order to exploit these differences between PKA and PKB and introduce selectivity. Inhibitor 2 with explicitly designed properties showed a 3- to 10-fold increase in selectivity over inhibitor 1, while inhibitors 3 ≠ 5 achieved 20- to 100-fold increases in selectivity.

to expel the Q181 side chain. The triple mutant (V123A, L173M, Q181K) is a better model because the third substitution restores accessibility of the hinge and eliminates the

Fig. 14. PKA vs. PKB (A) Mutants of PKA were chosen to mimic the ATP site of PKB, including V123A and L173M at the adenine binding site (yellow, lower left) and Q84E and F187L (yellow, right), sites in contact with ATP site inhibitors that extend beyond the ATP site. Introduction of the double mutation V123A, L173M into PKA resulted in a rotamer change for Q181 (pink, lower left). (B) The Q181 side chain in its native PKA position (orange), is found in negative difference electron density (red) and thus a new orientation in the double mutant structure (green, with positive difference density in white); this position partially occludes the adenine binding site.

Fig. 16. Confirmation of selectivity mechanism An overlay of inhibitor 2 as cocrystallized in PKA (gray carbon atoms) and quadruple mutant PKAB4 (orange inhibitor, yellow backbone, purple mutant positions Q84E and F187L) shows how the dimethyl piperidine group introduces selectivity to the inhibitor. In PKA, a steric clash between the dimethyl atoms and Phe187, combines with a lack of charge complementarity between the amine and Q84. In PKAB4 and presumably Rho kinase, the dimethyl piperidine can form a salt bridge with E84 and has no clash with L187.

48

C.B. Breitenlechner et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1754 (2005) 38 ≠ 49 [7] K.H. Bleicher, H.-J. Bohm, K. Muller, A.I. Alanine, Hit and lead ® ® generation: beyond high-throughput screening, Nat. Rev., Drug Discov. 2 (2003) 369 ≠ 378. [8] T. Lundqvist, The devil is still in the details--Driving early drug discovery forward with biophysical experimental methods, Curr. Opin. Drug Discov. Dev. 8 (2005) 513 ≠ 519. [9] K.R. Acharya, M.D. Lloyd, The advantages and limitations of protein crystal structures, Trends Pharm. Sci. 26 (2005) 10 ≠ 14. [10] K.A. Kantardjieff, B. Rupp, Matthews coefficient probabilities: improved estimates for unit cell contents of proteins, DNA, and protein ≠ nucleic acid complex crystals, Protein Sci. 12 (2003) 1865 ≠ 1871. [11] M.A. DePristo, P.I.W. de Bakker, T.L. Blundell, Heterogeneity and inaccuracy in protein structures solved by X-ray crystallography, Structure 12 (2004) 831 ≠ 838. [12] Z.S. Derewenda, Rational protein crystallization by mutational surface engineering, Structure 12 (2004) 529 ≠ 535. [13] J. Yang, P. Cron, V.M. Good, V. Thompson, B.A. Hemmings, D. Barford, Crystal structure of an activated Akt/Protein Kinase B ternary complex with GSK3-peptide and AMP-PNP, Nat. Struct. Biol. 9 (2002) 940 ≠ 944. [14] G. Manning, D.B. Whyte, R. Martinez, T. Hunter, S. Sudarsanam, The protein kinase complement of the human genome, Science 298 (2002) 1912 ≠ 1934. [15] M. Cherry, D.H. Williams, Recent kinase and kinase inhibitor X-ray structures: mechanisms of inhibition and selectivity insights, Curr. Med. Chem. 11 (2004) 663 ≠ 673. [16] H.M. Berman, J. Westbrook, Z. Feng, G. Gilliland, T.N. Bhat, H. Weissig, I.N. Shindyalov, P.E. Bourne, The protein data bank, Nucleic Acids Res. 28 (2000) 235 ≠ 242. [17] B. Nolen, S.S. Taylor, G. Ghosh, Regulation of protein kinases: controlling activity through activation segment conformation, Mol. Cell 15 (2004) 661 ≠ 675. [18] R.A. Engh, D. Bossemeyer, Structural aspects of protein kinase control-- Role of conformational flexibility, Pharmacol. Ther. 93 (2002) 99 ≠ 111. [19] C. Kim, N.-H. Xuong, S.S. Taylor, Crystal structure of a complex between the catalytic and regulatory subunits (RIa) of PKA, Science 307 (2005) 690 ≠ 696. [20] Z.-B. Xu, D. Chaudhary, S. Olland, S. Wolfrom, R. Czerwinski, K. Malakian, L. Lin, M.L. Stahl, D. Joseph-McCarthy, C. Benander, L. Fitz, R. Greco, W.S. Somers, L. Mosyak, Catalytic domain crystal structure of protein kinase C-theta (PKC-theta), J. Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 50401 ≠ 50409. [21] A. Messerschmidt, S. Macieira, M. Velarde, M. Badeker, C. Benda, A. ® Jestel, H. Brandstetter, T. Neuefeind, M. Blaesse, Crystal structure of the catalytic domain of human atypical protein kinase C-iota reveals interaction mode of phosphorylation site in turn motif, J. Mol. Biol. 352 (2005) 918 ≠ 931. [22] N. Ono-Saito, I. Niki, H. Hidaka, H. H-series protein kinase inhibitors, Potential clinical applications, Pharmacol. Ther. 82 (1999) 123 ≠ 131. [23] C. Breitenlechner, M. Gaﬂel, R. Engh, D. Bossemeyer, Structural insights into AGC kinase inhibition, Oncol. Res. 14 (2004) 267 ≠ 278. [24] S.S. Taylor, J. Yang, J. Wu, N.M. Haste, E. Radzio-Andzelm, G. Anand, PKA: a portrait of protein kinase dynamics, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1697 (2004) 259 ≠ 269. [25] T. Hunter, B.M. Sefton, Transforming gene product of Rous sarcoma virus phosphorylates tyrosine, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 77 (1980) 1311 ≠ 1315. [26] S.V. Russello, S.K. Shore, SRC in human carcinogenesis, Front. Biosci. 8 (2003) S1068 ≠ S1073. [27] R. Roskoski, Src protein ≠ tyrosine kinase structure and regulation, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 324 (2004) 1155 ≠ 1164. [28] T.J. Boggon, M.J. Eck, Structure and regulation of Src family kinases, Oncogene 23 (2004) 7918 ≠ 7927. [29] C.A. Lowell, Src-family kinases: rheostats of immune cell signalling, Mol. Immun. 41 (2004) 631 ≠ 643. [30] H. Yamaguchi, W.A. Hendrickson, Structural basis for activation of human lymphocyte kinase Lck upon tyrosine phosphorylation, Nature 384 (1996) 484 ≠ 489. [31] S.W. Cowan-Jacob, G. Fendrich, P.W. Manley, W. Jahnke, D. Fabbro, J.

energy cost of binding, and could be considered for use in attempts to identify PKB selective scaffolds by screening. Introduction of PKB selectivity into the class of inhibitors derived from the natural substance balanol was considered most feasible utilizing two exchanges that occur outside the ATP binding site but which can interact with the extended portion of the balanol inhibitors [67,68]. The exchange F187L increases volume available for inhibitor binding, while the exchange Q84E introduces a charge and the opportunity for selectivity via charge≠ charge interactions. The inhibitor series of Fig. 15 were designed to probe these opportunities for selectivity. Relative to inhibitor 1, inhibitor 2 is 3- to 10-fold selective for PKB, while inhibitors 3 ≠ 5 possess relative selectivities of up to 100-fold for PKB. Comparison of inhibitor binding modes in PKA and PKA mutants with F187L and Q84E exchanges confirm this hypothesis. While inhibitor 1 binds identically in PKA and the PKA-PKB hybrid, selective inhibitor 2 binds with reversed orientations of the dimethyl piperidine, utilizing the space and charge of the PKB mimic but finding no suitable interactions in PKA (Fig. 16). 6. Conclusions and perspectives The drug discovery exercises involving SRC and PKA described in this review exemplify work that is being done on many kinases currently identified as drug targets. The knowledge of appropriate kinase drug targets and of desirable or necessary inhibitor selectivity profiles will continue to advance steadily, as will the efficiency of crystal structure determination. Within a few years, it will likely be routine to generate hundreds of crystal structures for individual kinases in different complexes and crystallization conditions. This extensive data will provide the basis for an understanding of kinase flexibility and energetics much more comprehensive than at present. On the other hand, we may expect that the complex structural features of kinases will prevent any purely algorithmic approach to the use of structural information in drug design. Effective drug design will increasingly rely on efficient data mining from diverse sources, but interpretation and application will continue to require intuitive understanding of structural biochemistry. References
[1] W.G.J. Hol, Structural genomics for science and society, Nat. Struct. Biol. (2000) 964 ≠ 966. [2] J. Westbrook, Z.K. Feng, L. Chen, H.W. Yang, H.M. Berman, The protein data bank and structural genomics, Nucleic Acids Res. 31 (2003) 489 ≠ 491. [3] H. Gohlke, G. Klebe, Approaches to the description and prediction of the binding affinity of small-molecule ligands to macromolecular receptors, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 41 (2002) 2644 ≠ 2676. [4] D.H. Williams, E. Stephens, D.P. O'Brien, M. Zhou, Understanding noncovalent interactions: ligand binding energy and catalytic efficiency from ligand-induced reductions in motion within receptors and enzymes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 43 (2004) 6596 ≠ 6616. [5] B.A. Posner, High-throughput screening-driven lead discovery: meeting the challenges of finding new therapeutics, Curr. Opin. Drug Discov. 8 (2005) 487 ≠ 494. [6] D. Schuster, C. Laggner, T. Langer, Why drugs fail--A study on side effects in new chemical entities, Curr. Pharm. Des. 11 (2005) 3545 ≠ 3559.

C.B. Breitenlechner et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1754 (2005) 38 ≠ 49 Liebetanz, T. Meyer, The crystal structure of a c-Src complex in an active conformation suggests possible steps in c-Src activation, Structure 13 (2005) 861 ≠ 871. C.B. Breitenlechner, N.A. Kairies, K. Honold, S. Scheiblich, H. Koll, E. Greiter, S. Koch, W. Schafer, R. Huber, R.A. Engh, Crystal structures of ® active Src kinase domain complexes, J. Mol. Biol. 353 (2005) 222 ≠ 231. I.D. Kuntz, K. Chen, K.A. Sharp, P.A. Kollman, The maximal affinity of ligands, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 96 (1999) 9997 ≠ 10002. R. Talhout, A. Villa, A.E. Mark, J.B. Engberts, Understanding binding affinity: a combined isothermal titration calorimetry/molecular dynamics study of the binding of a series of hydrophobically modified benzamidinium chloride inhibitors to trypsin, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125 (2003) 10570 ≠ 10579. M.E.M. Noble, J.A. Endicott, L.N. Johnson, Protein kinase inhibitors: insights into drug design from structure, Science 303 (2004) 1800 ≠ 1805. H. Daub, K. Godl, D. Brehmer, B. Klebl, G. Muller, Evaluation of kinase inhibitor selectivity by chemical proteomics, Assay Drug Dev. Tech. 2 (2004) 215 ≠ 224. M. Vieth, R.E. Higgs, D.H. Robertson, M. Shapiro, E.A. Gragg, H. Hemmerle, Kinomics--Structural biology and chemogenomics of kinase inhibitors and targets, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Protein Proteom. 1697 (2004) 243 ≠ 257. Z.A. Knight, K.M. Shokat, Features of selective kinase inhibitors, Chem. Biol. 12 (2005) 621 ≠ 637. T. Schindler, W. Bornmann, P. Pellicena, W.T. Miller, B. Clarkson, J. Kuriyan, Structural mechanism for STI-571 inhibition of Abelson tyrosine kinase, Science 289 (2000) 1938 ≠ 1942. C. Pargellis, L. Tong, L. Churchill, P.F. Cirillo, T. Gilmore, A.G. Graham, P.M. Grob, E.R. Hickey, N. Moss, S. Pav, J. Regan, Inhibition of p38 map kinase by utilizing a novel allosteric binding site, Nat. Struct. Biol. 9 (2002) 268 ≠ 272. S.F. Barnett, D. Defeo-Jones, S. Fu, P.J. Hancock, K.M. Haskell, R.E. Jones, J.A. Kahana, A.M. Kral, K. Leander, L.L. Lee, J. Malinowski, E.M. McAvoy, D.D. Nahas, R.G. Robinson, H.E. Huber, Identification and characterization of pleckstrin-homology-domain dependent and isoenzyme-specific Akt inhibitors, Biochem. J. 385 (2005) 399 ≠ 408. C.E. Fitzgerald, S.B. Patel, J.W. Becker, P.M. Cameron, D. Zaller, V.B. Pikounis, S.J. O'Keefe, G. Scapin, Structural basis for p38alpha MAP kinase quinazoline and pyridol ≠ pyrimidine inhibitor specificity, Nat. Struct. Biol. 10 (2003) 764 ≠ 769. L. Tong, S. Pav, D.M. White, S. Rogers, K.M. Crane, C.L. Cywin, M.L. Brown, C.A. Pargellis, A highly specific inhibitor of human p38 MAP kinase binds in the ATP pocket, Nat. Struct. Biol. 4 (1997) 311 ≠ 316. C.B. Breitenlechner, M. Gaﬂel, H. Hidaka, V. Kinzel, R. Huber, R.A. Engh, D. Bossemeyer, Protein kinase A in complex with Rho-kinase inhibitors Y-27632, Fasudil (HA-1077) and H-1152P: structural basis of selectivity, Structure 11 (2003) 1595 ≠ 1607. W.M. Rockey, A.H. Elcock, Rapid computational identification of the targets of protein kinase inhibitors, J. Med. Chem. 48 (2005) 4138 ≠ 4152. M.L. Pusey, Z.-J. Liu, W. Tempel, J. Praissman, D. Linb, B.-C. Wang, J.A. Gavirac, J.D. Ng, Life in the fast lane for protein crystallization and X-ray crystallography, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 88 (2005) 359 ≠ 386. T.L. Blundell, H. Jhoti, C. Abell, High-throughput crystallography for lead discovery in drug design, Nat. Rev., Drug Discov. 1 (2002) 45 ≠ 54. B. Rupp, B.W. Segelke, I. Krupka, T. Lekin, J. Schafer, A. Zemla, D. ® Toppani, G. Snell, T. Earnest, The TB structural genomics consortium crystallization facility: towards automation from protein to electron density, Acta Cryst. D58 (2002) 1514 ≠ 1518. S. DiMarco, J.P. Priestle, Structure of the complex of leech-derived tryptase inhibitor (LDTI) with trypsin and modeling of the LDTI-tryptase system, Structure 5 (1997) 1465 ≠ 1474. C.B. Breitenlechner, Rontgenkristallographische Untersuchungen von ® Inhibitor-Komplexen der Proteinkinase A und der Kinasedomane von ® Src, Ph.D. Thesis, TU Munchen, 2004. ® C.B. Breitenlechner, R.A. Engh, R. Huber, V. Kinzel, D. Bossemeyer, M. Gaﬂel, The typically disordered N-terminus of PKA can fold as a helix and project the myristoylation site into solution, Biochemistry 43 (2004) 7743 ≠ 7749.

49

[32]

[33] [34]

[35] [36]

[37]

[38] [39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45] [46]

[47] [48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52] R.A. Engh, A. Girod, V. Kinzel, R. Huber, D. Bossemeyer, Crystal structures of catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase in complex with isoquinolinesulfonyl protein kinase inhibitors H7, H8, and H89. Structural implications for selectivity, J. Biol. Chem. 271 (1996) 26157 ≠ 26164. [53] W. Wen, S.S. Taylor, High affinity binding of the heat-stable protein kinase inhibitor to the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase is selectively abolished by mutation of Arg133, J. Biol. Chem. 269 (1994) 8423 ≠ 8430. [54] M. Gaﬂel, C.B. Breitenlechner, N. Konig, R. Huber, R.A. Engh, D. ® Bossemeyer, The protein kinase C inhibitor bisindolyl-maleimide II binds with reversed orientations to different conformations of PKA, J. Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 23679 ≠ 23690. [55] M. Wisniewska, Biochemical Studies on IGF and IGF-Binding Proteins Interactions and Structural Investigations on the SH3 Domain of Crkassociated Tyrosine Kinase Substrate p130cas (CAS) Ph.D thesis, TU Munchen, 2005. ® [56] T. Rehm, R. Huber, T.A. Holak, Application of NMR in structural proteomics: screening for proteins amenable to structural analysis, Structure 10 (2002) 1613 ≠ 1618. [57] M.H.J. Seifert, C.B. Breitenlechner, D. Bossemeyer, R. Huber, T.A. Holak, R.A. Engh, Phosphorylation and flexibility of cyclic-AMP dependent protein kinase (PKA) using P-31 NMR spectroscopy, Biochemistry 41 (2002) 5968 ≠ 5977. [58] R. Kiefersauer, H. Dobbek, M.E. Than, R. Huber, A novel freemounting system for protein crystals: improvement of diffraction power by accurately controlled humidity changes, Acta Cryst. A58 (2002) C150. [59] D. Rauh, G. Klebe, J. Sturzebecher, M.T. Stubbs, ZZ made EZ: influence ® of inhibitor configuration on enzyme selectivity, J. Mol. Biol. 330 (2003) 761 ≠ 770. [60] J. Bain, H. McLauchlan, M. Elliott, P. Cohen, The specificities of protein kinase inhibitors: an update, Biochem. J. 371 (2003) 199 ≠ 204. [61] C.B. Breitenlechner, T. Wegge, L. Berillon, K. Graul, K. Marzenell, W. Friebe, U. Thomas, R. Schumacher, R. Huber, R.A. Engh, B. Masjost, Structure-based optimization of novel azepane derivatives as PKB inhibitors, J. Med. Chem. 47 (2004) 1375 ≠ 1390. [62] P. Kulanthaivel, Y. Hallock, C. Boros, S.M. Hamilton, W.P. Janzen, L.M. Ballas, C.R. Loomis, J.B. Jiang, J.B. Katz, J.R. Steiner, J. Clardy, Balanol: a novel and potent inhibitor of protein kinase C from the Fungus Verticillium balanoides, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 115 (1993) 6452 ≠ 6453. [63] S. Ohshima, M. Yanagisawa, A. Katoh, T. Fujii, T. Sano, S. Matsukuma, T. Furumai, M. Fujiu, K. Watanabe, K. Yokose, Fusarium merismoides Corda NR 6356, the source of the protein kinase C inhibitor, azepinostatin. Taxonomy, yield improvement, fermentation and biological activity, J. Antibiot. (Tokyo) 47 (1994) 639 ≠ 647. [64] T. Matsui, M. Amano, T. Yamamoto, K. Chihara, M. Nakafuku, M. Ito, T. Nakano, K. Okawa, A. Iwamatsu, K. Kaibuchi, Rho-associated kinase, a novel serine threonine kinase, as a putative target for the small GTP binding protein Rho, EMBO J. 15 (1996) 2208 ≠ 2216. [65] M. Gaﬂel, C. Breitenlechner, P. Ruger, U. Jucknischke, T. Schneider, V. ® Kinzel, R. Huber, D. Bossemeyer, R.A. Engh, Mutants of protein kinase A that mimic the ATP-binding site of protein kinase B (AKT), J. Mol. Biol. 329 (2003) 1021 ≠ 1034. [66] C.B. Breitenlechner, W.-G. Friebe, E. Brunet, G. Werner, K. Graul, U. Thomas, K.-P. Kunkele, W. Schafer, M. Gassel, D. Bossemeyer, R. Huber, ® ® R.A. Engh, B. Masjost, Design and crystal structures of protein kinase B selective inhibitors in complex with protein kinase A and mutants, J. Med. Chem. 48 (2005) 163 ≠ 170. [67] N. Narayana, T.C. Diller, K. Koide, M.E. Bunnage, K.C. Nicolaou, L.L. Brunton, N.H. Xuong, L.F. Ten Eyck, S.S. Taylor, Crystal structure of the potent natural product inhibitor balanol in complex with the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase, Biochemistry 38 (1999) 2367 ≠ 2376. [68] P.H. Hunenberger, V. Helms, N. Narayana, S.S. Taylor, J.A. McCammon, Determinants of ligand binding to cAMP dependent protein kinase, Biochemistry 38 (1999) 2358 ≠ 2366.

