FEBS 16746

FEBS Letters 380 (1996) 302

Letter to the Editor

Publication of macromolecular crystal structures
E.N. Baker, T.L. Bluntell, M. Vijayan, E. Dodson, G. Dodson, G.L. Gilliland, J.L. Sussman*
A formal discussion of the archival journal requirements for data deposition was held at the International Seminar-cureSchool on Macromolecular Crystallographic Data at Calcutta, India in November. The current policy of the International Union of Crystallography (IUCr) is that on publication of a crystal structure determination of a macromolecule the atomic parameters used or represented in the publication must be deposited in the Protein Data Bank. The deposition of structure amplitudes is recommended but not insisted on. The policy provides crystallographers with the option to delay the release of atomic parameters for one year and of structure amplitudes for upto four years from the date of publication. Participants strongly supported this policy and felt it should be strictly applied by the journals (referees). Recent developments in X-ray crystallographic experimental and refinement techniques and the huge expansion in computing power and networking however necessitate the review of deposition arrangements. It was noted that the new validation procedures are much more effective but require the experimental structure amplitudes as well as the atomic parameters. In addition the technical arrangements for deposition, analysis and validation of macromolecular crystal structures are now much easier. The undersigned consider it vital for the macromolecular crystallographers to respond to these developments in their deposition practices. We recommend therefore that publication of macromolecular crystal structures should be accompanied by deposition of atomic parameters and also structure amplitudes. Amongst the many reasons identified for this practice the two following are critical. (1) Rigorous validation of the structure determinations resuits can only be carried out using both atomic parameters and experimental structure amplitudes. It is important that journals ensure referees have sufficient information to prevent incorrect structures being published. (2) Archival of this data will ensure they are not lost. There were numerous reports at this meeting of data being lost. This most probably reflects a general problem in the crystallographic community.

Signed by:

Edward N. Baker Member of IUCr Executive Committee and member of the IUCr Commission on Biological Molecules, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand. Tom L. Blundell - I C R F Unit of Structural Molecular Biology, Dept. of Crystallography, Birkbeck College, Malet St., London WC1E 7HX, UK. Mamannamana Vijayan - Chairman of IUCr Commission on Biological Molecules, Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India. Eleanor Dodson Member of IUCr Electronic Publishing Committee, Department of Chemistry, University of York, York YO1 5DD, UK. Gay Dodson - Previous chairman of IUCr Commission on Biological Molecules, Department of Chemistry, University of York, York YO1 5DD, UK. Gary L. Gilliland - Associate Director, Center for Advanced Research in Biotechnology, 9600 Gudelsky Dr., Rockville, MD 20850, USA. Joel L. Sussman - Head, Protein Data Bank, Departments of Biology and Chemistry, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA & Department of Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel.

*Corresponding author. Fax: (1) (516) 282 2176. E-mail: jls@bnl.90v 0014-5793/96/$12.00 © 1996 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. All rights reserved.

