mefloquine and absence of firm clinical evidence for its higher effectiveness than doxycycline and the combination of chloroquine and proguanil do not at present allow a single-drug recommendation for non-immune travellers visiting chloroquine-resistant areas. The use of mefloquine, chloroquine-proguanil, and doxycycline and/or a presumptive treatment (halofantrine, quinine, pyrimethamine-sulfadoxine) may be appropriate, depending on the clinical status, risks for adverse reactions, risk of infection, length of stay, and geographic region.
Leonardo K Basco, Rasoka Thor, Jacques Le Bras
Centre National de R&eacute;f&eacute;rence de la Chimiosensibilit&eacute; du Paludisme, Laboratoire de Parasitologie H&ocirc;pital Bichat-Claude Bernard, 75877 Paris, France

Dilution of 10-' is 10' molecules, 10- dilution is 10 molecules.

Table:

Endpoint (titre) of positive-strand HCV RNA titration

1 World Health Organization. Central nervous system reactions related to the antimalarial drug, mefloquine (WHO/MAL/89/1054). Geneva:

WHO, 1989: 1-18. Lobel HO, Miani M, Eng TR, Bernard KW, Hightower AW, Campbell CC. Long-term malaria prophylaxis with weekly mefloquine. Lancet 1993; 341: 848-51. 3 Steffen R, Fuchs E, Schildknecht J, et al. Mefloquine compared with other malaria chemoprophylactic regimens in tourists visiting East Africa. Lancet 1993; 341: 1299-303.
2

We used a purified positive-strand HCV RNA transcript (2015 bases in length) containing 324 bases from the 5' non-coding region (5'NCR) as the template. The sequence was cloned into pBluescript vector and linearised to prevent any activity at the T7 promoter site. RNA was synthesised by use of T3 RNA polymerase and purified by DNAse treatment twice. cDNA was synthesised from a serial ten-fold dilution of this HCV RNA (range 1-107 molecules) with 20 units of Moloney murine leukaemia virus RTase (BRL, Gaithersburg, USA) for 1 h at 42&deg;C, followed by heat inactivation at 95&deg;C for 15 min unless_otherwise stated (see table). cDNA synthesis was primed with reverse-PCR primer for positive-strand and forward-PCR primer for detection of strand. Nested PCR amplification used primers from the highly conserved 5'nor3and methods similar to those described by Fong et a1.4 Specific control assays included cDNA synthesis without RNA template to exclude product contamination, cDNA synthesis without RTase to exclude taq polymerase RTase activity, and cDNA synthesis and PCR step done with only the reverse or forward primer to confirm no contamination from mixed primers. These controls were always negative. cDNA synthesis was done with only one primer present followed by specific treatments in an attempt to abate "false" detection of negative strand before the addition of the second primer: (a) heat inactivation of RTase" (after cDNA synthesis) at 95&deg;C for 2 h; (b) digestion of RTase (after cDNA synthesis) with 50 ng proteinase K (Sigma) at 37&deg;C for 1 h, followed by phenol/chloroform extraction; (c) serial ten-fold dilution of cDNA to dilute out RTase; (d) cDNA synthesis incubation at elevated temperature (55&deg;C) to minimise false priming; (e) alkaline inactivation of RNA6(afer cDNA synthesis) with 0-11 mol/L sodium hydroxide; (f) cDNA treated with RNAse H6(0-5 U, Promega); and (g) a combination of (b)

SiR-We feel that Lobel and Keystone merely add to the confusion about malaria prophylaxis. They suggest that absence of consensus about which drug to use for prophylaxis causes confusion. We would maintain that more confusion is created by the suggestion that there is only one acceptable regimen for a particular country; this leads the less informed to conclude that when alternatives are given they are wrong or inappropriate. Often there are several reasonable alternatives and choice is made based on resistance patterns, side-effects, compliance, cost, &c. The studies that they cite suggesting that mefloquine is more effective than other regimens are not necessarily representative of travellers such as holiday makers who might be older and perhaps at more risk of side-effects, or business personnel, or the overland trekker, or those hoping to become pregnant. The recommendations described as those for the UK are incorrect. Chloroquine plus proguanil are usually advised for low-risk chloroquine-resistant areas, and mefloquine for highrisk chloroquine-resistant areas. There are several important principles in malaria prevention. First, precautions should be taken to avoid mosquito bites. Second, prompt investigation of fever and sometimes presumptive treatment of those exposed is essential. Third, chemoprophylaxis should be given for areas where the risk is substantial. Most importantly, every traveller should be considered individually and no regimen quoted dogmatically and without careful thought.
Eric

detection "false"-negative

and(/).

Walker, Lorna Calvert, Fiona Raeside

Communicable Diseases and Environmental Health (Scotland) Unit, Ruchill Hospital, Glasgow G20 9NB, UK

False detection of negative-strand virus RNA

hepatitis C

SiR-Navas and colleagues1 reported the detection of negativestrand hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA in liver tissue and peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 4 patients with normal alanine aminotransferase (ALT). Doubts have been raised as to the validity of negative-strand HCV RNA detection.2 The central problem is that positive-strand HCV RNA may act as a template for synthesis of a "false"-negative strand, either by false priming during cDNA synthesis by reverse transcription, or by failure of treatments to inactivate

transcriptase (RTase) enzyme activity during polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification.
reverse

efficacy of the treatments for inactivation of RTase or degradation of RNA was tested by also performing these treatments before cDNA synthesis. These showed that RTase activity was destroyed by heat treatment, proteinase K digestion, or dilution of the RTase to 2 x 106 units. Alkaline denaturation and neutralisation only partly degraded RNA, whereas RNAse H treatment totally inactivated RNA. The table shows the end-point of positive-strand RNA titration, which was the maximum dilution in which the 259 bp PCR product was identified. It ranged from 10-1 (106 molecules), showing that treatment had partly inactivated RTase or PCR, up to 10-6 (10 molecules), which is the limit of sensitivity of this assay. No treatment was able to eliminate detection of "false"-negative strand. The titre of the "false"negative strand was never less than one-hundredth of the titre of the positive strand. We have obtained similar results with the same inactivation procedures, but with aldolase B mRNA and aldolase B specific primers in normal liver tissue (data not shown). Explanations for these observations include false priming during cDNA synthesis possibly due to a thermostable hairpin at the 5'NCR end of HCV RNA or a protective association
551

The

between RNA and RTase. The replicative steps used by HCV are unknown. HCV is genomically similar to both flaviviruses and pestiviruses,8 suggesting that replication may occur through an intermediate-negative strand.9 However, our results clearly establish that reliable detection of HCVnegative RNA strand is not yet achievable by current methods.
P H McGuinness, G A Bishop, G W McCaughan, R E J Gowans

550-6 mIU/mL; t test, two-tail, p 0 7). After two years the mean anti-HBs mIU/mL values were higher in those positive for anti-HCV compared with those who were negative (531-2 vs 373-1mIU/mL, respectively,

seropositivity (596-8 vs

=

p < 0-05).
We conclude that immunogenicity to Recombivax was not affected by the presence of anti-HCV. Therefore, screening individuals for HCV seropositivity before vaccination is not needed or recommended in otherwise healthy adult. This can be a potential cost saving in areas where HCV prevalence is

Trowbridge,

A W Morrow Gastroenterology and Liver Centre, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown NSW 2050, Australia; and Division of Medical Virology, Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science, Adelaide

high.
Moamena

Kamel, Mustafa El Manialawi, F DeWolfe Miller

1

2 3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Navas S, Castillo I, Carreno V. Detection of plus and minus HCV RNA in normal liver of anti-HCV-positive patients. Lancet 1993; 341: 904-05. Willems M, Moshage H, Yap SH. PCR and detection of negative HCV RNA strands. Hepatology 1993; 17: 526. Hsu HH, Wright TL, Luba D, et al. Failure to detect hepatitis C virus genome in human secretions with the polymerase chain reaction. Hepatology 1991; 14: 763-67. Fong TL, Shindo M, Feinstone SM, Hoofnagle JH, Di Bisceglie AM. Detection of replicative intermediates of hepatitis C viral RNA in liver and serum of patients with chronic hepatitis C. J Clin Invest 1991; 88: 1058-60. Wang JT, Sheu JC, Lin JT, Wang TH, Chen DS. Detection of replicative form of hepatitis C virus RNA in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J Infect Dis 1992; 166: 1167-69. Ulrich PP, Romeo JM, Daniel LJ, Vyas GN. An improved method for the detection of hepatitis C RNA in plasma utilizing heminested primers and internal control RNA. PCR Methods Appl 1993; 2: 241-49. Han JH, Shyamala V, Richman KH, et al. Characterization of the terminal regions of hepatitis C viral RNA: identification of conserved sequences in the 5' untranslated region and poly(A) tails at the 3' end. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991; 88: 1711-15. Miller RH, Purcell RH. Hepatitis C virus shares amino acid sequence similarity with pestiviruses and flaviviruses as well as members of two plant virus supergroups. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1990; 87: 2057-61. Cleaves GR, Ryan TE, Schlesinger RW. Identification and characterization of type 2 dengue virus replicative intermediate and replicative form RNAs. Virology 1981; 111: 73-83.

Department of Clinical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt; Armed Forces Hospital, Maadi, Cairo; and Epidemiology Program, School of Public Health, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822, USA

1

2

3

4

Gargot D, Ducreux M, Dussaix E, et al. Antibodies to hepatitis C virus in patients with positive HBsAg. Dig Dis Sci 1990; 35: 1437-38. Shih C, Lo S, Miyamura T, Chen S, Lee Y. Suppression of hepatitis B virus expression and replication by hepatitis C virus core protein in HuH-7 cells. J Virol 1993; 67: 5823-32. Liaw Y, Lin S, Sheen I, Chu C. Acute hepatitis C virus superinfection followed by spontaneous HBeAg seroconversion and HBsAg elimination. Infection 1991; 19: 250-51. Esteban J, Lopez-Talavera J, Genesca J, et al. High rate of infectivity and liver disease in blood donors with hepatitis C virus. Ann Intern
Med 1991;
115: 443-49.

Bats in church
SIR&mdash;Unfortunately bats rarely roost in belfries (too noisy and draughty), and Child's "vestry roof' (Jan 1, p 5) is misleading too because in churches roosts are generally in the roof above the worship area. Excreta fall not only in concentrated areas under roosts but also liberally throughout the church since bats defaecate on the wing as well. Bat excreta smell most unpleasant and damage the fabric and furnishings. The faeces remain sticky and adhere to surfaces and bat urine leaves
permanent stains. Bat colonies can number 50-500 and it is almost impossible to keep the church clean during the 6-7 months of the year when these creatures are active. Cleaners have an unpleasant

hepatitis B vaccine Immunogenicity in presence of hepatitis C virus seropositivity
SiR-There is now evidence that hepatitis C virus (HCV) may inhibit infection or replication of hepatitis B virus (HBV).1-3 HCV viraemia is frequently found among anti-HCV-positive people.4 The influence of HCV infection or viraemia on immunogenicity to HBV recombinant vaccination is unknown. In 1990, a HBV recombinant vaccine trial of health care workers was carried out in a government run military hospital in Cairo, Egypt. A systematic random sample of all 161 hospital workers including physicians, previously determined negative for HBV markers and immunised with three 10 Jlg doses of HBV recombinant vaccine (Recombivax, Merck Sharp & Dohme, West Point, PA) was tested for anti-HCV (HCV 2-0 enzyme immunoassay, Abbott Laboratories). All the repeatedly reactive anti-HCV sera were confirmed by supplemental testing. Seroconversion to vaccination was defined as anti-HBs values greater than 10 mIU/mL. These serological tests were repeated on 114 of these subjects two years later. 18 (11 2%) of the 161 people vaccinated did not seroconvert to a protective level. In this group, 19 (11-8%) were seropositive for anti-HCV. Non-responders to Recombivax immunisation were evenly divided among those who were positive or negative for anti-HCV (odds ratio 1-08, 95% CI 0-21-7-44; Fisher's exact two-tail test, p=064). Moreover, in those who responded to vaccination, the mean anti-HBs mIU/mL values were not different with regard to anti-HCV

Recombinant

job; clergy
or

and congregation touch soiled furniture, hassocks, books; children come into contact with the excreta on pews and floors; if roosts are in the sanctuary, excreta can even fall onto the altar during services. Today, churches try to use the

buildings as much as possible with activities such as concerts, open days (which may include a cake stall), and children's
events.

protected by law so churches have no means of controlling Frequent advice is to "move things" (not in a church) or to swathe the church in plastic sheeting, easy which still gets soiled and has to be replaced. What other public building would tolerate such circumstances-or indeed be allowed to do so by the health authorities? Churches have no choice and, worse, the bat lobby is now promoting churches as suitable roosting places for bats. A bat sanctuary is a bat lavatory.
Bats
are

colonies.

Catherine Ward
Movement Against Bats in Churches, The Rectory, Bale, Fakenham NR21

0QJ, UK

CORRECTION
Haemolytic-uraemic syndrome in practice-In this Science and Practice review by G H Neild (Feb 12, p 398), reference 16 should be replaced by: Misiani R, Appiani A, Edefononit A, et al. Haemolytic uraemic syndrome: therapeutic effect of plasma infusion. BMJ 1982; 285:1304-06. The original reference 16 now relates to the paragraph on treatment by plasmapheresis.

552

