Biochimie 83 (2001) 325-332 © 2001 Société française de biochimie et biologie moléculaire / Éditions scientifiques et médicales Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved. S0300908401012421/REV

The substrate translocation channel of the proteasome
Alwin Köhlera, Monica Bajorekb, Michael Grollc, Luis Moroderc, David M. Rubina*, Robert Huberc, Michael H. Glickmanb, Daniel Finleya**
a

Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, 240 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115, USA b Department of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel c Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, 82152 Martinsried, Germany (Received 24 October 2000; accepted 9 January 2001)

Abstract -- The core particle (CP) of the yeast proteasome is composed of four heptameric rings of subunits arranged in a hollow, barrel-like structure. We have found that the CP is autoinhibited by the N-terminal tails of the outer () ring subunits. Crystallographic analysis showed that deletion of the tail of the 3 subunit opens a channel into the proteolytically active interior chamber of the CP, thus derepressing peptide hydrolysis. In the latent state of the particle, the tails prevent substrate entry by imposing topological closure on the CP. Inhibition by the  subunit tails is relieved upon binding of the regulatory particle to the CP to form the proteasome holoenzyme. Opening of the CP channel by assembly of the holoenzyme is regulated by the ATPase domain of Rpt2, one of 17 subunits in the RP. Thus, open-channel mutations in CP subunits suppress the closed-channel phenotype of an rpt2 mutant. These results identify a specific mechanism for allosteric regulation of the CP by the RP. © 2001 Société française de biochimie et biologie moléculaire / Éditions scientifiques et médicales Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved. proteasome / ubiquitin / protein degradation / yeast / ATPase

1. Introduction All ATP-dependent proteases of known structure have their proteolytic active sites sequestered within an internal chamber [1­3]. Protein substrates of these proteases, such as ubiquitin-protein conjugates, are thought to be unfolded in an ATP-dependent process, then translocated into the proteolytic chamber. In prokaryotic ATP-dependent proteases [2, 4], access to this chamber can apparently be gained through an axial channel. In contrast, no channel for substrate entry was observed in the free core particle (CP) of the eukaryotic proteasome, as exemplified by that of S. cerevisiae [5]. The eukaryotic CP is a cylindrical particle composed of four stacked rings of subunits, with each ring containing seven distinct subunits. The outer rings are composed of seven  subunits, the inner rings of seven subunits, which contain the active sites. The CP has a two-fold axis of symmetry relating both halves of the molecule in a 1­7 1­7 1­71­7 arrangement. The peptidase activity of eukaryotic CP can be activated by a variety of treatments [6­11]. Activation occurs when the CP complexes with the 17-subunit regulatory particle to form the 26S proteasome holoenzyme [6, 7]. Other endogenous activators of the CP include the interferon-induced PA28/REG complex [8, 9]. Mild
* Present address: Cognia, Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA **Correspondence and reprints. E-mail address: daniel_finley@hms.harvard.edu (D. Finley).

chemical treatments, such as exposure to low levels of sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS), are also effective. Activation of the proteasome and other ATP-dependent proteases has been often attributed to allosteric regulation of their proteolytic active sites. Alternatively, activation may reflect the opening of a channel into the CP, allowing substrate access into the proteolytic chamber. In the latter model, the N-terminal segments of various  subunits, which seal the central channel in the crystal structure of the CP [5], are rearranged to yield the activated complex. To test the regulated channel model, we deleted the 9-residue tail (GSRRYDSRT) from the N-terminus of the 3 subunit (see [12] for a more complete report). The tails of  subunits are defined on the basis of sequence alignment to the single  subunit of the T. acidophilum proteasome [13]. The tails correspond to those sequences N-terminal to Thr13, which are disordered in the archaeal particle. Their disorder accounts for the observation of a channel in the crystal structure of the T. acidophilum CP, and their irregular but well-defined structure appears to seal the chamber in the eukaryotic complex. The importance of the tails in the function of the CP is indicated by the remarkable evolutionary conservation of these sequences across eukaryotes (table I). Although each tail is conserved evolutionarily, the tail sequences are divergent from one  subunit to another. This divergence is correlated with dramatic structural heterogeneity among the tails. In contrast, sequences on the C-terminal side of Thr13 are strongly conserved from one subunit to another,

326
Table I. Conservation of -subunit tails.

Köhler et al. 3. Enzymatic properties of 3N core particles Core particles from the mutants showed strongly enhanced peptidase activity (figure 1A). The enhanced basal activity of the 3N CP was consistently observed using three different fluorogenic peptide substrates, each specific to a different active site (figure 1A) [14, 15]. Thus, the enhanced basal activity of the mutant cannot be due to allosteric activation of any individual active site. General allosteric activation can also be excluded, because the detailed structures of the proteolytically active subunits are indistinguishable in the mutant and wild-type particles (data not shown). SDS-mediated activation, as seen with wild-type CP [10, 11], was not observed with the mutant complex; near-maximal activity was seen under control conditions (figure 1B). The observation that an open-channel mutant of the CP is largely resistant to activation by SDS suggests that SDS activation of the wild-type complex is mediated by channel opening. These data indicate that the closed state of the channel seen in the crystal structure [5] is also the predominant state in solution; the purified CP exists in a self-inhibited state, in which peptide entry into the lumen is rate-limiting for hydrolysis. The in vivo activity of the 3N proteasome holoenzyme in degradation of ubiquitin-protein conjugates was found to be comparable to wild-type when tested using -galactosidase derivatives [16] with destabilizing N-terminal residues (figure 1C; see [12] for additional evidence). The 3N deletion had no significant effect on the stability or abundance of the 26S proteasome holoenzyme (data not shown), and the effects of the mutation on the in vitro peptidase activity of the holoenzyme were modest in comparison to those observed for the CP (figure 1B). Thus, formation of the wild-type 26S proteasome holoenzyme activates peptide hydrolysis within the CP to an extent comparable to that of SDS. The wild-type and mutant holoenzymes exhibit similar peptidase activities, suggesting that, in the wild-type holoenzyme, the repressive effect of the 3 tail is relieved. Presumably it is displaced to allow efficient entry of substrates. 4. Repression by a synthetic 3 tail peptide In the 3N complex, some electron density is lost from the N-termini of every  subunit. To test whether the mutant CP remains competent to repress peptide entry, we added the 3 tail back to the mutant CP in trans as a synthetic peptide. The activity of the mutant CP against fluorogenic peptide substrates returned to wild-type levels after a 15-min preincubation in the presence of the synthetic tail peptide (table II). Control peptides did not significantly inhibit the mutant CP, and the 3 tail peptide failed to inhibit the basal peptidase activity of the wildtype CP (table II). Additional controls indicated that

Identities are darkly shaded, similarities lightly shaded. Gaps in the alignment are represented by dashes.

and assume approximate seven-fold symmetry in the particle. Of the seven tails, that of 3 is unusual in that it projects directly across the pseudo seven-fold symmetry axis. Thus, its rearrangement is expected to be required for opening of an axial channel and its deletion should cause a major structural perturbation.

2. Structure of 3N core particles The deletion mutation was integrated into the chromosomal 3/PRE9 locus, replacing the wild-type gene, and core particles were then purified from this mutant (hereafter 3N). The crystal structure of the mutant complex was determined on the basis of the wild-type structure, with a resolution of 2.4 Å [13]. The deletion generates an axial channel whose dimensions are comparable to those of the T. acidophilum core particle. The loss of defined electron density results from both the elimination of nine residues from 3, and the loss of order in 20 residues in total from the tails of various other subunits, each of which directly contacts the 3 tail in the wild-type complex. Some loss of order is seen for every  subunit, but these effects are strictly local to the channel region. In particular, the body of 3 is present unperturbed within the mutant particle, indicating that the deletion does not cause an assembly defect.

The substrate translocation channel of the proteasome

327

Figure 1. The 3N core particle is constitutively activated for peptide hydrolysis. A. Basal peptidase activity of free core particles purified from wild-type (stippled) and 3N mutant (hatched) cells. LLE, Z-LLE- NA, a specific substrate of 1/Pre3; LRR, Boc-LRR-AMC, a specific substrate of 2/ Pup1; LLVY, Suc-LLVY-AMC, a specific substrate of 5/Pre2 [14, 15]. Assays contained purified CPs at 0.05 mg/mL and 0.1 mM peptide substrate. Enzyme activity was measured as arbitrary fluorescence units of the liberated fluorophore (AMC or -NA) after 15 min and was linear over the time course of the assay. B. Peptidase activity of the free CP, SDS-activated CP, and 26S proteasome holoenzyme, purified from wild-type (left) and 3N (right) cells. CP, purified core particle. SDS + CP, core particles activated by the addition of 0.02% SDS. Holo, proteasome holoenzyme. C. Steady-state levels of -galactosidase derivatives expressed in wild-type and 3N cells, determined by activity assays. See [12] for experimental details.

inhibition by the 3 tail peptide was not competitive with respect to the fluorogenic substrate (data not shown). The 3 tail peptide inhibited all three active sites of the CP, consistent with its blocking peptide entry into the proteolytic chamber (table II). To investigate the sequence requirements for the closed channel state, we generated alanine-scanning substitutions across the 3 tail peptide (table II). Inhibition by the tail peptide was abrogated only in the case of the Asp9 substitution. The requirement for Asp9 is specific, because neither of the two most conservative substitutions for this residue, Glu and Asn, resulted in complete inhibition of peptidase activity (although Glu showed a partial inhibitory effect; table II). The suggested role of Asp9 in the stabilization of the closed state of the channel was interesting because the only sequence conserved from one  tail to another is Tyr8-Asp9-Arg10 (YDR; table I). Conservation of Tyr8 is absolute, whereas Asp9 is present in six of seven  tails,

and Arg10 less conserved. The conservation of the these residues suggested a key structural role. In the crystal structure of the wild-type CP from yeast, the carboxylate group of Asp9 of 3 is seen to contact both Arg10 and Tyr8 of the neighboring 4 subunit. Direct contacts formed between these residues in adjacent subunits may explain their evolutionary conservation. The functional significance of Asp9 was further tested by introducing an Asp9 to Ala mutation (D9A) in the 3/Pre9 gene, and replacing the chromosomal wild-type gene with this allele. In vitro peptidase assays on the D9A core particles indicated a derepression of peptidase activity as strong as that of the 3N mutant (Köhler et al., in preparation). The close similarities between the 3N and D9A mutant CP's suggest that the properties of the 3 mutants reflect the general properties of core particles in an open-channel state. Thus, the channel may be driven into the open state in various ways, and the detailed structure of the open state is apparently not critical for

328
Table II. Synthetic 3 tail peptide restores repression in trans. Tail peptide none GSRRYDSR (WT) GSRRYDSR (WT) GARRYDSR GSARYDSR GSRAYDSR GSRRADSR GSRRYASR GSRRYDAR GSRRYDSA GSRRYESR GSRRYNSR MEEVD 3N CP + + + + + + + + + + + + + W CP LLVY 100 5.7 114 0.4 2.2 1.9 0.4 92 0.4 2.6 32 96 67 Fluorogenic peptide hydrolysis LRR 100 1.9 53 ­ ­ ­ 0.4 98 2.2 ­ 10 80 ­

Köhler et al.

LLE 100 2.0 71 ­ ­ ­ 0.6 72 1.8 ­ 15 92 ­

Hydrolytic rates are expressed as a percentage of the rate observed for a given fluorogenic peptide and a given CP in the absence of 3 tail peptide. See [12] for experimental details.

function, at least according to the assays we have employed. If this inference is correct, it may reflect that the CP channel does not function as a selectivity filter; substrates may be committed to translocation within the regulatory particle, prior to their entrance into the CP.

5. Role of Rpt2 in channel gating Mutational studies have indicated a role for Rpt2, one of six proteasomal ATPases, in the control of peptide hydrolysis by the proteasome [10]. The rpt2RF polypeptide carries two substitutions within its ATPase domain, K229R and S241F. K229 is the invariant lysine residue characteristic of Walker-type ATPases, and is thus expected to contact ATP directly within the active site of the protein. The conservative rpt2K229R mutation is lethal. rpt2S241F suppresses the lethality of rpt2K229R, but in the absence of the lysine substitution it has no known phenotype. In particular, it does not affect the peptidase activity of the proteasome. Thus, the peptide hydrolysis defect apparently arises from the K229R mutation. For other Rpt proteins examined, active-site substitutions equivalent to K229R do not exhibit a significant peptide hydrolysis defect [10]. These results indicate that the ATPase domain of Rpt2 plays a major role in regulating the peptidase activity of the CP. Three models for the Rpt2 effect on peptide hydrolysis can be considered (figure 2). In model I, the rpt2 mutation may allosterically modulate the active sites of the CP. Substrate-dependent allosteric regulation of these active sites has already been demonstrated in both free core particles and proteasome holoenzymes [17, 18]. In model II, the rpt2 mutation may close a hypothetical channel

within the center of the base, which leads to the CP channel. In contrast to this RP-gating model, the CP channel itself may be closed in the rpt2RF holoenzyme (model III). To test the CP-gating model, we constructed a rpt2RF 3N 7N triple mutant, and assayed the peptidase activity of holoenzymes from this strain. Only the CP-gating model predicts restoration of peptidase activity in the triple mutant. However, it should be noted that, in the asymmetric RP1CP1 form of the proteasome, there are two distinct CP channels, the cis channel, which is in contact with the RP, and the trans channel, which is free (figure 2D). Thus, assuming that the open channel mutations restore peptidase activity to the complex, the effect could be accounted for by assuming that, in the rpt2RF mutant, peptides gain access to the CP through the trans channel, with the cis channel in direct contact with Rpt2 remaining closed. Thus, to test model III, we resolved the symmetric (RP2CP1) and asymmetric forms of the proteasome by non-denaturing gel electrophoresis. Wild-type and rpt2RF 3N 7N proteasomes were purified to near-homogeneity, resolved on polyacrylamide gels, and detected with fluorogenic peptide (Köhler et al., in preparation). The trans channel model predicts that the recovery of peptidase activity in the triple mutant should be restricted to the RP1CP1 form of the proteasome. As shown in figure 2B, this is not the case; the RP2CP1 form is detected by the activity stain in the mutant sample, and the ratio of activity between the asymmetric and symmetric forms was comparable in the wild-type and mutant samples. The activity stain was an appropriate measure of specific activity, because Coomassie brilliant blue staining of the same gel showed that the relative abundance of the symmetric and asymmetric complexes was not affected in the mutant proteasomes (figure 2C). The peptidase activity

The substrate translocation channel of the proteasome

329

Figure 2. Open-channel mutations suppress the peptide hydrolysis defect in the symmetric form of the Rpt2RF proteasome holoenzyme. A. Possible models for the inhibition of peptidase activity by the rpt2RF mutation. The postulated target of inhibition is depicted in red for each model. Model I, the mutation results in an allosteric inhibition of the proteolytic active sites of the CP. Proteolytic active sites are represented by closed (model I) or open (models II and III) scissors. Model II, the mutation blocks substrate entry into the CP as a result of the Rpt2 polypeptide itself blocking a substrate channel in the RP. Model III, the CP channel fails to open in the mutant. The N-terminal tails of the  subunits, which constitute the gating mechanism of the channel, are represented in red in model III. B. Non-denaturing gel electrophoresis of holoenzymes prepared from wild-type and rpt2RF 3N 7N triple mutants. Peptidase activity was measured by soaking the gel in the presence of fluorogenic peptide Suc-LLVY-AMC as previously described. The symmetric (RP2CP) and asymmetric (RP1CP) forms of the proteasome are indicated. Note that in A and B an unassigned band is present between RP2CP and RP1CP. This band is variably observed in purified preparations of holoenzyme (unpublished data). It is likely to represent an asymmetric proteasome containing an RP on one end and a base subcomplex on the other. C. The same gel as shown in B was stained for protein using Coomassie brilliant blue. D. Model for the rpt2RF effect on peptide hydrolysis, based on the results of the figure (Köhler et al., in preparation).

of the rpt2RF proteasome is so low that it is not detected in such an assay [10] (Köhler et al., in preparation, and unpublished data). Thus, strong suppression is conferred by the open-channel mutants. Based on the results of figure 2B and 2C, we conclude that Rpt2 can control the state of the CP channel as depicted in figure 2D. 6. Discussion In summary, we have shown that substrate entry into the free CP is rate-limiting for peptide hydrolysis in the

wild-type complex, whereas peptides enter the lumen rapidly in the open-channel mutant. Substrate entry into the CP is controlled by a channel that was not seen by crystallography of the wild type CP, because it is gated. Since the deletion has little effect on peptide hydrolysis by the 26S proteasome holoenzyme, it is suggested that activation of the CP by the RP reflects opening of the channel by a similar mechanism as seen in the deletant CP. Although the detailed structure of the channel in the 3N mutant may not mimic that of the wild-type open channel in detail, the enzymological properties of the

330 mutant proteasome holoenzyme are nonetheless similar to those of wild-type in its active state. The principal in vitro effect of the deletion mutation is instead to activate the free CP from the repressed state that it exhibits in its free form. Perhaps the most noteworthy feature of the gating apparatus described above is its construction from a heterogeneous set of N-terminal tails. Such a design has not yet been reported for gating mechanisms that regulate ion channels and other transmembrane proteins. Terminal polypeptide segments may be well suited for gating, since their structural rearrangement is facilitated by being unconstrained at one end. Channel opening may also be facilitated by the lack of secondary structure in the  tails, an unusual feature, given the size of this domain within the CP (53 residues from the seven  subunit tails show defined electron density in the wild-type CP). The dramatic conservation of the  subunit tails (table I), together with the observation that the mammalian CP can be activated for peptide hydrolysis similarly to the yeast CP [6, 7], suggests that the gating mechanism may be general.

Köhler et al. Negative regulation of protease activity is frequently mediated by propeptides that are cleaved upon maturation of the protease [19]. The gated channel of the proteasome provides a new and perhaps general mechanism for regulating the activity of mature proteases. In the proteasome, both mechanisms are observed. Inhibition of the nascent complex is provided by the N-terminal propeptides of the proteolytically active subunits [20, 21]. We propose that the assembly of the mature CP marks the transition from one form of inhibition to the other (figure 3). In the final stage in CP assembly, topological closure of the particle, which is expected to be a necessary condition for CP inhibition by the  subunit tail, is achieved by the association of two 7 7 half-CP's at the - interface. According to this model, as the half-CP's are joined, inhibition by subunit N-termini is relieved by autolysis [22, 23], while inhibition by the  subunit N-termini is imposed. Binding of the RP relieves this inhibition by opening the channel, thus giving rise to the proteolytically active form of the complex. An interesting feature of the mechanism is that the inhibitory N-termini of both  and

Figure 3. Model for coupled regulation of proteasome assembly and inhibition. Proposed late steps in the assembly of the proteasome are depicted [12]. The inhibitory N-terminal sequences of the  and subunits are represented in red. In the inactive half-CP, inhibition is provided by the subunit propeptides (which directly block the proteolytic active sites). Inhibition by the  subunit tails becomes effective only when the half-CPs condense to form a closed chamber. The last step represents holoenzyme formation, which is accompanied by channel opening. For details, see the text. RP, regulatory particle. The schematic representation of -propeptidemediated inhibition is modified from [18].

The substrate translocation channel of the proteasome subunits lie at assembly interfaces (figure 3). When assembly occurs at a given interface, inhibition is relieved at that site. Thus, in both cases, the inhibitory function of the N-terminal tails appears to be coupled to assembly by local conformational changes. However, the closedchannel phenotype of the rpt2RF mutant implies that holoenzyme assembly may not necessarily be accompanied by channel opening. The activity of the CP is regulated by complex formation with a variety of particles [8, 9]. Binding of the PA26 complex of trypanosomes to the CP results in channel opening via an outwards displacement of the 2, 3, and 4 tails, and a resulting activation of peptide hydrolysis [24]. There is no obvious sequence similarity between PA26 and subunits of the RP, and it is unclear to what extent the PA26 model for channel opening applies to the RP. One important difference between PA26 and the RP is that PA26 exhibits seven-fold symmetry, whereas this cannot be true of the RP. Previous work has defined a base subassembly of the RP which contacts the CP, and includes Rpt1-6 as well as two additional subunits, Rpn1 and Rpn2 [11]. Based on these findings, and by analogy to the ATPase assemblies of prokaryotic ATP-dependent proteases, a likely model for the RP interface in contact with the CP is a pseudo-six-fold symmetric ring of the related ATPases Rpt1-6. The effect of rpt2 mutations on CP gating provides more direct evidence that at least a subset of Rpt subunits interact directly with the CP. Notably, PA26 does not appear to have ATPase activity. Thus, our finding that an ATPase can control CP gating suggests a second important distinction between the mechanisms of CP gating by PA26 and the RP. An interesting possibility is that the CP gate opens and closes with each ATPase cycle of Rpt2. As a Walker family ATPase, Rpt2 most likely cycles between twoconformational states [2], as appears to be the case for the CP gate as well [12, 24]. PA26 is thought to open the gate by contacting a reverse turn located between the H0 helix of the CP and the N-terminal tails [24]. Conceivably, Rpt2 contacts the same reverse turn, but only in one of its two ATP-directed states. Further studies on the rpt2RF mutant are likely to clarify the mechanism of CP gating in the proteasome holoenzyme. References

331

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH grant GM43601 (to D.F.), the Foundation for the Promotion of Research at the Technion (M.G.), The U.S.-Israel Binational Science Foundation grant 9800240 (to M.H.G. and D.F.) and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB 469 and Schwerpunkt `Struktur, Funktion und Regulation des 20S/26S Proteasomsystems' to R.H.). A.K. was partially supported by a fellowship from the Studienfoerderung Cusanuswerk.

[1] Bochtler M., Ditzel L., Groll M., Hartmann C., Huber R., The proteasome, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 28 (1999) 295­317. [2] Schmidt M., Lupas A.N., Finley D., Structure and mechanism of ATP-dependent proteases, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 3 (1999) 584­591. [3] Voges D., Zwickl P., Baumeister W., The 26S proteasome: a molecular machine designed for controlled proteolysis, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68 (1999) 1015­1068. [4] De Mot R., Nagy I., Walz J., Baumeister W., Proteasomes and other self-compartmentalizing proteases in bacteria, Trends Microbiol. 7 (1999) 88­92. [5] Groll M., et al., Structure of the 20S proteasome from yeast at 2.4 Å resolution, Nature 386 (1997) 463­471. [6] Chu-Ping M., Vu J.H., Proske R.J., Slaughter C.A., DeMartino G.N., Identification, purification, and characterization of a high molecular weight, ATP-dependent activator (PA700) of the 20S proteasome, J. Biol. Chem. 269 (1994) 3539­3547. [7] Hoffman L., Rechsteiner M., Activation of the multicatalytic protease, J. Biol. Chem. 269 (1994) 16890­16895. [8] DeMartino G.N., Slaughter C.A., The proteasome, a novel protease regulated by multiple mechanisms, J. Biol. Chem. 274 (1999) 22123­22126. [9] Rechsteiner M., Realini C., Ustrell V., The proteasome activator 11S REG (PA28) and class I antigen presentation, Biochem. J. 345 (2000) 1­15. [10] Rubin D.M., Glickman M.H., Larsen C.N., Dhruvakumar S., Finley D., Active site mutants in the six regulatory particle ATPases reveal multiple roles for ATP in the proteasome, EMBO J. 17 (1998) 4909­4919. [11] Glickman M.H., Rubin D.M., Coux O., Wefes I., Pfeifer G., Cjeka Z., Baumeister W., Finley D., A subcomplex of the proteasome regulatory particle required for ubiquitin conjugate degradation and related to the COP9-signalosome and eIF3, Cell 94 (1998) 615­623. [12] Groll M., Bajorek M., Köhler A., Moroder L., Rubin D.M., Huber R., Glickman M.H., Finley D., A gated channel into the proteasome core particle, Nature Struct. Biol. 7 (1998) 1062­1067. [13] Löwe J., et al., Crystal structure of the 20S proteasome from the archeon T. acidophilum at 3.4 Å resolution, Science 268 (1995) 533­539. [14] Arendt C.S., Hochstrasser M., Identification of the yeast 20S proteasome catalytic centers and subunit interactions required for active-site formation, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94 (1997) 7156­7161. [15] Dick T.P., et al., Contribution of proteasomal beta subunits to the cleavage of peptide substrates analyzed with yeast mutants, J. Biol. Chem. 273 (1998) 25346­25637. [16] Bachmair A., Finley D., Varshavsky A., In vivo half-life of a protein is a function of its amino-terminal residue, Science 234 (1986) 179­186. [17] Kisselev A.F., Akopian T.N., Castillo V., Goldberg A.L., Proteasome active sites allosterically regulate each other, suggesting a cyclical bite-chew mechanism for protein breakdown, Mol. Cell 4 (1999) 395­402. [18] Schmidtke G., Emch S., Groettrup M., Holzhutter H.G., Evidence for the existence of a non-catalytic modifier site of peptide hydrolysis by the 20S proteasome, J. Biol. Chem. 275 (2000) 22056­22063. [19] Khan A.R., James M.N., Molecular mechanisms for the conversion of zymogens to active proteolytic enzymes, Protein Sci. 7 (1998) 815­836. [20] Schmidtke G., et al., Analysis of mammalian 20S proteasome biogenesis: the maturation of -subunits is an ordered two-step mechanism involving autocatalysis, EMBO J. 15 (1996) 6887­6898.

332
[21] Chen P., Hochstrasser M., Autocatalytic subunit processing couples active site formation in the 20S proteasome to completion of assembly, Cell 86 (1996) 961­972. [22] Ditzel L., et al., Conformational constraints for protein selfcleavage in the proteasome, J. Mol. Biol. 279 (1998) 1187­1191.

Köhler et al.
[23] Groll M., et al., The catalytic sites of 20S proteasomes and their role in subunit maturation: a mutational and crystallographic study, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96 (1999) 10976­10983. [24] Whitby F.G., Masters E.I., Kramer L., Knowlton J.R., Yao Y., Wang C.C., Hill C.P., Structural basis for the activation of 20S proteasome by 11S regulators, Nature 408 (1995) 115­120.

