Infection, Genetics and Evolution 4 (2004) 301­308

Review

The extracytoplasmic function sigma factors: role in bacterial pathogenesis
Murali D. Bashyam a,b,,1,2 , Seyed E. Hasnain b,2
a

Department of Pathology, CCSR 3240, 269 Campus Drive, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94306, USA b Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics (CDFD), Nacharam, Hyderabad 500076, India Received 17 February 2004; received in revised form 24 April 2004; accepted 26 April 2004 Available online 20 June 2004

Abstract Bacteria utilize a distinct subfamily of sigma factors to regulate extra cytoplasmic function (thus termed as ECF subfamily). Eubacteria appear to have evolved to incorporate extensive genetic diversity into their repertoire of ECF sigma factors (some species have more than 60 ECF sigma factors), while maintaining three major themes common to all members including: (1) they regulate and respond to extracytoplasmic functions; (2) they are themselves regulated by anti-sigma and/or anti-anti-sigma factors; and (3) most of them control a relatively small regulon. The cell wall is the first bacterial structure that comes in contact with the host during infection by pathogenic bacteria. The cell wall components are often associated with functions related to host cell invasion. It is therefore, likely that the ECF sigma factors regulate the bacterial response to host insult. Moreover, in some cases, virulence factors have been shown to be regulated directly by the ECF sigma factors. Unfortunately, this facet of the ECF sigma factors has not been an important area of study by researchers. The present review attempts to highlight the important role played by ECF sigma factors in bacterial pathogenesis and highlights several areas of future study involving the genetics of ECF sigma factors vis-à-vis bacterial pathogenesis. © 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: ECF; Sigma factors; Pathogenesis; Stress response; Extra cytoplasmic

1. Introduction Through the course of evolution and continuous adaptation, bacteria have developed several modes to cope with the variety of environmental stress that they frequently encounter. This is especially true for pathogenic bacteria which not only have to adapt to changing environment within the host during the course of infection but also to counter the adaptive response of the host. Therefore, stress response in the pathogen is a major determinant of its virulence. Depending upon whether the cytoplasm or the membrane/periplasm is subjected to stress, bacterial stress response can be broadly classified into cytoplasmic and extra-cytoplasmic. There is reduced protein mobility, paucity of ATP, and a predominantly oxidizing environment in the membrane/periplasmic region of a bacterial cell as against the cytoplasm, thereby necessitating the need for a separate stress response system
Corresponding author. Tel.: +91 40 7150008; fax: +91 40 7155610. E-mail addresses: bashyam@cdfd.org.in, mbashyam@stanford.edu (M.D. Bashyam), director@cdfd.org.in (S.E. Hasnain). 1 Tel.: +1-650-736-1989; fax: +1-650-736-073. 2 Tel.: +91-40-7155604; fax: 91-40-7155610. 1567-1348/$ ­ see front matter © 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.meegid.2004.04.003


catering for the periplasm/membrane (Brass et al., 1986; Nikaido, 1996). Cytoplasmic stress results in the generation of misfolded proteins in the cytoplasm, whereas an extracytoplasmic stress results in the generation of misfolded proteins in the membrane or periplasm. The cytoplasmic stress response has been extensively studied for several decades and includes the classical heat shock response as well as the response to generation of toxic radicals that damage cellular macromolecules including DNA and proteins (Storz and Zheng, 2000; Walker et al., 2000; Yura et al., 2000). The extracytoplasmic stress response is only recently been studied in detail and it is evident that it is much more diverse and comprehensive than the cytoplasmic stress response system. Specific recognition of promoter sequences in bacteria is brought about by the sigma subunit of the RNA polymerase. The sigma factors have been divided into two main families namely the sigma 70 family and the sigma 54 family. The sigma 70 family is further divided into two sub-families; the sigma 70-like subfamily and the ECF sub-family. A common mode of adaptation to any stress in bacteria is through a switch in the sigma factor utilized by the RNA polymerase core enzyme; cytoplasmic stress results in the activation of the heat shock sigma factor sigma 32. Studies during the last

302

M.D. Bashyam, S.E. Hasnain / Infection, Genetics and Evolution 4 (2004) 301­308

two decades have indicated that the extracytoplasmic stress response in bacteria is mediated by a special subfamily of sigma factors that have been classified according to their unique function (extra cytoplasmic function; ECF). Based on their structure and sequence homology, the ECF subfamily of sigma factors have been included within the sigma 70 family. ECF sigma factors have been shown to regulate cell envelope related processes (involving maintenance of the membrane/preiplasmic architecture), such as secretion, synthesis of exopolysaccharides, iron import or efflux, synthesis of extracellular proteases, etc. Since majority of gene regulation in bacteria occurs at the step of transcription initiation, transcriptional regulation of genes involved in bacterial pathogenesis has been an important area of study. Transcriptional regulators have been shown to be essential for virulence in several bacteria (Finlay and Falkow, 1997). Several pathogenic bacteria employ alternative sigma factors for responding to changing environmental conditions that they encounter inside the host during infection. The hostile environment within the host is bound to affect the membrane architecture of the invading bacterial pathogen. Study of ECF sigma factors and their target genes therefore assumes a lot of significance since they may play an important role in evading extracytoplasmic stress encountered by bacteria during infection. Moreover, ECF sigma factors are known to regulate synthesis of membrane/secretory proteins and the latter may form part of the immune evasion repertoire of pathogenic bacteria. The current review discusses the wide genetic diversity of the ECF sigma factors and their possible role in regulating bacterial virulence.

2. Control of the bacterial extracytoplasmic stress response Transcriptional control of the bacterial extracytoplasmic stress response, through utilization of a specific subfamily of sigma factors, was elucidated by two independent studies. One study by Lonetto and colleagues led to the discovery of the ECF sigma factor Sig E of Streptomyces coelicolor, which directs transcription of the dagA gene (Lonetto et al., 1994). A compilation of several sigma factor sequences resembling Sig E, led to the discovery of ECF subfamily of sigma factors including the CarQ of Myxococcus xanthus, AlgU of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, HrpL of Pseudomonas syringae, SigE and FecI of Escherichia coli, CnrH of Alcaligenes eutrophus, and SigX of Bacillus subtilus. Lonetto and colleagues have classified the ECF sigma factors as a subfamily of the sigma 70 class of sigma factors. The other major study was performed on the degP gene of E. coli. The degP gene is essential for growth at elevated temperatures (around 50  C, a condition termed as extreme heat shock) and encodes a periplasmic protease (Lipinska et al., 1990). Transcription of degP is activated at high temperatures and was shown not to be regulated by the heat shock

sigma factor rpoH/sigma 32 (Erickson and Gross, 1989). The study revealed that the presence of misfolded proteins in the periplasm could act as a sensor for inducing the expression of degP and led Erickson and Gross (1989) to propose the presence of another heat shock regulon, the rpoE regulon in E. coli. Both imbalanced synthesis as well as misfolding of membrane polypeptides in the periplasm, was shown to induce the extracytoplasmic heat shock response (Lipinska et al., 1990; Erickson and Gross, 1989). Following the initial discovery of RpoE from E. coli and SigE from S. coelicolor, several other members belonging to the ECF subfamily have since been discovered and studied. A compilation of ECF sigma factors from various bacterial species is given in Table 1. The E. coli Sig E (rpoE), which was originally identified by its ability to transcribe the heat shock sigma factor gene rpoH from its third promoter (Erickson et al., 1987), is perhaps the most well studied ECF sigma factor. About 10 genes have been identified as part of the rpoE regulon including sigH, rpoE itself, degP, rseA, rseB, rseC and the peptidyl prolyl isomerase gene fkpA (Rouviere et al., 1995). In an independent study, 20 distinct E. coli promoters/genes were identified as part of the rpoE regulon (Dartigalongue et al., 2001). The rpoE gene is part of a multicistronic operon that includes the rseA, rseB and rseC genes. Genetic and biochemical studies have indicated that RseA is an inner membrane protein while RseB is a periplasmic protein (De Las Penas et al., 1997; Missiakas et al., 1997). The periplasmic domain of RseA interacts with RseB while its cytoplasmic domain interacts with RpoE, thereby sequestering RpoE away from the transcription complex. Presence of misfolded proteins in the periplasm results in the sequestration of RseB away from the ternary inhibitory complex, thus alleviating the inhibition of RseA on RpoE (Collinet et al., 2000). RseB, therefore acts as the sensor protein. A protease that degrades RseA named DegS, has been identified. Upon stress, the DegS protease is activated resulting in rapid degradation of RseA, which in turn results in the activation of Sigma E (Ades et al., 1999). A second protease namely the YaeL (EcfE) acts sequentially along with DegS for the proteolytic cleavage of RseA (Alba et al., 2002; Kanehara et al., 2002). Peptides representing the C-terminal domain of bacterial outer membrane proteins (OMPs) were recently shown to activate the proteolytic activity of DegS, thereby indicating that misfolded OMPs trigger the DegS protease activity (Walsh et al., 2003). Recently, the co-crystal structure of E. coli SigE and the C-terminal domain of RseA was determined and it was shown that the anti sigma factor binds to the core RNAP binding domain of SigE, thereby inhibiting its assembly with the core RNAP (Campbell et al., 2003). Therefore, RseA and RseB ensure efficient inhibition of RpoE and this inhibition is quickly alleviated upon membrane perturbations as RseA and RseB are either degraded or removed away from the ternary inhibitory complex. Fig. 1 depicts a simple model to explain the regulation of activation of the ECF sigma factors.

M.D. Bashyam, S.E. Hasnain / Infection, Genetics and Evolution 4 (2004) 301­308 Table 1 A compilation of various ECF sigma factors ECF sigma Heat stress Sigma E Sigma E Sigma X PrtI Alg U RpoE Sig1 Species E. coli S. coelicolor B. subtilis P. fluorescence P. aeruginosa Salmonella typhimurium Deinococcus radiodurans Role Heat Heat Heat Heat Heat Heat Heat stress response stress response stress response stress response stress response stress response and ethanol stress response Pathogenesis No No No Yes, food spoilage Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes, Yes, Yes, Yes, Yes, No

303

Denaturing, oxidative and heat stress Sig E M. tuberculosis Sig H M. tuberculosis Iron starvation PvdS PupI PfrI PbrA BupI RhuI Light stress Car Q P. aeruginosa P. putida P. putida P. fluorescence B. pertussis B. avium M. xanthus

SDS and heat shock response Oxidative stress response Iron uptake Iron uptake Iron uptake Iron uptake Iron uptake Heme utilization Light stress response

indirect indirect indirect whooping cough avian counterpart of B. pertussis

Although ECF sigma factors have been classified under the sigma 70 family, there are distinct differences in the respective DNA binding domains viz. the region 2 that binds to the -10 promoter region and the region 4 that binds to the

-35 promoter region (Lonetto et al., 1994). Understandably, the two promoter sequences recognized by these two sigma factors also differ. Most bacteria harbor several sigma factors belonging to the ECF sub-familiy. The promoter specificity

Fig. 1. A diagrammatic representation of regulation of activity of ECF sigma factors. The model depicts a two-pronged regulation of the activity of the ECF sigma factors in gram negative bacteria. Membrane perturbations are (1) sensed by a sensory protein which leads to its dissociation from the anti sigma factor; and (2) lead to activation of a protease that in turn activates the degradation of the anti-sigma factor. Thus the inhibition of the ECF sigma factor is abrogated and specific genes controlled by the ECF sigma factor are activated. The N-terminal domain of the anti sigma factor has a cytoplasmic location and directly interacts with the ECF sigma factor whereas its C-terminal domain protrudes into the periplasm where it interacts with the sensor protein. Different bacterial species may have additional requirements for this process, for example, in E. coli, the protein YaeL participates in the degradation of the anti sigma factor (RseA) by the protease (DegS). RNAP; RNA polymerase.

304

M.D. Bashyam, S.E. Hasnain / Infection, Genetics and Evolution 4 (2004) 301­308

is determined by the -35 region that differs among promoters recognized by different ECF sigma factors in the same bacterial species (Lonetto et al., 1994).

3. Role in pathogenesis One facet of the ECF sigma factors that has not received due attention is their possible role in pathogenesis in virulent bacteria. Virulence factors induced by a specific sigma factor have been more of a `myth' than a `reality'. It is unlikely that a pathogenic bacteria would employ a specific sigma factor exclusively for the induction of virulence factors. However, given the importance of ECF sigma factors in regulating extracytoplasmic stress, it is more than likely that they may play an indirect role in establishing infection and pathogenesis. Therefore, although the ECF regulons have evolved primarily to protect the Bacterium against extracytoplasmic stress inducing cues, they are also an important component of pathogenesis in several virulent bacteria. Many species of Pseudomonas harbor multiple (about 20) ECF sigma factors and several of them appear to be important determinants of pathogenesis. The most striking case of a direct role of ECF sigma factors in bacterial pathogenesis was revealed during studies on the regulation of the alginate biosynthesis operon in P. aeruginosa. The synthesis and secretion of alginate is central to the production of the mucoid capsule. Alginate provides a coat that protects the bacterium from antibiotics, oxidative stress and immune attack. It is the mucoid form of the bacterium that is predominately present in prolonged lung infections and is an important determinant of morbidity and mortality in patients infected with this organism and suffering from cystic fibrosis (Govan and Harris, 1986). The alginate biosynthesis operon in P. aeruginosa is controlled by the algU operon (Martin et al., 1993) that is homologous to the sigE operon of E. coli (Yu et al., 1995; Hershberger et al., 1995). The algU operon, consists of algU, mucA, mucB, mucC and mucD. The AlgU activity is controlled by the anti sigma factor MucA, that is similar to E. coli RseA (Schurr et al., 1996). MucA has been shown to be localized to the inner membrane (Mathee et al., 1997). Mutations in MucA that lead to an increase in production of alginate, actually lead to the stabilization of AlgU, indicating that MucA might inhibit AlgU by targeting the latter for proteolysis and/or by sequestering it in the cytoplasm (Rowen and Deretic, 2000). MucB has been shown to be present in the periplasm (Schurr et al., 1996; Mathee et al., 1997), is similar to E. coli RseB and stabilizes MucA (Rowen and Deretic, 2000). Both MucA and MucB therefore are negative regulators of AlgU. MucD is similar to E. coli DegP, the periplasmic protease (Boucher et al., 1996). This is a prime example of conservation of operons at the structural and regulation level in two different bacterial species. The similarity also exists in the nature of protein-protein interactions between the various gene products of the operon,

although the operons in the respective species regulate entirely different extra cytoplasmic functions. There are several other striking examples that highlight the role played by ECF sigma factors and/or the genes they regulate, in bacterial pathogenesis. The production of extracellular proteases is essential for pathogenesis and food spoilage by Pseudomonas fluorescence and is under the control of an ECF sigma factor PrtI. Similar to SigE of E. coli, prtI is induced under elevated temperatures (Burger et al., 2000). The prtI gene is part of an operon that also includes the downstream gene ptrR, which is a membrane bound anti sigma factor (Burger et al., 2000). The stop codon of prtI and the start codon of prtR overlap indicating translational coupling (Burger et al., 2000). Phytopathogenic strains of Pseudomonas syringeae are capable of parasitizing tomato and Aradopsis thaliana. Recently, it was shown that the P. syringeae ECF sigma factor HrpL (hypersensitive response and pathogenesis) played a pivotal role in activating several genes involved in pathogenesis (Fouts et al., 2002). HrpL regulates synthesis of proteins involved in the delivery of pathogenesis effector proteins through the type III secretion system (Alfano and Collmer, 1997). A similar type III secretion system has also been shown in several other plant (as well as animal) bacterial pathogens including those belonging to the genera Escherichia, Salmonella, Yersinia, Xanthomonas, etc. (Galan and Collmer, 1999). Salmonella typhimurium is known to inhabit niches that vary greatly in various vertebrate hosts. This can be partly attributed to its ability to adapt to different environmental conditions in vivo. It has been shown that Salmonella strains harboring mutations in the extracellular protease gene htrA, exhibit reduced virulence (Johnson et al., 1991; Chatfield et al., 1992). The htrA gene is under the direct control of the ECF sigma factor RpoE, just like in E. coli. Humphreys and coworkers have shown that a mutant of Salmonella typhimurium lacking the ECF sigma factor RpoE was compromised in its ability to invade and multiply inside macrophages and epithelial cells (Humphreys et al., 1999). These results indicate that the rpoE regulon (htrA plus other genes) may play an important role in pathogenicity of Salmonella typhimurium. Several antibiotics act on cells by inhibiting the cell wall biosynthesis pathway. Perturbations in the pathway would lead to deformities in the cell membrane, which might be a trigger for an ECF response in the cell. Do bacteria also use the ECF sigma factors to regulate proteins involved in drug resistance? This hypothesis was proven recently by using microarrays, in case of B. subtilis; antibiotics that inhibit cell wall synthesis (such as vancomycin) were shown to induce sigma factors SigW and SigM, which are ECF sigma factors (Cao et al., 2002). In a similar study, Cao and Helmann (2002) have shown that BcrC, a component of the BcrABC drug transporter system involved in resistance to the drug Bacitracin, is regulated by two ECF sigma factors, SigX and SigM. It was shown that bacitracin could induce BcrC through SigM but not through SigX. The sigM mutant

M.D. Bashyam, S.E. Hasnain / Infection, Genetics and Evolution 4 (2004) 301­308

305

was four-fold more sensitive to the drug than the wild type strains, whereas the sigX mutant was only slightly more sensitive (Cao and Helmann, 2002). The BcrC promoter could be recognized by both SigX and SigM. These studies indicate that ECF sigma factors are also involved in regulating antibiotic resistance in bacteria and raise important issues regarding bacterial pathogens where drug resistance is a major problem, such as M. tuberculosis. 3.1. Iron regulation Iron is an essential element for any living organism since it is an important co-factor for many redox titrating enzymes. Bacterial pathogens are known to induce expression of virulence genes in response to iron starvation (Litwin and Calderwood, 1993; Vasil and Ochsner, 1999). Often pathogenic bacteria inhabit host environments that are low in iron availability. Iron in the host is usually present in the ferric form, which is not suitable for intake by pathogenic bacteria. Moreover, iron may be present in association with carrier proteins and therefore may not be freely available to the pathogen. Bacteria have evolved several mechanisms for uptake of iron including the ability to acquire iron in its ferric form by synthesis of molecules called siderophores. Siderophores have been shown to be important for virulence in several animal models of bacterial disease (reviewed in Ratledge and Dover, 2000). Siderophore synthesis is essential for survival of bacteria in host environment. Siderophore synthesis is regulated by a negative feedback loop mechanism; the Fur and DtXR proteins in gram negative and gram positive bacteria respectively, have been shown to bind to operator sequences and inactivate promoters of siderophore genes in the presence of iron. Recently, ECF sigma factors have been shown to be involved in siderophore synthesis and uptake. These include the PvdS from P. aeruginosa, PbrA from P. fluorescens, PfrI and PupI from Pseudomonas putida and FecI from E. coli K-12. The link between iron acquisition and pathogenesis is well established in case of P. aeruginosa. In fact, the importance of iron uptake in survival and pathogenesis is striking in P. aeruginosa since it appears to contain about 14 sigma factors, including PvdS, with significant homology to iron regulated ECF sigma factors (Visca et al., 2002). Moreover, most of these ECF sigma factors also contain FecR-like genes in their immediate vicinity, indicating that they respond to membrane signals (Visca et al., 2002). The expression of pyoverdine (a siderophore) is under positive regulation of the ECF sigma factor, PvdS (Cunliffe et al., 1995; Miyazaki et al., 1995). PvdS is activated under low iron conditions since it is negatively controlled by the Fur protein (Cunliffe et al., 1995; Miyazaki et al., 1995; Ochsner and Vasil, 1996). PvdS has been conclusively proven to be a member of the ECF sub-family of sigma factors (Leoni et al., 2000; Wilson and Lamont, 2000). PvdS activity is regulated by the anti sigma factor FpvR. The siderophore pyoverdine forms the ferric-pyoverdine complex which binds to the cell

surface receptor FpvA. This binding in turn transduces a signal to FpvR leading to alleviation of inhibition on PvdS resulting in synthesis of virulence factors including pyoverdine itself, exotoxin A and PrpL endoprotease (Ochsner and Vasil, 1996). Recently, another ECF sigma factor FpvI, was shown to be regulated by the anti sigma factor FpvR. FpvI is responsible for synthesis of FpvA (Beare et al., 2003). Another Pseudomonas species viz. P. putida, also utilizes ECF sigma factors for iron acquisition. The P. putida ECF sigma factor PupI is regulated by the anti-sigma factor PupR and the sensor protein PupB. Pseudomonas utilizes multiple ECF sigma factors for pathogenesis and therefore is an excellent organism to study the evolution of multiple ECF sigma factors in the same species. The fur regulated gene bfrZ of Bordetella pertussis, the causal organism for whooping cough in humans, encodes a protein that is a siderophore receptor. Expression of BfrZ is regulated by the ECF sigma factor BupI and its cognate anti sigma factor BupR (Pradel and Locht, 2001). Heme utilization in Bordetella avium, which is the avian counterpart of B. pertussis, is also regulated by a sigma factor belonging to the ECF subfamily viz. RhuI. The rhuI gene is present upstream of the bhuR that encodes a membrane bound heme receptor protein. 3.2. Pathogenesis in Mycobacterium: role of ECF sigma factors Several areas of mycobacterial pathogenesis have been the focus of research during the past two decades, notably the role of ECF sigma factors. An earlier study of mycobacterial promoters had pointed to the existence of multiple sigma factors (Bashyam et al., 1996). Bacteria belonging to the actinomycete family, including Streptomyces and Mycobacterium, harbor multiple extracytoplasmic sigma factors that appear to regulate varied functions, many of which are yet to be deciphered. The M. tuberculosis genome sequence revealed the existence of several sigma factors (a total of 13) and many of them appeared to belong to the ECF sub-family (Cole et al., 1998). The sigma factor SigA has been shown to be important for expression of vegetative genes (Gomez et al., 1998) and the other sigma factors have been shown to be involved in response to several kinds of stress stimuli. SigB, earlier thought to be a vegetative sigma factor, was shown to be dispensable for normal growth in M. tuberculosis as well as in Mycobacterium smegmatis. The SigF sigma factor was shown to be important for survival and multiplication inside lung granulomas (Chen et al., 2000). The other 10 sigma factors are thought to be members of the ECF subfamily (Gomez et al., 1997; Cole et al., 1998). Initial work by Manganelli and colleagues (1999) showed the importance of sigma factor regulation in adaptation of M. tuberculosis to various forms of stress (Manganelli et al., 1999). The ECF sigma factor SigE is induced by heat as well as by the denaturing agent Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate (SDS), indicating that it is probably induced due to membrane perturbation

306

M.D. Bashyam, S.E. Hasnain / Infection, Genetics and Evolution 4 (2004) 301­308

signals. Both sigE and sigH have been shown to be induced upon macrophage infection. Mycobacteria sigE mutants are compromised in their response to SDS and heat shock, are sensitive to killing by mouse macrophages and are also attenuated in infection of human macrophages (Manganelli et al., 2001). Mycobacterium SigE is homologous to the S. coelicolor ECF sigma factor SigR. In the M. tuberculosis genome, sigE is immediately followed by the gene Rv1222, which is very similar to the S. coecolicolor anti sigma factor RsrA (regulator of SigR) (Kang et al., 1999). Therefore, Rv1222 is likely to be the anti sigma factor for SigE. The S. coelicolor SigR is involved in maintaning redox homeostasis in the cell by transcribing genes involved in the thioredoxin disulphide reductase pathway. RsrA binds to SigR and keeps it in an inactive form. The anti sigma activity of RsrA is alleviated by the action of the oxidising agent diamide that causes formation of disulphide bridges in RsrA and it is no longer able to bind to SigR. In M. tuberculosis, sigE and Rv1222 may not be transcribed as part of a single message. Like SigE, mycobacterial SigH is also a close homologue of the Streptomyces ECF sigma factor SigR. A gene present downstream of sigH is homologous to rsrA. The gene for the sigma factor SigH was cloned from M. tuberculosis as well as from M. smegmatis was initially shown to be important for survival of the bacteria under oxidative stress and heat shock (Norvin et al., 1999). Recently, an M. tuberculosis sigH knockout strain was created. It was shown that sigH regulates the response to oxidative and other denaturing stress conditions (Kaushal et al., 2002). Surprisingly, the gene itself is indispensable for bacterial growth but is essential for pathogenesis and lethality in mice. This study also shows that the sigH gene product may be involved in recruitment of granuloma inducing immune signals in the host (Kaushal et al., 2002). Another study on sigH knockout strain of M. tuberculosis revealed that the mutant could grow inside macrophages as efficiently as the wild type strain. However, the mutant was compromised in its ability to cope with heat and oxidative stresses (Manganelli et al., 2002). Several genes that were induced in the presence of diamide in the wild type strain were not induced in the mutant strain (Manganelli et al., 2002), indicating that SigH may be involved in regulating redox homeostasis in M. tuberculosis, similar to SigR of S. coelicolor. Taken together, these results provide important evidence in favor of role of ECF sigma factors in mycobacterial pathogenesis (Graham and Clark-Curtiss, 1999). Therefore, M. tuberculosis appears to utilize several ECF sigma factors to facilitate various steps leading to establishment and maintenance of infection.

4. Conclusion The last decade has seen several important developments in the biochemical characterization of the process

of activation of ECF sigma factors. It is now imperative to determine the target genes for the ECF sigma factors particularly in case of pathogenic bacteria like M. tuberculosis. Recently, a plasmid-based system for identification of target genes for ECF sigma factors in E. coli has been established (Rezuchova and Kormanec, 2001). It has been suggested that this system can be used for identification of ECF sigma-regulated promoters from other species, such as Salmonella and Xanthomonas as well. Hopefully such studies would also be extended to pathogenic bacteria. Pathogenic bacterial species, such as Mycobacterium and Salmonella are able to survive and propagate within the hostile environment of macrophages. It is obvious that the ECF sigma factors play an important role in modulating the bacterial response to combat the bactericidal conditions prevailing inside the macrophages. The study of role of ECF sigma factors would therefore potentially yield several novel drug targets that would have the added advantage of being unique to the bacterial species, since they are unlikely to have human counterparts, a problem frequently encountered in drug targets belonging to metabolic pathways. Gene knockout studies are currently underway to determine the role of ECF sigma factors, particularly in the case of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Use of the microarray technology is another promising approach to identify ECF targets as was recently done for the Hrpl target genes in Pseudomonas syringae (Fouts et al., 2002). Another aspect worth studying would be the promoter binding domains in the ECF sigma factors. It would be interesting to determine the effect of specific mutations in the amino acids present in the region 2 and region 4 of the ECF sigma factors and compare the result with mutations in the promoter sequence. This will aid in dissecting how multiple sigma factors distinguish between specific target genes. Another important area of study would be to determine genetic variation within a single ECF sigma factor gene from among clinical isolates of a particular pathogenic bacterium. This would provide unique insights into the relationship between the particular ECF sigma factor and pathogenesis. A unique way to determine genes regulated by ECF sigma factors could be to use the I-TRAP method (identification of transcriptional regulator activated promoters), developed by McLendon and Shinnick (McLendon and Shinnick, 2003). Using this method, sigmaE regulated genes were identified in M. tuberculosis. Given the recurrent problem of multi-drug resistance in several bacterial pathogens, it has become imperative to identify new drug targets. Given the importance of the ECF sigma factors, the genes involved in regulating ECS response can be attractive targets for drug therapy. The ECF regulon can also be potentially used for generating attenuated strains for vaccine purposes. Therefore, it is imperative that we understand the link between the ECF sigma factors, the regulons controlled by these sigma factors and pathogenesis in virulent bacterial species. Although it has been suggested that free living bacteria harbor a larger number of ECF sigma factors than pathogenic

M.D. Bashyam, S.E. Hasnain / Infection, Genetics and Evolution 4 (2004) 301­308

307

species (Mittenhuber, 2002), it is evident that ECF sigma factors have an important role to play in pathogenic bacteria. References
Ades, S.E., Connolly, L.E., Alba, B.M., Gross, C.A., 1999. The Escherichia coli sigma(E)-dependent extracytoplasmic stress response is controlled by the regulated proteolysis of an anti-sigma factor. Genes Dev. 13, 2449­2461. Alba, B.M., Leeds, J.A., Onufryk, C., Lu, C.Z., Gross, C.A., 2002. DegS and YaeL participate sequentially in the cleavage of RseA to activate the sigma(E)-dependent extracytoplasmic stress response. Genes Dev. 16, 2156­2168. Alfano, J.R., Collmer, A., 1997. The type III (Hrp) secretion pathway of plant pathogenic bacteria: trafficking harpins, Avr proteins, and death. J. Bacteriol. 179, 5655­56562. Bashyam, M.D., Kaushal, D., Dasgupta, S.K., Tyagi, A.K., 1996. A study of mycobacterial transcriptional apparatus: identification of novel features in promoter elements. J. Bacteriol. 178, 4847­4853. Beare, P.A., For, R.J., Martin, L.W., Lamont, I.L., 2003. Siderophoremediated cell signalling in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: divergent pathways regulate virulence factor production and siderophore receptor synthesis. Mol. Microbiol. 47, 195­207. Boucher, J.C., Martinez-Salazar, J.M., Schurr, M.J., Mudd, M.H., Yu, H., Deretic, V., 1996. Two distinct loci affecting conversion to mucoidy in Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis encode homologs of the serine protease HtrA. J. Bacteriol. 178, 511­523. Brass, J.M., Higgins, C.F., Foley, M., Rugman, P.A., Birmingham, J., Garland, P.B., 1986. Lateral diffusion of proteins in the periplasm of Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 165, 787­794. Burger, M., Woods, R.G., McKcarthy, C., Beacher, I.R., 2000. Temperature regulation of protease in Pseudomonas fluorescens LS107d2 by an ECF sigma factor and a transmembrane activator. Microbiology 146, 3149­3155. Campbell, E.A., Tupy, J.L., Gruber, T.M., Wang, S., Sharp, M.M., Gross, C.A., Darst, S.A., 2003. Crystal structure of Escherichia coli sigmaE with the cytoplasmic domain of its anti-sigma RseA. Mol. Cell 11, 1067­1078. Cao, M., Helmann, J.D., 2002. Regulation of the Bacillus subtilis BcrC bacitracin resistance gene by two extracytoplasmic function sigma factors. J. Bacteriol. 184, 6123­6129. Cao, M., Wang, T., Ye, R., Helmann, J.D., 2002. Antibiotics that inhibit cell wall biosynthesis induce expression of the Bacillus subtilis sigma(W) and sigma(M) regulons. Mol. Microbiol. 45, 1267­1276. Chatfield, S.N., Strahan, K., Pickard, D., Charles, I., Hormaeche, C., Dougan, G., 1992. Evaluation of Salmonella typhimurium strains harbouring defined mutations in htrA and aroA in the murine salmonellosis model. Microbiol. Pathog. 12, 145­151. Chen, P., Ruiz, R.E., Li, Q., Silver, R.F., Bishai, W.R., 2000. Construction and characterization of a Mycobacterium tuberculosis mutant lacking the alternate sigma factor gene, sigF. Infect. Immunol. 68, 5575­5580. Cole, S.T., Brosch, R., Parkhill, J., Garnier, T., Churcher, C., Harris, D., Gordon, S.V., Eiglmeier, K., Gas, S., Barry III, C.R., Tekaia, F., Badcock, K., Bashyam, D., Gentles, S., Hamlin, N., Holroyd, S., Hornsby, T., Jagels, K., Barrell, B.G., 1998. Deciphering the biology of Mycobacterium tuberculosis from the complete genome sequence. Nature 393, 537­544. Collinet, B., Yuzawa, H., Chen, T., Herrera, C., Missiakas, D., 2000. RseB binding to the periplasmic domain of RseA modulates the RseA:sigmaE interaction in the cytoplasm and the availability of sigma E.RNA polymerase. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 33898­33904. Cunliffe, H.E., Merriman, T.R., Lamont, I.L., 1995. Cloning and characterization of pvdS, a gene required for pyoverdine synthesis in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: PvdS is probably an alternative sigma factor. J. Bacteriol. 177, 2744­2750.

Dartigalongue, C., Missiakas, D., Raina, S., 2001. Characterization of the Escherichia coli sigma E regulon. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 20866­20875. De Las Penas, A., Connolly, L., Gross, C.A., 1997. The sigmaE-mediated response to extracytoplasmic stress in Escherichia coli is transduced by RseA and RseB, two negative regulators of sigma E. Mol. Microbiol. 24, 373­385. Erickson, J.W., Gross, C.A., 1989. Identification of the E subunit of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase: a second alternate factor involved in high-temperature gene expression. Genes Dev. 3, 1462­1471. Erickson, J.W., Vaughn, V., Walter, W.A., Neidhardt, F.C., Gross, C.A., 1987. Regulation of the promoters and transcripts of rpoH, the Escherichia coli heat shock regulatory gene. Genes Dev. 1, 419­432. Finlay, B.B., Falkow, S., 1997. Common themes in microbial pathogenicity revisited. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 61, 136­169. Fouts, D.E., Abramovitch, R.B., Alfano, J.R., Baldo, A.M., Buell, C.R., Cartinhour, S., Chatterjee, A.K., D'Ascenzo, M., Gwinn, M.L., Lazarowitz, S.G., Lin, N.C., Martin, G.B., Rehm, A.H., Schneider, D.J., van Dijk, K., Tang, X., Collmer, A., 2002. Genomewide identification of Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 promoters controlled by the HrpL alternative sigma factor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 2275­2280. Galan, J.E., Collmer, A., 1999. Type III secretion machines: bacterial devices for protein delivery into host cells. Science 284, 1322­1328. Gomez, J.E., Chen, J.M., Bishai, W.R., 1997. Sigma factors of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Tuber Lung Dis. 78, 175­183. Gomez, M., Doukhan, L., Nair, G., Smith, I., 1998. sigA is an essential gene in Mycobacterium smegmatis. Mol. Microbiol. 29, 617­628. Govan, J.R., Harris, G.S., 1986. Pseudomonas aeruginosa and cystic fibrosis: unusual bacterial adaptation and pathogenesis. Microbiol. Sci. 3, 302­308. Graham, J.E., Clark-Curtiss, J.E., 1999. Identification of Mycobacterium tuberculosis RNAs synthesized in response to phagocytosis by human macrophages by selective capture of transcribed sequences (SCOTS). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96, 11554­11559. Hershberger, C.D., Ye, R.W., Parsek, M.R., Xie, Z., Chakrabarty, A.M., 1995. The algT (algU) gene of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a key regulator involved in alginate biosynthesis, encodes an alternative æ factor ( E). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92, 7941­7945. Humphreys, S., Stevenson, A., Bacon, A., Weinhardt, A.B., Roberts, M., 1999. The alternative sigma factor, sigma E, is critically important for the virulence of Salmonella typhimurium. Infect Immunol. 67, 1560­ 1568. Johnson, K., Charles, I., Dougan, G., Pickard, D., Ogaora, P., Costa, G., Ali, T., Miller, I., Hormaeche, C., 1991. The role of a stress-response protein in Salmonella typhimurium virulence. Mol. Microbiol. 5, 401­ 407. Kanehara, K., Ito, K., Akiyama, Y., 2002. YaeL (EcfE) activates the sigma(E) pathway of stress response through a site-2 cleavage of anti-sigma(E), RseA. Genes Dev. 16, 2147­2155. Kang, J.G., Paget, M.S., Seok, Y.J., Hahn, M.Y., Bae, J.B., Hahn, J.S., Kleanthous, C., Buttner, M.J., Roe, J.H., 1999. RsrA, an anti-sigma factor regulated by redox change. EMBO J. 18, 4292­4298. Kaushal, D., Schroeder, B.G., Tyagi, S., Yoshimatsu, T., Scott, C., Ko, C., Carpenter, L., Mehrotra, J., Manabe, Y.C., Fleischmann, R.D., Bishai, W.R., 2002. Reduced immunopathology and mortality despite tissue persistence in a Mycobacterium tuberculosis mutant lacking alternative sigma factor, SigH. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 8330­8835. Leoni, L., Orsi, N., de Lorenzo, V., Visca, P., 2000. Functional analysis of PvdS, an iron starvation sigma factor of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J. Bacteriol. 182, 1481­1491. Lipinska, B., Zylicz, M., Georgopoulos, C., 1990. The HtrA (DegP) protein, essential for Escherichia coli survival at high temperatures, is an endopeptidase. J. Bacteriol. 172, 1791­1797. Litwin, C.M., Calderwood, S.B., 1993. Role of iron in regulation of virulence genes. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 6, 137­149. Lonetto, M.A., Brown, K.L., Rudd, K.E., Buttner, M.J., 1994. Analysis of the Streptomyces coelicolor sigE gene reveals the existence of a

308

M.D. Bashyam, S.E. Hasnain / Infection, Genetics and Evolution 4 (2004) 301­308 Pradel, E., Locht, C., 2001. Expression of the putative siderophore receptor gene bfrZ is controlled by the extracytoplasmic-function sigma factor BupI in Bordetella bronchiseptica. J. Bacteriol. 183, 2910­2917. Ratledge, C., Dover, L.G., 2000. Iron metabolism in pathogenic bacteria. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 54, 881­941. Rezuchova, B., Kormanec, J., 2001. A two-plasmid system for identification of promoters recognized by RNA polymerase containing extracytoplasmic stress response sigma(E) in Escherichia coli Bronislava Rezuchova, Jan Kormanec. J. Microbiol. Meth. 45, 103­ 111. Rouviere, P.E., De Las Penas, A., Meares, J., Lu, C.Z., Rudd, K.E., Gross, C.A., 1995. rpoE, the gene encoding the second heat-shock sigma factor, E, in Escherichia coli. EMBO J. 14, 1032­1042. Rowen, D.W., Deretic, V., 2000. Membrane-to-cytosol redistribution of ECF sigma factor AlgU and conversion to mucoidy in Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates from cystic fibrosis patients. Mol. Microbiol. 36, 314­327. Schurr, M.J., Yu, H., Martinez-Salazar, J.M., Boucher, J.C., Deretic, V., 1996. Control of AlgU, a member of the E-like family of stress sigma factors, by the negative regulators MucA and MucB and Pseudomonas aeruginosa conversion to mucoidy in cystic Fibrosis. J. Bacteriol. 178, 4997­5004. Storz G., Zheng M., 2000. Oxidative stress. In: Storz, G., Hengge-Aronis, R. (Ed.), Bacterial Stress Responses. ASM, Washington, DC, pp. 47­59. Vasil, M.L., Ochsner, U.A., 1999. The response of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to iron: genetics, biochemistry and virulence. Mol. Microbiol. 34, 399­413. Visca, P., Leoni, L., Wilson, M.J., Lamont, I.L., 2002. Iron transport and regulation, cell signalling and genomics: lessons from Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas. Mol. Microbiol. 45, 1177­1190. Walker G.C., Smith B.T., Sutton M.D., 2000. The SOS response to DNA damage. In: Storz G., Hengge-Aronis R. (Ed.), Bacterial Stress Responses. ASM, Washington, DC, pp. 131­144. Yu, H., Schurr, M.J., Deretic, V., 1995. Functional equivalence of Escherichia coli  E and Pseudomonas aeruginosa AlgU: E. coli rpoE restores mucoidy and reduces sensitivity to reactive oxygen intermediates in algU mutants of P. aeruginosa. J. Bacteriol. 177, 3259­3268. Yura T., Kanemori M., Morita M.T., 2000. The heat shock response; regulation and function. In: Storz, G., Hengge-Aronis, R. (Eds.), Bacterial Stress Responses. ASM, Washington, DC, pp. 3­18. Walsh, N.P., Alba, B.M., Bose, B., Gross, C.A., Sauer, R.T., 2003. OMP peptide signals initiate the envelope-stress response by activating DegS protease via relief of inhibition mediated by its PDZ domain. Cell 113, 61­71.

subfamily of eubacterial RNA polymerase factors involved in the regulation of extracytoplasmic functions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91, 7573­7577. Manganelli, R., Dubnau, E., Tyagi, S., Kramer, F.R., Smith, I., 1999. Differential expression of 10 sigma factor genes in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Mol. Microbiol. 31, 715­724. Manganelli, R., Voskuil, M.I., Schoolnik, G.K., Dubnau, E., Gomez, M., Smith, I., 2002. Role of the extracytoplasmic-function sigma factor sigma (H) in Mycobacterium tuberculosis global gene expression. Mol. Microbiol. 45, 365­374. Manganelli, R., Voskuil, M.I., Schoolnik, G.K., Smith, I., 2001. The Mycobacterium tuberculosis ECF sigma factor sigmaE: role in global gene expression and survival in macrophages. Mol. Microbiol. 41, 423­437. Martin, D.E., Holloway, B.W., Deretic, V., 1993. Characterization of a locus determining the mucoid status of Pseudomonas aeruginosa: AlgU shows sequence similarities with a Bacillus sigma factor. J. Bacteriol. 175, 1153­1164. Mathee, K., McPherson, C.J., Ohman, D.E., 1997. Posttranslational control of the algT (algU)-encoded sigma22 for expression of the alginate regulon in Pseudomonas aeruginosa and localization of its antagonist proteins MucA and MucB (AlgN). J. Bacteriol. 179, 3711­3720. McLendon, M.M., Shinnick, T.M., 2003. I-TRAP: a method to identify transcriptional regulator activated promoters. BMC Infect. Dis. 3, 15. Mittenhuber, G., 2002. An inventory of genes encoding RNA polymerase sigma factors in 31 completely sequenced eubacterial genomes. J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 4, 77­91. Missiakas, D., Mayer, M.P., Lemaire, M., Georgopoulos, C., Raina, S., 1997. Modulation of the Escherichia coli sigmaE (RpoE) heat-shock transcription-factor activity by the RseA, RseB and RseC proteins. Mol. Microbiol. 24, 355­371. Miyazaki, H., Kato, H., Nakazawa, T., Tsuda, M., 1995. A positive regulatory gene, pvdS, for expression of pyoverdin biosynthetic genes in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO. Mol. Gen. Genet. 248, 17­24. Nikaido H., 1996. Outer membrane. In: Neidhardt, F.C., Curtiss III, R., Ingraham, J.L., Lin, E.C.C., Low K.B. (Eds.), et al., Escherichia coli and Salmonella: Cellular and Molecular Biology. ASM, Washington, DC, pp. 88­103. Norvin, D.F., Qi-long, W.U., Dequan, K., Xiaoling, P., Sumeet, G., Robert, N.H., 1999. A mycobacterial extracytoplasmic sigma factor involved in survival following heat shock and oxidative stress. J. Bacteriol. 181, 4266­4274. Ochsner, U.A., Vasil, M.L., 1996. Gene repression by the ferric uptake regulator in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: cycle selection of iron-regulated genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93, 4409­4414.

