Exp. Eye Res. (1974) 19, 163-166

Coenzyme Dependency of Alcohol Dehydrogenase in the Retina of the Rat.
III. Effect of Lightand Dark adaptation on the Redox State of the Pyridine Nucleotides
JUDITH
POWER

C~LIVE N. GRAYMORE*,

AND RALPH

D. KISSUN

DPljart?rLent Pathology ad Depwtment of Physiology and Biochemistry; of Institute of Ophthalmology, University of Lo&on. Englad (Received22 April 1974, London)
The levels of t!he oxidized and reduced forms of NAD and NADP have been determined in t,he rat's retina following darkand light-adaptation, to clarify further their roles in vision. The lack of a significant increase in the oxidized form makes it difficult to implicate either coenzyme in the visual cycle. However, in view of the previous results reported by this laboratory and others, it is felt that XADP may yet have a special role. There is little doubt, that the present investigation can only stimulat,e furt'her studies on this complex and rsciting problem.

1. Introduction
In paper I of this series(Graymore and Power, 1972) it was shown that t)he response of the pyridine nucleotides to the intraperitoneal injection of methyl or ethyl alcohols differed dramatically in the liver and retina of the rat. There is little effect on the NADP-NADPH system of the liver 90 min after injection of a 200/bethanol solution (1.5 ml per 100 g body weight). although the ratio of N,4D/NADH falls from 6.4 to 2.18; this suggeststhat liver alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) is largely, if not entirely dependent on the NAD-NADH system. Theseresults corroborate the previous findings of Slater, Sawyer and Strauli (1964). As regards the retina, although the levels of NAD and NADH are increased, the ratio relllains virtually unaltered; however there is a marked fall in NADP with a corresponding increase in NADPH resulting in a drastic alteration of the NADPH/ NADP ratio from 2.9 to 5.0. On this basis,it can be assumedthat either ADH of the retina is NADP-dependent, or that retinol dehydrogenase (RDH) can utilize ethanol as substrate, with NSDP as the coenzyme (seediscussion). Paper II of this seriesexamined the roles of N,;ZD and NADP from a histochemical standpoint (Kissun, Graymore and Newhouse, 1972). This work again endorsed the predominant role of the NBDP system in the operation of the visual cycle. Xuch of the work carried out so far has involved in vitro studies, and the relative in vivo concentrations of coenzymes, as well as the degree of binding, have tended to he ignored and the situation not fully exploited. In the presenceof high concentrations of NAD (as exist in the normal tissue, vide infra) either coenzyme can elicit a similar stimulation of the RDH system (Graymore, Kissun and Fernando, 1974). However, the purpose of the present investigation is to study the changesin coenzyme levels during dark- and light-adaptation, under as closely physiological conditions as possible.
* Reprint Judd Street, requests London, to Dr. R. D. Kissun, WClH 9&S. Department 163 of Pathology, Institute of Ophthalmology,

164

(`.

h'.

GRAYMORmE,

J.

POWER

ASD

R.

D.

KISSUN

2. Methods
Animals The animals used in this investigation were normal albino rats of either sex. aged between 3 and 5 months, and weighing between 200 and 350 g each. They `Ir-ere fed on a standard diet used in this laboratory (diet 41, Bruce and Parkes), and alloived wat'er ad lib. Treatment of animals prior to kilhy (1) In viva experiments. Because of the low levels of nucleotides in the retina and the small amount of tissue available per animal, nine rats were used for each estimation. For each determination, nine rats were maintained overnight under conditions of normal laboratory lighting, a further nine bein, n maintained in complete darkness for the same period. At the end of this time (about 20 hr) the animals were lightly anaesthetixed wit11 ether and killed by cervical dislocation. Under appropriate conditions of light and dark (using dim red light in the latter case) the retinas were removed and frozen immediately in liquid nitrogen. (2) In vitro experiments. For each estimation 18 rats were subjected to total darkness for a period of 2 hr or more. The retinas were removed in dim red light as described above. One retina from each animal was placed in a beaker of ice-cold saline, surrounded by crushed ice and returned to normal laboratory lighting for 40 min; the paired retina was treated similarly but maintained in complete darkness for the same time. Following this period and continuing the appropriate conditions of light and dark, the retinas were removed and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen retinas from both groups were extracted and assayed by the same procedure as described in paper I of this series, based on the semi-micro method of Slater et al. (1964) ( see also Graymore and Towlson, 1965). It is of interest that on three occasions retinas were stored overnight at, -30°C. and there was no detectable change in activity.

3. Results
As in the previous papers of this series results are expressed as pg total nitrogen in t,he precipitate (i.e. the precipitate obtained following treatment with potassium hydroxide and perchloric acid (reduced nucleotides) or vice versa (oxidized nucleotides). This is a convenient base-line for standardization (see Graymore and Power, 1972). Table I shows that the levels of the coenzymes of the retinas, light-adapted in vivo, fall within the normal range reported previously. These levels differ markedly.
T~FJI,IG I

Lfqels of oxidized

and reduced pyridke

nucleotides

7% the dark and in the liyht

KAD

NADH

IiAD/ NADH

NADP

KADEH

NADPH/ KAD

Light-adaptation (in vitro) Dark-adaptation (in vitro) Light-adaptation (in viva) Dark-adapt,ation (in viva)

13%3*0.80 n = 5 12.90&0.55 n=5 15.19*0.79 n = 8 15~30*om n = 6

1.50*0,29 ?A = 4 1.97*0.35 a = 5 4m*o.34 71 = 8 3.06+0.49 n=6

9.0: 64: 3.6:

1 1 1

5.1 : 1

045~0~10 .n = 6 0.38*0.05 n = 5 0~33-&0.05 n = 8 0~27&0.02 ,I, = 6

060,t0+l8 11 r 4 0.57+0.09 n = 5 0.93&0.06 n = 8 0.81&0.06 ?L=6

I.3 : 1 1.9 : 1 2% : 1 3.0: 1

ALCOHOL

DEHYDROGENASE

IN

THE

RAT

RETlNA

165

however, from those found in the retinas light-adapted in vitro, NAD, NADH and NADPH are all lower in the latter case, and NADP shows a slight increase. A similar picture is obtained by comparing the in vivo and in vitro levels of t,he dark-adapted retinas. In the case of the "light-adapted" retinas, a change occurs in the ratio of NAD/ NADH from 36 in vivo to 9-O in vitro. A similar change from 5.1 to 64 is evident in the dark-adapted retinas. The ratios of NADPH/NADP falls from 2.8 in vivo to 1.3 in vitro in retinas that are light-adapted and from 3.0 to 1.9 in retinas that are darkadapted. In vitro during dark-adaptation the ratio of NAD/NaDH decreases? whereas in vivo there is an increase in this ratio. Again, the ratio of NADPHINADP increases during dark-adaptation, in vitro, but is not affected materially in vivo. 4. Discussion It is difficult to apportion at this stage a specific role to either coenzyme employed. An increase in the oxidized form of either coenzyme would suggestits participation in the reductive processof the visual cycle during light-adaptation, i.e. the conversion of retinaldehyde to retinol. From this standpoint. the results obtained do little to sustain the theory that NADP is necessarily the principle coenzyme involved in this reductive process, contrary to previous evidence (seeFutterman, 1963; 1965; Graymore and Power, 1972; Kissun et al., 1972; Newhouse, Graymore and K&sun, 1972). The results suggest that light-adaptation, in vitro, increasesthe ratios of oxidized to reduced coenzymes both for the NAD and NADP systems. In viva the only notSablevariation is an increase in the level of NADH on light-adaptation. This result is not statistically significant, but can cast some doubt on the role of the XAD system in vision. This is endorsed by the shift in the ratio of NADINSDH from 5.1 to 3.6 for the in vivo dark- and light-adapted retinas respectively. The ratio of N,4DPH to NADP is not affected at this time. -4lthough t'he results obtained present a number of questions deserving further investigation (seeGraymore et al.,.l974) certain points should be borne in mind. Although the retina appears to be extraordinarily resistant to the trauma of isolation (see Graymore, 1959), the present procedures subjected the retina, dissected in red light. to a higher degree of maceration and delay in assaythannormally employed. ljutf previous evidence does not suggestthat this should have any adverse effect. There is also the problem of ho&" light-adaptation" is interpreted. Under normal laboratory lighting it is likely that relatively small bleaching occurs (in viva) and as a consequenceit' would be difficult to detect a shift in coenzyme ratios. On the other hand, this explanation is invalidated by the in vitro experiments in which the bleaching of the visual pigment was quite apparent visually. This may well account for the dramatic differences between the in viva and in vitro figures. where retinas are fully exposed to the extreme conditions of light and dark. It was st'ated in the introduction that either ADH of the retina differs from that of the liver and is NADP-dependent. or t,hat RDH is capable of using ethanol as a substrate, again using NADP as the coenzyme. This was based on the experiments in which the coenzymes of both liver and ret'ina were measured following injection of ethyl alcohol. There is certainly ample evidence that RDH of the retina can use either coenzyme, although the distribution of activity differs as shown by histochemical studies, (Kissun et al., 1972). In vitro estimations of RDH activity on

166

C. N.

GRAYMORE,

J.

POWER

Ah'D

R.

I).

KISSUN

retinal extracts shows also that NAD elicits activity, although not approaching that induced by NADP (Newhouse et al., 1972). On the other hand, paper IV of this series suggests that, under similar conditions of assay of retinal extracts. increasing the concentration of NAD to approximately 10 times that of NADP results in a plateauing of activity at a similar rate of retinol turnover. This, indeed, might well be more representative of the conditions existing in vivo (Graymore et al., 1974). Finally, it is established that light stimulates the hexose monophosphate yathn-a>- ; the reduction of retinal is probably coupled with glucose-l-phosphate and Cphoxphogluconate throughout t,he mediation of t,he NADP-NADPH system. This being so. it is quite possible t'hat the resultant shift in the equilibrium of the reduced ant1 oxidized coenzymes is so finely balanced that any change may not appear significant using the present' system of investigation.
REFERENCES Futterman, S. (1963). Metabolism of the retina. III. The role of reduced triphosphopyridine nucleotide in the visual cycle. J. Biol. Chem. 238, 1145. Futterman, S. (1965). Stoichiometry of retinal vitamin A metabolism during light adaptation. In Biochemistry of the Retina (Ed. Graymore, C. N.). P. 16. Academic Press, London. Graymore. C. N. (1959). Metabolism of the developing retina. 1. Aerobic and anaerobic glycolysis in the developing rat retina. Brit. J. Ophthdmol. 43, 34. Graymore, C. N. and Towlson, M. J. (1965). The metabolism of the retina of the normal and alloxan diabetic rat. The levels of oxidized and reduced pyridine nucleotides and the oxidation of the carbon-l and carbon-6 of glucose. J:-ision Res. 5, 379. Graymore, C. NV. and Power, J. (1972). Coenzyme dependency of alcohol dehydrogenase in the retina of the rat. 1. The effects of int'raperitoneal injection of et,hanol or methanol on thf pyridine nucleotides of the liver and retina of the rat'. Ezp. Eye Res. 14, 142. Graymore, C. N., Kissun, R. D. and Fernando, J. C. (1974). Coenzyme dependency of alcohol dehydrogenase in the retina of the rat. IV. Retinol dehydrogenase (RDH) activity in the developing normal and retinitis rat retina, and the effect, on enzyme artivity of increasing concentrations of NAD or NADP. Eq. Eye Res. 19, 167. Kissun, R. D., Graymore. C. N. and Newhouse. ,J. I'. (1973). Coenzyme dependency of aIcr:hol dehydrogenase in the retina of the rat,. 11. Histochemistry. Exp. Eye Res. 14, 150. Newhouse, J. P., Graymore, C. N. and Kissun, R. D. (1!172). Coenzyme dependence of retinol dehydrogenase in the retina of adult rat. E.z~. Eye Kea. 14, 82. for nicotinamide-adrnine Slater, T. F.. Sawyer, B. and Skauli, V. D. (1964). A n assay procedure dinucleotides in rat liver and other tissues. Arch. Id. Physiol. Biochem. 72, 427.

