ARCHIVES OF BIOCHEMISTRY AND BIOPHYSICS Vol. 262, No. 1, April, pp. 149-158,1988

Effects of Anions, Ca2' I Mg2+, and Aliphatic Alcohols on the Reaction of Hemocyanin with Cyanide
MARIANO BELTRAMINI,'
Department

MERI SANTAMARIA,
of Bidogg, Univerdy

AND

BENEDETTO

SALVATC2

of Padova, Paobva, Italy

Received June 3,1987, and in revised form October 29,1987

The reaction between Car&znus maenas hemocyanin and cyanide has been used for probing protein conformation in the presence of perturbants such as various anions, cations (Ca2', Mg2+), and aliphatic alcohols. The kinetic parameters of the reaction are strongly affected by these agents, suggesting that the induced conformational modifications change the reactivity of the active site toward exogenous ligands. Different patterns are observed according to the perturbant used. As indicated by the mathematical treatment of the kinetic curves the affinity of the active site for CN- and Oa is affected 8 1~3Academic PW, much more than the rate constant of copper removal.
I~C.

Hemocyanins (He),3 are copper proteins of high molecular weight which are able to bind oxygen reversibly and are found in the hemolymph of many molluscs and arthropod species. Based on acid-base titration (l), resonance Raman (2,3), EXAFS (4), and X-ray crystallography (5), the current model of the binuclear copper active site involves three histidinyl residues as ligands of each metal ion. In oxy-Hc a further group, probably a phenolate (4, 6) is present as bridging ligand between the two metal ions. In the deoxygenated state, the metal occurs as Cu( I) and the protein is colorless and diamagnetic. Oxygen is bound via a one-electron transfer from each Cu(1) ion to each O-atom of the dioxygen molecule. The resulting complex can be described as [Cu(II) Of- Cu(II)], the peroxide dianion being bound as a b-peroxo-bridge to both
' Present address: Department of Cellular Biology, University of Calabria, Arcavacata di Rende, Italy. * To whom correspondence should be addressed at: Dipartimento di Biologia, via Loredan 10, I-35131 Padova, Italy. ' Abbreviations used: Hc, hemocyanin; EXAFS, extended X-ray absorption fine structure. 149

cupric ions (7). The absorption spectrum of oxy-Hc displays two bands in the near uv-visible region with maxima at -340 nm (E - 20,000 M-l cm-' per binuclear copper site) and -570 nm (e - 1,000 M-' cm-' per binuclear copper site). In addition to 02, the active site of Hc interacts with a number of small ligands such as thiourea, SCN-, F-, and CN- (8,9). These anions cause the disappearance of the absorption bands of oxy-Hc at wavelengths above 300 nm due to the ligand exchange. However, only CN- at appropriate concentrations is able to remove the metal from the active site (10). It has been demonstrated that the reaction with CNinvolves two processes: the loss of color as consequence of the formation of a complex Hc-CN and the release of copper which follows the decomposition of this complex (11). It has also been observed that the metal ions are released stepwise and that the formation of a complex between Hcbound copper and CN- is the rate-limiting step (11). Recent studies using the Hc from Octopus vulgaris and Car&us maenas, representing molluscan and arthropod species, indicate strong differences of the kinetics of the CN- reaction between different Hc species as well as within the
0003-9861188 $3.00
Copyright All rights Q 1988 by Academic Pres. Inc. of reproduction in any form reserved.

150

BELTRAMINI,

SANTAMARIA,

AND

SALVATO

same species. The differences are related to (i) the aggregation state of the oligomer; (ii) the accessibility to the active site which is controlled by the protein matrix, and (iii) the site-site interactions which are under the control of the quaternary structure (11, 12). Taken together, these suggest that the reaction is under steric control and that conformational modifications of the Hc molecule are expected to modify the reactivity of the active site to CN- with a consequent change of the kinetic parameters. The effect of several agents known to modify the protein conformation (anions, Ca'+, Mg'+, and aliphatic alcohols such as methanol, ethanol, and n-propanol) has been studied on the kinetics of the reaction between C. maenas Hc and CN-. Under this experimental approach, the kinetic parameters of the reaction are taken as probe of conformational changes. Useful information can be obtained on the relationships among the protein conformation, the reactivity and the accessibility of the binuclear copper site in reference to the reversible binding of exogenous ligands (02, CN-) and the removal of copper.
MATERIALS AND METHODS

alone. For kinetic measurements the protein content was brought to 3-4 mg/ml by adding thermostatted buffer equilibrated with moistened air. Hc solutions had an absorbance ratio at 337 and 278 nm of 0.21, indicating full saturation of the protein with Oe (11). After addition of an aliquot of a freshly prepared KCN solution (0.25 M), the decrease of the 337 nm band was measured as a function of time by continuous recording. The absorbance at different times was corrected for the residual absorption at the end of the reaction in order to correct for the light scattering effect. This was always lower than 7% with respect to the absorbance of oxy-Hc. Before the measurements in the presence of anions, Hc was equilibrated against Tris/HCl, I = 0.05, buffer containing 0.5 M of the desired anion at pH 8.0 and then diluted with buffer containing either increasing concentrations of the anion or increasing anion-to-Clratios, the total salt concentration being kept constant at 1 M. Because the protein was diluted approximately 20 times for the CN- reaction, the buffer in which the protein was equilibrated can be considered to have no effect on the composition of the reaction medium. For experiments with Ca2+ or Mg*+ the Hc was equilibrated with 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.0, diluted with the same buffer containing increasing concentrations of either CaClr or MgCla. For experiments with alcohols the protein was equilibrated with Tris buffer containing 7.5% of either methanol or ethanol, and 1.8% n-propanol. The alcohol concentration was expressed as grams/100 g of solution. All measurements were carried out at 21 + O.l"C. RESULTS

Hc was purified from the hemolymph of living animals and was stored at -20°C in the presence of 18% (w/v) sucrose (11). Protein concentration was estimated spectrophotometrically using the value E = 1.24 ml mg-i cm-' at 278 nm in Tris/HCl, I = 0.1, pH 8.0 (11). The absorbance was corrected for light scattering as described elsewhere (1). Optical spectra were taken with a Perkin-Elmer Model 5'76 recording spectrophotometer equipped with a thermostatted sample holder. Oxygen concentration in the buffers was checked with an oxygen electrode (Yellow Springs Instrument Co., Yellow Springs, OH). The oxygen concentration in air-equilibrated water was maintained equal to 0.28 mM at 21°C (11). The recorder (Perkin-Elmer Model 561) was calibrated to baseline by adding NazSzOl to the buffer under study. All chemicals were of analytical grade and were used without further purification. Kinetic measurements. Kinetic experiments and data analysis were carried out as described in (11). Hc samples (-80 mg/ml) were prepared by exhaustive dialysis against 0.1 M Tris/HCl buffer, pH 8.0, containing 20 rnb! EDTA and then against the buffer

By addition of CN-, at concentrations higher than 1 mM, a time-dependent decrease of the absorbance at 337 nm of oxyHc is observed; i.e., a decrease of the binuclear O,-binding sites occurs. As there is much more CN- than Hc its concentration can be considered time independent and the process can be described with pseudofirst-order kinetics. Upon addition of anions, divalent cations, or alcohols, the reaction can still be described by a single exponential function, the medium affecting only the apparent first-order rate constant (k,,,) of the process. This indicates that the rate of any conformational rearrangement induced by the perturbants is much larger than the rate of the CN- reaction. Furthermore, no decrease of the 337 nm absorbance is observed in the absence of CN-, indicating that the perturbants do not interact with the active site. The de-

REACTION BETWEEN Carcinua maenos HEMOCYANIN

AND CN-

151

pendence of k,,,, versus increasing concentrations up to 1.0 M of Cl- or HPO:- in the medium ([CN-] = 6.0 mM) is shown in Fig. 1. kapp decreases continuously throughout the range of Cl- concentration. Upon increasing the HPO$- concentration an increase of kapp is observed in the range 0.1-0.4 M: the maximum value is 40% higher than that measured in 0.1 M HPOZ-. At higher concentrations kapp decreases, but not as much as with Cl-. In order to minimize effects due to salt concentration, k,,, was measured upon progressive substitution of Cl- with other anions using buffers containing different Cl-to-anion ratios. In Fig. 2 the dependence of kappversus this ratio ([CN-] = 6.0 mM) when the anions are Cl- and HPO$-, Br-, SO:-, I-, ClO;, or SCN- is reported. Hc was previously equilibrated with 0.5 M Cl- (open dots, dashed lines) or with 0.5 M of each different anion (full dots, solid lines). In all cases the plots follow the same trends and the differences between the two equilibration procedures are small as compared with those caused by different Cl-:anion ratios. When Cl- is substituted with other anions, an increase of kappis observed, indicating that the CN--induced disappearance of the 337 nm band is faster than that in the presence of Cl- alone.

1:o ICfl:IAnionl

FIG. 2. Effects of different anions on the reaction between Care&us hemocyanin and CN-. k, values were measured at [CN-] = 6.0 mM in buffers containing mixtures of Cl- and other anions at final concentrations of 1 M. Hemocyanin was equilibrated before the CN- reaction either against Tris/HCl buffer, Z = 0.05, containing 0.5 M of each anion at pH 8.0 (full dots, solid lines) or against Tris/HCl, Z = 0.05, containing 0.5 M NaCl pH 8.0 (open dots, dashed lines). T = 21OC.

Each anion has a different effect according to the order
2.0

SCN- > ClO; > SO:- > I- > HPO:-. Almost no differences are observed when Cl- is exchanged with Br-. In the case of SO:-, the effects of SOi--to-Cl- exchange are less pronounced when the protein is equilibrated with SO:-. The substitution of ClO; with SOf has also been studied ([CN-] = 6.0 mM) (Fig. 3) using protein solutions equilibrated with ClO; (solid line) or with SOP (dashed line). In the first case the plot has a bell-like shape where k,,,, remains unchanged over a large region. In the second case this region is rather narrow. kapp does not change when the medium contains only SO;- (ClO;:SOz- = 0:l) and Hc is equilibrated either in SOi- or

a2

0.4

0.5 (M)

0.8

1.0

Concentration

FIG. 1. Effects of HPOZ- (A) and Cl- (0) on the reaction between Car&us wwenas hemocyanin and CN-. The pseudo-first-order rate constant (kapr,)is measured in the presence of CN- (6.0 mM). For details see Materials and Methods.

152

BELTRAMINI.

SANTAMARIA.

AND SALVATO

of cosolvent. It is important to note that for higher values, irreversible denaturation of the protein occurs, as indicated by the loss of the 337 nm band upon equilibration with alcohol/water medium. The kinetics of the reaction has been studied as a function of CN- concentration and in the presence of: (i) a constant concentration (1 M) of each anion perturbant; (ii) Ca2+ions at concentrations between 0 and 8.9 mM; (iii) various alcohol percentages. The results obtained in the presence of anions are reported in Fig. 6A. In all cases, kapp increases as a parabolic function of rao;1 : Iso; [CN-] as shown by the straight lines obtained when the data are plotted versus FIG. 3. Effect of the substitution of CIO; to SOj- on [CN-]2 (data not reported). Anions change kapp of the reaction between Carcinus hemocyanin the slope of the plots of Fig. 6A. Also, in and CN- ([CN-] = 6.0 mM). The total salt concentrathe presence of Ca2' and alcohols kapp intion was 1 M. Hemocyanin was previously equilicreases with the square of CN- concentrabrated either against Tris/HCl, I = 0.05, containing 0.5 M NaC104, pH 8.0 (full dots, solid line), or against tion and the increase of the perturbant Tris/HCl, I = 0.05, containing 0.5 M Na&SOd,pH 8.0 causes a change in the slope (Figs. 63 and (open dots, dashed line). 2' = 21°C. 6C). Namely, the slope decreases with increasing [Ca"`] (Fig. 6B) whereas, in the case of ethanol, the slope first decreases ClO;. On the contrary, when the buffer and then increases (Fig. SC). In Fig. 6B contains only ClO; (ClO;:SOq- = l:O), kapp only the plots obtained at [Ca"`] = 0, 1.9, as measured with Hc equilibrated against ClO; is about 40% lower (5.3 X 1O-3 s-l) than that calculated when the protein is equilibrated against SOS- (8.5 X 10m3 s-l). The dependence of kagp versus increasing concentrations of Ca + and Mg2+ up to 15-20 mM ([CN-] = 7.8 mM) is reported in Fig. 4. In both cases kapp first decreases very rapidly as the cation concentration is raised up to 5 mM. Moreover in the case of Mg2+ the decrease is uniform, whereas in the presence of Ca2+ a sigmoidal trend is evident with a plateau around l-3 mM. Methanol, ethanol, or n-propanol cause a marked change of the kappas function of I I I I I 11 5 lo cosolvent percentage (Fig. 5). ICation I (mM) With methanol, kapp decreases and two plateau regions are evident starting 4 and FIG. 4. Dependence of k.r,Pof the reaction between 20%. With ethanol, kapp decreases until Carcinus hemocyanin and CN- ([CN-] = 7.8 mrd) about 6%, then increases until 20%. n- versus the concentration of Ca" (full dots, solid line) Propanol causes a strong increase of k, and Mg*+ (open dots, dashed line). Buffer Tris/HCl, throughout the whole concentration range 0.1 ?d,pH 8.0; !I' = 21°C.

REACTION BETWEEN Carcinus muonas HEMOCYANIN

AND CN`

153
.-A

A . /

/

I

i

/'

/'

/`
20

/
10

I

I

1

5

10

15

FIG. 5. Dependence of k, versus increasing concentrations of alcohol (expressed as grams per 196 g of solution). The data refer to experiments carried out on Curcinus hemocyanin at constant [CN-] = 7.8 rnM and in the presence of methanol (a), ethanol (0), and n-propanol (A). For details see Materials and Methods.

6.1, and 7.9 mM are reported but experiments were also carried out at other values (1.1, 2.8, 3.8, 5.2, 6.8, and 8.9 mM);

the data are not shown to avoid crowding the figure. In Fig. 6C only the data obtained in the presence of 0, 7.6, and 19.5%

8

0

5

10

0

5 ICN-I.103

10 (M)

FIG. 6. Dependence of ,&sr versus [CN-] under different experimental conditions. (A) Buffer containing 1 mol/liter of SCN- (D), ClOi (0), HP@- (A), SO:- (Cl), I- (O), Br (A), or Cl (*). The data obtained with hemocyanin in buffer alone are also reported (:). (B) Buffer containing 0 (0), 1.9 (0). 6.1 (m), or 7.9 (A) mM CaCls. (C) Buffer containing 0 (0), 7.6 (A), or 19.5 (0) g ethanol per 169 g solution. For details see Materials and Methods.

154

BELTRAMINI,

SANTAMARIA,

AND

SALVATO

ethanol are reported; those with 1.8, 3.7, 11.4, and 15.4% are not included for the same reason. These results indicate that the reaction of Car&w Hc with CN- can be described by the model proposed by us also in the presence of anions, Ca'+, Mg2+ and alcohols. It was shown that kaPP [CN-] are and related by the equation (ll),

kapp kl =

Ko,W-I" Ko,FN-1+ &N[O21'

r11

where Ka and KCN are the equilibrium constants of deoxy-Hc with O2 and CN-, respectively, and kl is the bimolecular rate constant of the removal of the first copper ion. Because Koz [CN-] -4 Km [02] (ll), Eq. [l] predicts the parabolic dependence of kapp versus CN- as reported in Fig. 5. Equation [l] can be also written in the form [CN-] _ 1 k L [%]KcN
k aPP

kl kl [CWKo, *

r21

This equation predicts a linear dependence of [CN-]/lc,,, against [02]/[CN-] (11). The plots obtained by treating the data of Fig. 6 according to Eq. [2] are reported in Fig. `7 in the presence of different anions (Fig. 7A) and in the presence of increasing [Ca2'] (Fig. 7B). In Fig. 7B the straight lines obtained for [Ca2+] = 1.1, 2.8, 6.8, and 8.9 KIM are not shown to avoid overcrowding. In all cases, straight lines are obtained; kl and K&Ko2 can be calculated as (intercept))' and slope X (intercept)-`, respectively. Marked changes in the slope are observed, but the intercept values are almost independent of the presence of a given anion and of the Ca2+ concentration. The change of K&K,, versus [Ca2+] is reported in Fig. 8 where a sigmoidal trend is evident with a transition midpoint around [Ca2+] = 4.5 mM. The values of [CN-l/k,,, versus [02]/[CN-] in the presence of ethanol are reported in Fig. 9. In this case the experimental values also fit in straight lines. The slopes, however, are very similar and the intercept values are very small. In

L

I

I 2

I

I 1

I 6

[O~I/[CN-l~102

FIG. 7. Dependence of [CNyk,,, versus [Oky[CN-] obtained for the reaction between Cur&us hemocyanin and CN- in the presence of different anions (A) and increasing [Ca"] (B). In A, the symbols refer to 1 M solutions of SCN- (m), Cl01 (0), HPOi- (A), SOi- (O), I- (O), Br- (A), and Cl- (k). In B, [CaZ+] is at 0 (A), 1.9 (0), 3.8 (*), 5.2 (A), 6.1 (O), and 7.9 (# mM. Buffers: (A) Tris/HCl, I = 0.05 M, pH 8.0; (B) Tris/ HCl, 0.1 M, pH 8.0. T = 21°C.

some cases, negative intercepts are obtained. Thus, rather than describing a family of well-defined straight lines, the experimental data are distributed in a broad band between two extreme sets of values. Similar plots are obtained with methanol and n-propanol.
DISCUSSION

The conformation of a protein is the result of a fine balance between electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions arising

REACTION BETWEEN Car&us

mac-rw~ HEMOCYANIN

AND CN-

155

quaternary structure of Hc is strongly affected by the anions of the Hofmeister series: they are very effective dissociating agents according to the order Cl- < Br< I- < ClO, (17). Changes at the level of quaternary and tertiary structure are also evident during the oxygenation of Hc, as indicated by the ligand-linked subunit dissociation (18) and the increase of molecular size (19). The binding process and the affinity of Hc for dioxygen are modulated by the aggregation state of the protein; generally high aggregation forms display cooperative Oz binding: Ca2+ and Me foster cooperatiFIG. 8. Dependence of KcN/Kol versus [Ca*+]. vity probably by stabilizing higher molecValues on the y-axis are obtained from the slopes of ular weight oligomeric species (18). The the lines shown in Fig. 7B. Values obtained in the function of the active site is expected to be presence of [Ca"+] = 1.1, 2.8, 6.8, and 8.9 mM are also strongly influenced even by small changes included. in protein conformation because copper ions are directly bound to amino acid side chains. It has been suggested (20) that the among amino acid side chains and peptide observed structural changes accompanying binding of Oz and the modulation of bonds, or between these and the surprotein conformation on this process tend rounding medium. Chemical and physical agents which affect this balance act as to optimize the copper-copper distance and allow the dioxygen to fit as a coplanar perturbants of the protein conformation causing reversible or irreversible changes bridge to the Cu(I1) pair. In this paper the effects of several comaccording to the characteristics of both conformational the system and the perturbants (13-15). pounds have been studied by following Conformational perturbations may occur changes in the kinetics of the CN- reacfor several reasons: cations such as Ca2+ tion; this approach allows us to distinand Mgz+ bind to charged or even neutral groups which function as ligands; heavy metal ions do the same but are effective at much lower concentrations and have a greater tendency to form stable complexes. Other cations such as guanidinium and tetraalkyl ammonium as well as various anions are able to perturb the structure of water clusters around amino acid side chains, thus modifying the solution free energy of the group. Aliphatic alcohols change the dielectric constant of the solvent and cause conformational rearrangements by affecting both electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions (16). Besides the tertiary and secondary structures, perturbations also imply the FIG. 9. Dependence of [CN-]/ka, versus [O&[CN-] interactions between the subunits of oligo- obtained for the reaction between Car&us hemomerit proteins. The result can be either a cyanin and CN- in the presence of ethanol at 0 (0), stabilization of the quaternary structure 1.8 (a), 3.7 (Cl), 7.6 (m), 11.4 (A), 15.4 (*), and 19.5 (A) or the dissociation of the molecule. The g per 100 g solution.

156

BELTRAMINI,

SANTAMARIA,

AND

SALVATO

guish the effects on the equilibrium constants of Hc for Oz and CN- and on the bimolecular rate constant of copper removal (11). The choice of Curcinus Hc is justified by the fact that the oligomer of this Hc species can be described as a population of independent active sites (11): changes in the aggregation state can be assumed to have no effect on the kinetics of the CN- reaction and, therefore, changes of kinetic parameters disclose conformational modifications which are relevant for the active site reactivity. This work differs from previous experiments on the conformational stability of globular proteins in the presence of various electrolytes and nonelectrolytes because differences of kinetic parameters are seen at quite low concentrations of perturbants. As expected, the anions show a wide range of efficiency in inducing Hc conformational changes; in all cases, however, k,, increases. SO:- and HPOZ-, for instance, which stabilize the protein conformation, being effective in promoting salting-out, behave on kappsimilarly to I-, CIO;, and SCN- which promote protein salting-in. This clearly indicates that the conformation of Hc changes in such a way as to induce the same kind of structural rearrangement at the active site level. The observed effect on kappcannot be attributed entirely to a modification of the solvent structure induced by anions: I-, which is expected to behave like ClO; and SCN- (17, 21), actually is much less effective. This suggests that the effects due to anion binding are also important, because ClO; and SCN- are more capable of interaction with the protein matrix than Iwhich has a rather large ionic radius. The efficiency of ClO; and SCN- is evident from Fig. 2; a definite plateau is not seen at low Cl-:anion ratio due to continuous conformational shift toward denaturation. The coincidence of the plots of kapp versus anion-to-Cl- ratios obtained with Hc equilibrated with either Cl- or the various anions is an indication that the conformation quickly adjusts to medium composition as compared to the time scale of CN- reaction. SOi- and HPOq- are exceptions however. These anions probably

bind significantly to the protein matrix, inducing conformational changes which take a long time to reach completion. The increase of kappindicates, in first approximation, that the accessibility of the active site to CN- increases. It was interesting, therefore, to study the combined effect of anions such as ClO; capable of inducing this effect with anions known to increase the stability of native protein conformation against denaturation. Previous experiments showed that SOi- ions are stabilizing agents against denaturation of Hc induced by urea (22). As expected, kappdecreases with increasing ratios of SO;-/ ClO;, indicating a counter-balance of the opposite effects of the two anions. The plots obtained with Hc previously equilibrated with ClO; or SO?- show essentially the same trend and the observed differences depend on the medium used for equilibration. There are probably timedependent conformational rearrangements, which again may be related to anion binding. Quite interesting is the course of kappas a function of Ca2+ and Mgz+ concentrations. When cation concentrations increase, kappdecreases; the curves reported in Fig. 4 suggest that Hc can exist in three different conformations depending on the Ca2+ concentration. Two separate transitions are evident: the first is very sharp and at low [Ca'+]; the second is smoother with a midpoint around 4-4.5 MM. In agreement with the mechanism of Ca2+ action, two classes of binding sites can be singled out: the interaction with the highaffinity sites triggers the transition occurring at lower [Ca'+]; binding to low-affinity sites further shifts the conformation to that typical of Ca2+ saturation. The existence of two classes of Ca2+binding sites, "strong" and "weak" sites, has been recognized using 43Ca2+and =Na+ NMR techniques (23). As shown in Fig. 4, only one conformational transition is observed with Mg2+, although kappmeasured under saturation is the same as with Ca2+, suggesting no discrimination with Mg2+ between high- and low-affinity sites. In spite of the quite different mechanisms of perturbation, the effect of alco-

REACTION BETWEEN Carcinus maenas HEMOCYANIN

AND CN-

157

hols on kapp can be also interpreted in terms of transitions between different conformations. Taken together, the data obtained with alcohols of different aliphatic chains suggest the existance of at least three different conformations, two of which are characterized by lower kapp,and one by higher kappwith respect to Hc in buffer alone. Alcohols seem to stabilize differently the conformers depending on the length of the aliphatic chain. Whereas methanol and ethanol induce a parallel transition between 0 and 7%, at higher cosolvent/water ratios the conformational effect is opposite; this could be attributed to the higher effectiveness of ethanol in perturbing hydrophobic interactions, an interpretation which is strengthened by the fact that when using n-propanol, only an increase of kappis observed. According to the kinetic model (ll), changes of kappresult from changes of either the relative affinities of the Hc active site for CN- and O2or the bimolecular rate constant of removal of the first metal ion. The strict dependence of kapp versus [CN-12 is a further indication that in the presence of perturbants the reaction with CN- follows the same mechanism as in buffer alone. The data can be treated, therefore, as in Eq. [2] to yield the separate values of kl and Ko/Ko,. It is important to consider, however, that it is not possible to calculate with our technique separate values of KCN and Ko, since the KcN/Ko, ratio represents actually an equilibrium constant for ligand-ligand exchange. In the case of the anions, the rate constant of copper removal is only slightly affected, in constrast to K&Ko,, indicating that the conformational effect of solutes is disclosed on the relative affinity of the site for CN- and OZ. The treatment of data in the presence of Ca2' is not as conclusive as can be inferred on the basis of Eq. [2]. Thus, although with Ca2+ almost no changes of the copper removal rate are observed, the dependence of K&K% versus [Ca2+] is not in agreement with the result suggested by the kappversus [Ca2+] plot. Indeed, the smooth sigmoidal curve obtained in the former case indicates a single transition between two conforma-

tional states, in contrast to the latter plot from which two transitions are expected. Probably the scattering of data introduced by the deconvolution is so high as to cover more fine effects. Furthermore, even small differences in kl may contribute to mask the first transition at lower [Ca"`]. As for the effect of alcohols, the data of [CW/kq,, versus [02]/[CN-] do not follow the trend expected according to the model because in some instances negative intercepts can be calculated and only a poor correlation between alcohol percentage and changes of slopes and/or of intercepts in the plot are observed. It is likely that the modifications of Hc conformation induced by alcohols are not due only to changes of solvent properties. Rather, the presence of alcohols may cause also a more complex reaction pathway so that Eq. [2] does not fully account for the dependence of [CN-l/k,,, on [02]/[CN-1. This may be due to the concomitance of different factors dependent on alcohol concentration, such as formation of alcohol clusters on specific regions of the protein, alteration of the HCN/CN- equilibrium microconstant, and/or the assistance of adsorbed alcohol in the binding of CNto copper or to the release of metal.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The assistance of Mr. A. Cervellin for hemocyanin preparation and of Mr. C. Friso for drawing the figures is gratefully acknowledged. We thank Professor L. Cordone and Professor F. Ghiretti for helpful discussion and criticism. REFERENCES 1. SALVATO, B., GHIRETTI-MAGALDI, A., AND GHIREITI, F. (19'74) Biochemistry 13,4778-4733.
2. FREEDMAN, T. B., LOEHR, J. S., AND LOEHR, T. M. (1976) J. Amer. Ghan. Sot S&2809-2815. 3. LARRABEE, J. A., AND SPIRO, T. G. (1930) J. Amer. Chem Sot 102,4217-4223. 4. BROWN, J. M., POWERS, L., KINCAID, B., LARRABEE, J. A., AND SPIRO, T. G. (1980) J. Amer. Chem Sot 102,4210-4216. 5. LINZEN, B., SOETER, N. M., RIGGS, A. F., SCHNEIDER, H.-J., SCHARTAU, W., MOORE, M. D., YOKOTA, E., BEHRENS, P. Q., NAKASHIMA, H., TAKAGI, T., NEMOTO, T., VEREIJKEN, J. M., BAK, H. J., BEINTEMA, J. J., VOL-

158

BELTRAMINI,

SANTAMARIA,

AND

SALVATO

6.

7. 8. `9.

10. 11.

12. 13.

BEDA, A., GAYKEMA, W. P. J., AND HOL, W. G. J. (1985) Science 229,519-529. EICKMAN, N. C., HIMMELWRIGHT, R. S., AND SOLSci USA OMON, E. I. (1979) Proc Natl. Ad 76,2094-2098. SOLOMON, E. I. (1981) in Copper Proteins (Spiro, T. G., Ed.), pp. 43-108, Wiley, New York. Guo, J.-M., CHANG, C. C., LI, N. C., AND DOUGLAS, K. T. (1978) Biochemistry 77,452-457. CHEN, J. T., SHEN, S. T., CHIJNG, S. C., CHANG, H., WANG, S. M., AND LI, N. C. (1979) Biochemistry 18,3097-3101. KUBOW~, F. (1938) Bimhem 2. 299,32-46. BELTRAMINI, M., RICCHELLI, F., TALLANDINI, L., AND SALVATO, B. (1984) Iwg. Chim Acta 92, 209-217. BELTRAMINI, M., RICCHELLI, F., AND SALVATO, B. (1984) Inorg. Chim. Acta 92,219-227. VON HIPPEL, P. H., AND WONG, K.-Y. (1965) J.

16. CORDONE, L., CUPANE, A., SAN BIAGIO, P. L., AND VITRANO, E. (1981) Biopolymms 20,39-51. 17. HERSKOVITS, T. T., SAN GEORGE, R. C., AND ERHUNMWUNSEE, L. J. (1981) Biochemistry 20. 2580-2587. 18. PREAUX, G., AND GIELENS, C. (1984) in Copper Proteins and Copper Enzymes (Lontie, R., Ed.), Vol. II, pp. 159-205, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. 19. VAN BREEMEN, J. F. L., PLOEGMAN, J. H., AND VAN BRUGGEN, E. F. J. (1979) Eur. J. Biochmz. 100,61-65. 20. GIARDINA, B., COLETTA, M., ZOLLA, L., AND BRUNORI, M. (1985) in Respiratory Pigments in Animals (Lamy, J., Truchot, J.-P., and Gilles, R., Eds.), pp. 125-140, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 21. VON HIPPEL, P. H., AND WONG, K.-Y. (1964) Science 145,577-580. 22. RICCHELLI, F., FILIPPI, B., AND SALVATO, B. (1981) in Invertebrate Oxygen-Binding Proteins (Lamy, J., and Lamy, J., Eds.), pp. 31-39, Dekker, New York. 23. ANDERSSON, T., CHIANCONE, E., AND FORSEN, S. (1982) Eur. J. Biochem. 125,103-108.

Bid Chem 240,3909-3923.
14. LAPANJE, S. (1978) Physicochemical Aspects of Protein Denaturation, Wiley, New York. 15. VON HIPPEL, P. H., AND SCHLEICH, T. (1969) in Structure and Stability of Biological Macromolecules (Timasheff, S. N., and Fasman, G. D., Eds.), pp. 457-574, Dekker, New York.

