48

Combinatorial gene regulation by eukaryotic transcription factors Lin Chen
Recent structure determinations of high order complexes of eukaryotic transcription factors bound to DNA have revealed that residues from their DNA-binding domains are involved in protein­protein interactions between distinct factors. Protein­protein interactions between transactivation domains and coactivators have also been characterized in a number of recently determined structures. These studies support the combinatorial mechanism of transcription regulation in eukaryotic cells and multicellular organisms.
Addresses Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309-0215, USA; e-mail: lchen@xtal200.harvard.edu Current Opinion in Structural Biology 1999, 9:48­55 http://biomednet.com/elecref/0959440X00900048 © Elsevier Science Ltd ISSN 0959-440X Abbreviations AF-2 activation function-2 AP-1 activating protein-1 CBP CREB-binding protein CRE cAMP-response element CREB CRE-binding protein GABP GA-binding protein GTF general transcription factor IFN interferon IL interleukin KIX CREB-binding domain of CBP LBD ligand-binding domain NFAT nuclear factor of activated T cells  NF-B nuclear factor B pKID phosphorylated kinase-inducible domain  PPAR- peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor- RHR Rel homology region SRC steroid receptor coactivator STAT signal transducer and activator of transcription TAF TBP-associated factor TBP TATA-box-binding protein TCR T-cell receptor TF transcription factor VP-16 herpes simplex virus protein-16 (b)
Flexible linker

Figure 1 (a)
N  hairpin

MCM1 MADS box dimer C C N Flexible linker

C N MAT2 homeodomain

C Modeled half-site

N

'Arm'  hairpin MAT2 homeodomain MCM1 MADS box dimer Modeled half-site

Current Opinion in Structural Biology

Introduction
Regulated eukaryotic gene transcription involves the assembly of an initiation complex at the core promoter region and regulatory complexes at promoterenhancer/operator regions [1]. The core promoter complex of RNA polymerase II contains multiple protein factors (referred to as general transcription factors, GTFs), including the TATA-box-binding protein (TBP) and its associated factors (TAFs). The structures of a number of binary and ternary GTF­DNA complexes have been determined in previous years [2­4]. More GTF complexes will probably appear soon. Structural studies of eukaryotic transcription factors continue to reveal novel DNA-binding motifs and variants of known motifs [5·,6·,7,8·]. Many of these studies from the past year will not be discussed

The structure of MCM1 (residues 1­100) and MAT2 (residues 103­189) bound to DNA. On a natural a-specific operator, the MCM1 MADS box DNA-binding site is flanked on both sides by a MAT2 site. The MADS box dimer and the left hand MAT2 homeodomain bound to DNA is the crystallographically observed complex [9··]. The MAT2­DNA complex on the right hand (light shading and thin stick DNA drawing) was modeled manually to represent a MAT2­MCM1­MAT2 complex on an a-specific operator. Each subunit is shaded differently. Note that the  hairpin of MAT2 extends the central  sheet of MCM1, which forms the major protein­protein interaction interface. The -strand interaction is probably conserved in the modeled right-hand half-site, but the rest of the linker and the DNA conformation may be different with different DNA spacing. (a) View perpendicular to the MCM1 dimer dyad axis. (b) View from the top, with a rotation 90° from (a). Note the conserved minor groove DNA binding by the MAT2 homeodomain `arm'. All figures drawn using MOLSCRIPT [52].

here because of the limited space. This review will focus on recent structural studies of high order regulatory complexes [9··­11··] and activation domain­coactivator complexes [12··­15··]. The activation of eukaryotic genes in vivo often requires the coordinated binding of multiple transcription factors to the promoter-enhancer region; many of these factors are regulated by distinct signal transduction pathways. In several cases, it has been shown that the binding of multiple transcription factors to a specific promoter-enhancer

Combinatorial gene regulation by eukaryotic transcription factors Chen

49

region is cooperative and requires a unique composition and spatial arrangement of transcription-factor-binding sites [16·,17,18]. The assembly of these enhancer complexes (also referred to as the enhanceosome [19]) is facilitated by protein­protein interactions between DNA-bound factors and protein-induced DNA bending. Two features of enhanceosome assembly are especially important for combinatorial transcription regulation: combinations of multiple transcription factors generate diverse patterns of regulation [20,21] and highly cooperative binding ensures the specificity of transcriptional control [22]. The enhanceosome may serve as a template for the assembly of the core promoter complex by either direct or coactivator-mediated interactions. Most eukaryotic transcription factors contain one or more transactivation domain involved in interactions with downstream coactivators and GTFs [23]. These transactivation domains are usually rich in proline and glutamine, or acidic amino acids, and appear to be very flexible before binding to their respective targets. This flexibility is probably the main reason that the structural characterization of these domains lagged behind that of the DNA-binding domains. The recent identification of various targets of transactivation domains, including TAFs, cAMPresponse element (CRE) binding protein (CREB) binding proteins (CBPs/p300) and steroid receptor coactivators (SRCs), however, has allowed the structural characterization of several transactivation domains in complex with their respective target proteins [12··­15··].

Figure 2 Jun Fos NFAT1 RHR-N Loop 1 NFAT1 RHR-C

Loop 2 Loop 3

DNA
Current Opinion in Structural Biology

The structure of NFAT1 (residues 399­678), Fos (residues 138­200) and Jun (residues 254­315) bound to DNA [10··]. Multiple loops (loops 1, 2 and 3 are shown in this orientation) presented by the NFAT Nterminal RHR (RHR-N) contact Fos and Jun. Each component (Fos, Jun and the two NFAT domains [RHR-N and RHR-C]) is shaded differently.

Structures of eukaryotic transcription factor complexes bound to DNA
In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, three transcription factors, the a homeodomain proteins MAT2 and MATa1, and the MADS box protein MCM1, play crucial roles in cell-type specification. Various combinations of these three factors and additional factors are involved in gene activation and repression in different yeast cell types, providing the best example of the combinatorial control of eukaryotic gene regulation [24]. These transcription factors bind various DNA sites cooperatively to form higher order complexes that have distinct regulatory functions. The crystal struca ture of a MAT2­MATa1­DNA ternary complex revealed that cooperative DNA binding is induced by a C-terminal amphipathic  helix of MAT2 bound to a hydrophobic a groove on the MATa1 homeodomain [25]. In another complex, that of MAT2­MCM1­MAT2­DNA, an N-terminal flexible linker of MAT2 has been suggested by biochemical studies to interact with the DNA-binding domain (referred to as the MADS box) of MCM1 to mediate cooperative DNA binding [26]. Indeed, the recent crystal structure of a DNA-bound ternary complex of MCM1 and MAT2 [9··] shows that part of this flexible linker forms a  hairpin that binds to the outer strand of the central  sheet of the MCM1 MADS box (Figure 1). The binding interactions involve parallel -strand hydrogen

bonding of mainchain atoms and hydrophobic packing of sidechains. -strand-mediated interactions have also been observed between TFIIA and TBP in TFIIA­TBP­DNA complexes [3,4] and may be involved in a wide range of physiological and pathological protein­protein interactions. Combinatorial control of transcription activation in higher eukaryotic cells has been characterized biochemically for several promoter-enhancers, including that of the TCR  gene [18], the IFN- gene [16·] and the interleukin (IL)-2 gene [27]. A crystallographic study of this last was reported recently [10··]. The nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) and members of the activating protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factor family (including Fos and Jun) bind cooperatively to their target DNA sites in the promoter-enhancer and participate in the transcriptional regulation of IL-2 and other immune response genes [28]. Although NFAT is activated by calcium signals through calcineurin, the AP-1 transcription factors are induced by agents that activate protein kinase C. The DNA-binding domain of NFAT is distantly related to that of the Rel family of transcription factors, including the nuclear factor-KB (NF-KB) proteins. The DNA-binding domains of AP-1 proteins consist of the basic region, leucine zipper (bZIP) motif. The DNA-binding domains of NFAT, Fos and Jun are necessary and sufficient for cooperative DNA binding. The recently determined

50

Protein­nucleic acid interactions

Figure 3

GABP Ankyrin repeats GABP

enhances GABP DNA binding both by displacing the C-terminal  helix from its inhibitory orientation and by directly stabilizing the DNA-binding residues of GABP. GABP is also thought to mediate the higher order assembly of a GABP/ complex on DNA (­ dimer) through its C-terminal leucine zipper motif.

C-terminal helix

Complexes of transactivation domains and their target proteins
The complex structure of a CREB activation domain (the phosphorylated kinase-inducible domain, pKID) bound to its target (the KIX domain) on CBP has been determined by NMR spectroscopy [12··]. Complex interactions between the herpes simplex virus protein-16 (VP16) activation domain and human TAF31 were also characterized by an NMR study [13··]. More recently, the crystal structure of the ligand-binding domain (LBD) of a nuclear receptor, the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor- (PPAR-), which contains the activation function-2 (AF-2) motif, was determined in a ternary complex with SRC-1 and the anti-diabetic ligand rosiglitazone [14··,15··]. CBP, TAFs and SRC represent the major targets of transcription activators bound to upstream enhancers. In both the pKID­KIX and the VP16­TAF complexes, the transactivation domain presents an amphipathic  helix to a hydrophobic surface on their respective target. These helices are flexible and largely unstructured before binding. This flexibility may be important for the binding of the same region in different conformations to other regulatory proteins. In the pKID­KIX complex, a phosphoserine at one end of the amphipathic helix plays an important regulatory role, conveying the phosphorylation signal through a hydrogen bond interaction. In the ternary complex of PPAR- LBD, rosiglitazone and SRC1, the coactivator SRC-1 displays an amphipathic helix to a surface formed by AF-2 and other structural elements from the nuclear receptor LBD. SRC-1 binding is ligand dependent, providing another means of conveying a signal to the transcription machinery.

Ets domain

DNA

Current Opinion in Structural Biology

Complex of GABP (residues 1­157) and GABP (residues 311­430) bound to DNA [11··]. Each subunit is shaded differently (GABP dark and GABP light). Note that the GABP ankyrin repeats bind to the GABP Ets domain and the C-terminal  helix using the extended loop tips. The ankyrin repeats of GABP do not contact the DNA in this structure.

crystal structure of this complex [10··] shows protein­protein interactions between NFAT and Fos­Jun that involve multiple patches of surface residues on the three proteins and that are facilitated by the bending of the DNA and the Fos  helix (Figure 2). Previous biochemical studies had suggested that many of these interacting residues were important for complex assembly [29­31]. In the ternary complex, the NFAT DNA-binding domain seems to have moved closer to Fos­Jun from its orientation in the binary NFAT­DNA complex [32·]. The interaction surfaces are mostly hydrophilic, with a small hydrophobic center. DNA binding by a transcription factor can also be modulated by interactions with a protein that does not bind DNA itself. One example is the GA-binding protein (GABP) that binds DNA with a conserved GA sequence motif, whose core DNA-binding complex structure was recently determined [11··] (Figure 3). The two subunit GABP complex is involved in the transcriptional regulation of mitochondrial protein genes and some viral genes. GABP belongs to the Ets family of transcription factors, which have a `winged helix-turn-helix' DNAbinding motif. GABP is a large protein that contains a leucine zipper-like motif and a number of ankyrin repeats, but it does not bind DNA directly. GABP binds to the GABP Ets motif and a C-terminal  helix using the extended loop tips of its ankyrin repeats. GABP

Implications for the mechanisms of eukaryotic transcription regulation
Together with biological studies on transcriptional synergy or `cross talk', what do the above complex structures tell us about the combinatorial gene regulation mechanisms in eukaryotic cells?
Members of a transcription factor family may be differentiated in higher order transcription factor complexes

In the higher order complex structures discussed above, the residues of a DNA-binding domain that do not contact the DNA mediate protein­protein interactions. Transcription factors from the same family usually have highly homologous DNA-binding surfaces, but different surface residues outside the DNA-binding region. There is some biological evidence that these variable residues may be important determinants of each family member's distinct in vivo functions [33,34].

Combinatorial gene regulation by eukaryotic transcription factors Chen

51

A sequence comparison of NFAT (NFATs 1­4) and Fos (cFos, FosB, Fra-1, Fra-2) family members indicated that different NFAT­Fos pairs should have different interaction interfaces [10··]. A similar specificity is also seen in the a MAT2­MATa1­DNA complex, in which the MAT2 Ca terminal  helix specifically binds to the MATa1 homeodomain, but not its own homeodomain [25].
The assembly of specific transcription factor complexes contributes to the specificity of transcriptional control

Figure 4 (a) b a NFAT RHR-C

e

For each individual transcription factor in the ternary complexes discussed above, the homeodomain­DNA, MADS box­DNA and Ets­DNA interactions are all similar to the interactions seen in their respective binary protein­DNA complexes. This is true even when the binding site deviates significantly from the consensus sequence, as does DNA binding by Fos­Jun in the NFAT­Fos­Jun complex. The recognition of nonconsensus sites by a transcription factor often involves only local changes or adjustments of DNA-binding residues. Such apparent `relaxation' of specificity seems very common in in vivo DNA binding by eukaryotic transcription factors, especially as part of larger complexes. This may allow the assembly of enhancer complexes on various composite sites while maintaining the specificity by cooperative protein­protein interactions. In higher order complexes, protein­protein interactions add specificity to the combined DNA-binding specificity a of each component. In the MAT2­MATa1­DNA and MAT2­MCM1­DNA complexes, protein­protein interactions are mediated by structural modules that are tethered to DNA-binding domains through a peptide linker. These linkers, though flexible in the crystal structures (as evident from high B factors), still seem to impose specificity on complex formation by restricting the arrangement of each component's binding site [35]. In contrast, the interactions between NFAT and Fos­Jun are directly mediated by residues of their respective DNA-binding domains and are continuous with the DNA-binding surfaces, similar to a nuclear receptor heterodimer­DNA complex [36]. Thus, the whole complex has a continuous DNA-binding groove, explaining why the spacing between the NFAT and AP-1 DNA-binding sites is highly conserved. Significant conformational changes of the protein and DNA are observed in the above higher order complexes and they may play important roles in the specificity (`indirect read out') and diversity of higher order complex assembly. In the MAT2­MCM1­DNA complex, the MAT2 linker contacting MCM1 shows flexibility by being able to assume either a  strand or an -helical conformation. Such flexibility may be important for MAT2 binding to a MCM1 dimer on both sides, with a two or three base pair spacing on a natural a-specific operator [9··]. The Fos  helix in the NFAT­Fos­Jun­DNA complex has a significant bend in its fork region. The fork

NFAT RHR-N

(b)

NF-B RHR-C

a b e

NF-B RHR-N

Current Opinion in Structural Biology

Comparison of NFAT in the (a) NFAT­Fos­Jun­DNA complex and (b) NF-B p50 in the p50 dimer­DNA complex. The N-terminal DNAbinding domains of NFAT and p50 are similarly anchored on the DNA, but their C-terminal domains are in very different orientations. The Cterminal domain of NFAT is similar to that of p50 (root mean square deviation of 0.84 Å for 65  strand C atoms, and most of the dimerization residues at the abe sheet are conserved in NFAT).

region of DNA-bound bZIP proteins is usually flexible, which may favor interactions with other proteins on DNA, although it is not clear if members of the Fos family have different flexibility in this region or not. DNA conformational changes in the NFAT­Fos­Jun complex may explain why the DNA spacer between the NFAT and AP-1 sites shows a strong preference for AT-rich sequences [28]. Another level of specificity that is achieved through higher order complex assembly is the specific orientation of heterodimeric DNA-binding proteins on DNA. Fos and Jun

52

Protein­nucleic acid interactions

Figure 5

(a)

(b)

(c)

N B E A E B A N B E C N A

Minor groove contact ab loop
C

ab loop
C

Minor groove contact ab loop

Minor groove contact

(d)
N

(e)

A B E

N

A B E C

ab loop

ab loop

Minor groove contact

C

Current Opinion in Structural Biology

A comparison of the immunoglobulin DNA-binding domains of (a) p53, (b) NFAT, (c) STAT, (d) NF-B and (e) the T domain. The  barrel is oriented similarly, with the ABE sheet shown in front. The conserved ab loop bound in the DNA major groove is indicated. Note that in p53, NFAT and STAT, the C-terminal  helix is positioned in the major

groove, whereas a -strand loop is inserted in the adjacent minor groove. The orientation of p53 on DNA is significantly different from that of the others. NF-B does not contact the DNA minor groove. A C-terminal  helix of the T domain binds deeply in the minor groove, opposite the groove contacted by p53, NFAT and STAT.

have almost identical DNA-binding surfaces. Their bZIP heterodimer was found to bind DNA in two orientations in the binary (Fos­Jun)­DNA complexes [37,38], but adopted a unique orientation in the ternary NFAT­Fos­Jun­DNA complex [37]. As seen in the ternary crystal structure [10··], the NFAT­Fos and NFAT­Jun interaction interfaces are different, leading to orientation specificity on the DNA. Such a specific orientation of heterodimeric transcription factors on DNA, either through their own asymmetric DNA binding or through interactions with partner proteins, may have functional importance.
Higher order complexes form upon DNA binding

Unlike many tightly associated transcription factor dimers, most of the ternary complexes discussed above do not form

without binding to DNA. As seen in the crystal structures, the protein­protein interaction interfaces observed in these complexes are either limited or highly hydrophilic. This feature is also observed in other complexes, including those of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins. Crystal structures of two STAT DNAbinding complexes and a STAT N-terminal domain have been determined recently [39··,40··,41·]. DNA-bound STAT dimers are suggested to form higher order complexes through the conserved N-terminal protein interaction domain that probably only dimerizes after DNA binding. The potential dimer interface of this STAT N-terminal domain is highly hydrophilic, as seen in the crystallographic dimer [41·]. Complex formation between NFAT and a Fos­Jun, and between MAT2 and MATa1 is also DNA-

Combinatorial gene regulation by eukaryotic transcription factors Chen

53

binding-dependent. This DNA-dependent complex formation may enable the combinatorial use of transcription factors [25].
Combinatorial diversity is achieved at multiple levels

In addition to complex formation between distinct and related transcription factors, the same DNA-binding domain of a given transcription factor may adopt different conformations in different promoter contexts, while maintaining its specific DNA-binding interactions [42]. NFAT may be one example. On composite NFAT and AP-1 DNA-binding sites, such as those found in the IL-2 promoter-enhancer, NFAT binds the DNA cooperatively in complex with AP-1 transcription factors. On some other DNA sites that have two NFAT DNA-binding sites arranged with dyad symmetry and appropriate spacing, NFAT binds the DNA cooperatively as a dimer. The latter mode of DNA binding by NFAT may be similar to that of the Rel NF-KB transcription factors, which are involved in a wide range of transcription regulation in the immune system and in viral gene expression. The DNAbinding sites of the NFAT dimer resemble that of the NF-KB proteins (the Kb DNA site), raising the possibility that NFAT may regulate gene transcription through DNA sites (KB or KB-like DNA sites) that are also responsive towards NF-KB regulation. The structures of the DNA-binding domains of NFAT and NF-KB are also remarkably similar, both consisting of two Ig modules. In the NFAT­Fos­Jun-DNA complex, each of NFAT's two Ig modules, Rel homology regions (RHRs) N and C, resembles the corresponding parts of Rel NF-B p50, but the relative orientation of the two Ig modules in NFAT is significantly different from that seen in p50­DNA complexes [43,44]. The C-terminal Ig module in p50 mediates dimer formation, whereas NFAT is a monomer in solution [37,45] (Figure 4). Strikingly, residues involved in p50 dimerization are largely conserved in the NFAT C-terminal Ig module, suggesting that NFAT can probably dimerize upon binding to DNA using the same surface. There is evidence that NFAT may bind B-like DNA sites as a dimer under certain physiological situations [28], probably by adopting a conformation that is very much like a typical NF-B dimer (Figure 4). Crystals of a NFAT dimer bound cooperatively to a B DNA fragment have been obtained and the structure determination is underway (L Chen, A Breier, B Tasic, SC Harrison, unpublished data). Alternatively, the exposed NFAT C-terminal dimer interface can mediate higher order complex formation between multiple copies of DNA-bound NFAT­Fos­Jun complexes on an enhancer [46], similar to the higher order assembly of DNA-bound GABP/ and STAT dimers (see above). The Ig DNA-binding domain is also found in a novel class of transcription regulators, referred to as the T-domain proteins. The T-domain proteins are the products of the so-called T-box gene, which plays important roles in transcription regulation in embryonic development. The

recent structure determinations of NFAT, STATs and the T-domain [47·] reveal that these proteins, together with p53 [48] and NF-B [43,44], form a superfamily that uses the Ig module as a scaffold for presenting various secondary structural elements for DNA recognition (Figure 5). Whether the above proteins are evolutionarily related or not, however, is unclear at present. The recent structure determination of a DNA-binding complex of Skn-1 illustrated another way of generating diverse DNAbinding functions, combining various DNA-binding motifs and scaffolds to form a novel DNA-binding domain [49·]. This combination of DNA-binding modules is related to but is different from those seen in other DNA-binding proteins, including zinc-finger proteins and the POU domain proteins.
Transcriptional coactivators play important roles in the combinatorial control of transcription

Considering the complexes between transactivation domains and coactivators discussed above and similar studies on p53 [50], it seems that the binding of transactivation domains to their target proteins generally involves an induced amphipathic helix. This mode of protein­proa tein interaction is also seen in the MAT2­MATa1­DNA complex. Amphipathic helices have one or more xx motifs, where  represents a hydrophobic residue. In the case of pKID, VP16 and other transactivation domains (p53 and p65), the motif shows a preference for phenylalanine and tyrosine at the first , imposing some specificity on coactivator selection. In SRC-1 and other nuclear receptor coactivators, the motif is more restricted to LXXLL (L represents leucine) [51]. The specificity of coactivator binding also involves hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions. Thus, interactions between transactivation domains and coactivators are mediated by small, relatively independent structural modules, each making limited but specific contacts. There are three LXXLL motifs in SRC-1, two of which can interact with a nuclear receptor dimer. The presence of a third LXXLL may imply that these motifs can be used either combinatorially with different nuclear receptor dimers or simultaneously in forming higher order complexes. Similarly, coactivators such as CBP and p300 also contain separated binding sites for the transactivation domains of various transcription factors. These general features of transactivation domain­coactivator interactions are consistent with the combinatorial gene regulation mechanism.

Conclusions
In the past year, we have seen more structural characterizations of the protein­protein interactions involved in the function of eukaryotic transcription factors. These include the interactions between DNA-bound transcription factors and interactions between transactivation domains and their respective targets. These structural studies support the combinatorial transcription regulation mechanism in eukaryotic cells.

54

Protein­nucleic acid interactions

Structural studies of eukaryotic transcription factors with higher and higher complexity continue. These structures will allow the analysis of the molecular details of enhancer complexes (enhanceosome), the core promoter complex and the interactions between them. These molecular pictures will provide an important framework for studying and understanding the in vivo mechanisms of eukaryotic gene regulation.

12. Radhakrishnan I, Perez AG, Parker D, Dyson HJ, Montminy MR, ·· Wright PE: Solution structure of the KIX domain of CBP bound to the transactivation domain of CREB: a model for activator­coactivator interactions. Cell 1997, 91:741-752. The first detailed structural characterization of the interactions between an activation domain (CREB) and a coactivator (CBP). 13. Uesugi M, Nyanguile O, Lu H, Levine AJ, Verdine GL: Induced  helix ·· in the VP16 activation domain upon binding to a human TAF. Science 1997, 277:1310-1313. The first structural characterization of the interactions between VP16 and TAF31, using NMR spectroscopy and biochemical methods. 14. Westin S, Kurokawa R, Nolte RT, Wisely GB, McInerney EM, ·· Rose DW, Milburn MV, Rosenfeld MG, Glass CK: Interactions controlling the assembly of nuclear-receptor heterodimers and co-activators. Nature 1998, 395:199-202. See annotation to [15··]. 15. Nolte RT, Wisely GB, Westin S, Cobb JE, Lambert MH, Kurokawa R, ·· Rosenfeld MG, Willson TM, Glass CK, Milburn MV: Ligand binding and coactivator assembly of the peroxisome proliferator-activated  receptor-. Nature 1998, 395:137-143. This paper, together with [14··], describes the first crystallographic study of a nuclear receptor ligand-binding domain and its coactivator in a ternary complex. 16. Kim TK, Maniatis T: The mechanism of transcriptional synergy of  · an in vitro assembled interferon- enhanceosome. Mol Cell 1997, 1:119-129. A detailed biochemical study on enhanceosome assembly, demonstrating a direct correlation between cooperative DNA binding and transcriptional synergy in the context of an assembled enhancer. 17. Garrity PA, Chen D, Rothenberg EV, Wold BJ: Interleukin-2 transcription is regulated in vivo at the level of coordinated binding of both constitutive and regulated factors. Mol Cell Biol 1994, 14:2159-2169.

Acknowledgements
The author is grateful to Ernest Fraenkel, Rachelle Gaudet, Susanne Swalley and Marc Jacobs for critically reading this review and for their many helpful comments. The author would like to thank Stephen C Harrison for a wonderful postdoctoral experience in his laboratory. A postdoctoral fellowship from the Medical Foundation is acknowledged.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

· of special interest ·· of outstanding interest
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. · Tjian R, Maniatis T: Transcriptional activation: a complex puzzle with few easy pieces. Cell 1994, 77:5-8. Tan S, Richmond TJ: Eukaryotic transcription factors. Curr Opin Struct Biol 1998, 8:41-48. Tan S, Hunziker Y, Sargent DF, Richmond TJ: Crystal structure of a yeast TFIIA/TBP/DNA complex. Nature 1996, 381:127-151. Geiger JH, Hahn S, Lee S, Sigler PB: Crystal structure of the yeast TFIIA/TBP/DNA complex. Science 1996, 272:830-836.

18. Grosschedl R: Higher-order nucleoprotein complexes in transcription: analogies with site-specific recombination. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1995, 7:362-370.  19. Thanos D, Maniatis T: Virus induction of human IFN gene expression requires the assembly of an enhanceosome. Cell 1995, 83:1091-1100. 20. Yamamoto KR, Pearce D, Thomas J, Miner JN: Combinatorial regulation at a mammalian composite response element. In Transcriptional Regulation. Edited by McKnight SL, Yamamoto KR. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 1992:1169-1192. 21. Johnson A: A combinatorial regulatory circuit in budding yeast. In Transcriptional Regulation, vol 2. Edited by McKnight SL, Yamamoto KR. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 1992:975-1006. 22. Hochschild A, Ptashne M: Cooperative binding of lambda repressors to sites separated by integral turns of the DNA helix. Cell 1986, 44:681-687. 23. Ptashne M, Gann A: Transcriptional activation by recruitment. Nature 1997, 386:569-577. 24. Johnson AD: Molecular mechanisms of cell-type determination in budding yeast. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1995, 5:552-558. 25. Li T, Stark MR, Johnson AD, Wolberger C: Crystal structure of the MATa1/MAT 2 homeodomain heterodimer bound to DNA. Science 1995, 270:262-269. 26. Vershon AK, Johnson AD: A short, disordered protein region mediates interactions between the homeodomain of the yeast 2 protein and the MCM1 protein. Cell 1993, 72:105-112. 27. Crabtree GR, Clipstone NA: Signal transmission between the plasma membrane and nucleus of T lymphocytes. Annu Rev Biochem 1994, 63:1045-1083.

Shi Y, Wang YF, Jayaraman L, Yang H, Massague J, Pavletich NP: Crystal structure of a Smad MH1 domain bound to DNA:  insights on DNA binding in TGF- signaling. Cell 1998, 94:585-594. This paper describes the first crystal structure of the DNA-binding domain from a Smad family protein in complex with DNA, showing a novel DNA-binding mode involving a  hairpin bound in the major groove. Escalante CR, Yie J, Thanos D, Aggarwal AK: Structure of IRF-1 with bound DNA reveals determinants of interferon regulation. Nature 1998, 391:103-106. The first crystal structure determination of a DNA-binding domain from the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family of proteins in complex with DNA, showing a variant of the `helix-turn-helix' DNA-binding motif. 7. Chen FE, Huang DB, Chen YQ, Ghosh G: Crystal structure of  p50/p65 heterodimer of transcription factor NF-B bound to DNA. Nature 1998, 391:410-413.

6. ·

Parraga A, Bellsolell L, Ferre-D'Amare AR, Burley SK: Co-crystal structure of sterol regulatory element binding protein 1a at 2.3 Å resolution. Structure 1998, 6:661-672. A recent example showing that binding to a nonconsensus DNA site by a transcription factor involves only localized changes at the protein­DNA interface. 8. ·  9. Tan S, Richmond TJ: Crystal structure of the yeast MAT2/MCM1/ ·· DNA ternary complex. Nature 1998, 391:660-666. A higher order eukaryotic transcription factor complex bound to DNA, demonstrating the importance of protein­protein interactions in the assembly. 10. Chen L, Glover JN, Hogan PG, Rao A, Harrison SC: Structure of the ·· DNA-binding domains from NFAT, Fos and Jun bound specifically to DNA. Nature 1998, 392:42-48. A higher order eukaryotic transcription factor complex bound to DNA, demonstrating the importance of protein­protein interactions in the assembly. 11. Batchelor AH, Piper DE, de la Brousse FC, McKnight SL,   ·· Wolberger C: The structure of GABP/: an ETS domain-ankyrin repeat heterodimer bound to DNA. Science 1998, 279:1037-1041. The structure determined shows a different kind of higher order transcription factor complex, as compared with [9··] and [10··], in that one component does not bind DNA directly; however, the protein­protein interactions are equally important for the assembly and the enhanced DNA binding. It is also one of the first two structures to show the detailed protein­protein interactions mediated by ankyrin repeats that play important roles in a wide range of physiologically important protein complexes.

28. Rao A, Luo C, Hogan PG: Transcription factors of the NFAT family: regulation and function. Annu Rev Immunol 1997, 15:707-747. 29. Erlanson DA, Chytil M, Verdine GL: The leucine zipper domain controls the orientation of AP-1 in the NFAT­AP-1­DNA complex. Chem Biol 1996, 3:981-991. 30. Peterson BR, Sun LJ, Verdine GL: A critical arginine residue mediates cooperativity in the contact interface between transcription factors NFAT and AP-1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996, 93:13671-13676.

Combinatorial gene regulation by eukaryotic transcription factors Chen

55

31. Sun LJ, Peterson BR, Verdine GL: Dual role of the nuclear factor of activated T cells insert region in DNA recognition and cooperative contacts to activator protein 1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:4919-4924. 32. Zhou P, Sun LJ, Dotsch V, Wagner G, Verdine GL: Solution structure · of the core NFATC1/DNA complex. Cell 1998, 92:687-696. An NMR study of a binary NFAT­DNA complex, showing the different orientation of NFAT on DNA compared with [10··]. 33. Diamond MI, Miner JN, Yoshinaga SK, Yamamoto KR: Transcription factor interactions: selectors of positive or negative regulation from a single DNA element. Science 1990, 249:1266-1272. 34. Davis RL, Cheng PF, Lassar AB, Weintraub H: The MyoD DNA binding domain contains a recognition code for muscle-specific gene activation. Cell 1990, 60:733-746. 35. Jin Y, Mead J, Li T, Wolberger C, Vershon AK: Altered DNA recognition and bending by insertions in the 2 tail of the yeast 1/2 homeodomain heterodimer. Science 1995, 270:290-293.  36. Rastinejad F, Perlmann T, Evans RM, Sigler PB: Structural determinants of nuclear receptor assembly on DNA direct repeats. Nature 1995, 375:203-211. 37. Chen L, Oakley MG, Glover JN, Jain J, Dervan PB, Hogan PG, Rao A, Verdine GL: Only one of the two DNA-bound orientations of AP-1 found in solution cooperates with NFATp. Curr Biol 1995, 5:882-889.

for the DNA-binding-dependent, higher order complex assembly of transcription factors. 42. Lefstin JA, Yamamoto KR: Allosteric effects of DNA on transcriptional regulators. Nature 1998, 392:885-888.  43. Ghosh G, van Duyne G, Ghosh S, Sigler PB: Structure of NF-B p50 homodimer bound to a B site. Nature 1995, 373:303-310. 44. Muller CW, Rey FA, Sodeoka M, Verdine GL, Harrison SC: Structure  of the NF-B p50 homodimer bound to DNA. Nature 1995, 373:311-317. 45. Hoey T, Sun YL, Williamson K, Xu X: Isolation of two new members of the NF-AT gene family and functional characterization of the NF-AT proteins. Immunity 1995, 2:461-472. 46. Rooney JW, Sun YL, Glimcher LH, Hoey T: Novel NFAT sites that mediate activation of the interleukin-2 promoter in response to T-cell receptor stimulation. Mol Cell Biol 1995, 15:6299-6310. 47. · Muller CW, Herrmann BG: Crystallographic structure of the T domain-DNA complex of the Brachyury transcription factor. Nature 1997, 389:884-888. The structure not only expands the Ig DNA-binding protein family, but it also reveals unusual minor groove DNA binding by an  helix. This observation is important for understanding the general mechanisms of DNA recognition by proteins. 48. Cho Y, Gorina S, Jeffrey PD, Pavletich NP: Crystal structure of a p53 tumor suppressor-DNA complex: understanding tumorigenic mutations. Science 1994, 265:346-355. 49. Rupert PB, Daughdrill GW, Bowerman B, Matthews BW: A new · DNA-binding motif in the Skn-1 binding domain-DNA complex. Nat Struct Biol 1998, 5:484-491. This structure shows a novel DNA-binding domain that can be regarded as a hybridization of parts of other known DNA-binding motifs, illustrating a unique way of varying DNA-binding motifs in order to generate new DNAbinding functions by nature. 50. Kussie PH, Gorina S, Marechal V, Elenbaas B, Moreau J, Levine AJ, Pavletich NP: Structure of the MDM2 oncoprotein bound to the p53 tumor suppressor transactivation domain. Science 1996, 274:948-953. 51. Heery DM, Kalkhoven E, Hoare S, Parker MG: A signature motif in transcriptional co-activators mediates binding to nuclear receptors. Nature 1997, 387:733-736. 52. Kraulis PJ: MOLSCRIPT: a program to produce both detailed and schematic plots of protein structures. J Appl Crystallogr 1991, 24:946-950.

38. Glover JN, Harrison SC: Crystal structure of the heterodimeric bZIP transcription factor c-Fos-c-Jun bound to DNA. Nature 1995, 373:257-261. 39. Chen X, Vinkemeier U, Zhao Y, Jeruzalmi D, Darnell JJ, Kuriyan J: ·· Crystal structure of a tyrosine phosphorylated STAT-1 dimer bound to DNA. Cell 1998, 93:827-839. See annotation to [40··]. 40. Becker S, Groner B, Muller CW: Three-dimensional structure of the  ·· Stat3 homodimer bound to DNA. Nature 1998, 394:145-151. The structures described in this paper and [39··], the first for the STAT family, show the unique features of the STAT family proteins, whose multiple functional domains are highly integrated at the structural level. 41. Vinkemeier U, Moarefi I, Darnell J Jr, Kuriyan J: Structure of the · amino-terminal protein interaction domain of STAT-4. Science 1998, 279:1048-1052. This is the first crystallographic study of potential protein-binding surfaces from the conserved STAT N-terminal domain. The structural features of the dimer interface observed in the crystal structure have general implications

