476

Abstracts

oxidant. In addition, the pH dependence is modulated by the pK, of a distal group, and the electron donating/withdrawing properties of the heme substituents modulate the redox potential. These design principles provide the opportunity to tailor peroxidase function for enhanced microbicidal activity and inactivation of specific toxins. Chemicalsynthesis and S. Sakakibara

qf dendrotoxin I: revision of the reported structure. H. Nishio, T. Inui, Y. Nishiuchi, T. Kimura
(Peptide Institute Inc., Protein Research Foundation, Minoh-shi, Osaka 562, Japan).

Dendrotoxin I, a 60-residue peptide isolated from the venom of the black mamba, Dendroaspispol~lepispolylepis, was shown to target specifically neuronal voltage-sensitive potassium channels. Calcicludine, a peptide with 40% sequence homology to dendrotoxin I, was recently isolated from the venom of the green mamba, Dendroaspis augusticeps, and shown to be a potent blocker of high-threshold calcium channels with high affinity for L-type channels in cerebellar granule neurons. Recently, we have synthesized calcicludine by the solution procedure and found that the synthetic peptide was completely identical to natural calcicludine, by means of high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and receptor binding assay. To elucidate the structure-activity relationships of these homologous peptides, we have synthesized dendrotoxin I by a similar procedure to calcicludine; the fully protected peptide was assembled from six segments in solution using our newly developed solvent system, a mixture of chloroform and trifluoroethanol. All of the protecting groups were removed by treatment with HF and then the product was subjected to the oxidative folding reaction in 0.1 M Tris buffer (pH 8.7) containing 1 mM EDTA and 0.2 M KCI for I day using reduced and oxidized glutathione as redox reagents. After isolating the principal product by HPLC, it was confirmed to have correct amino acid composition and mol. wt. Furthermore, the disulfide structure of the synthetic product was the same as that reported. The synthetic peptide was compared with natural dendrotoxin I by HPLC. The result demonstrated that the synthetic peptide had a different retention time on HPLC from that of the natural product. After DTT reduction followed by pyridylethyiation and enzymatic digestions, the products were mapped on HPLC and it was confirmed that one fragment of our synthetic peptide showed a different retention time from that of a corresponding fragment of the natural product. The structure of each fragment was determined by Edman degradation, and it was found that the Asn at position 12 in the reported structure should be replaced by Asp and the N-terminal Gln by Pyroglu, although the reported structure of dendrotoxin I had been confirmed by nuclear magnetic resonance. Structure and,finction of' two polypeptides purifiedfrom the Chinese bird spider Selenocosmia huwena. S. Liang,' D. Zhang,' X. Pan,' Y. Qu,' J. Ding,' P. Zhod and X. Gu? (`Department of Biology, Hunan Normal University, Changsha City, 410081, P.R. China; and 2National Laboratory of Protein Engineering and Plant Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P.R. China). Two polypeptides, named HWTX-I and SHLP-I, which have some sequence and disuhide bond linkage similarity but different biological activities, were isolated from the venom of the Chinese bird spider Selenocosmia huwena. Huwentoxin-I (HWTX-I) is a neurotoxin which can reversibly block the neuromuscular transmission in an isolated mouse phrenic nerve-diaphragm preparation. The site of action of this toxin is the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. HWTX-I consists of 33 amino acid residues and three disulfide bonds. Complete sequence-specific assigment of resonances in the `H-nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra of HWTX-I was achieved by using a combination of two-dimensional (2D) NMR experiments including ZD-COSY, 2D-NOESY and ZD-TOCSY. The three-dimensional solution structure of HWTX-I was determined by analysis of the interproton distance inferred from NOES and dihedral angles from spin-spin coupling constants. The molecule has a compact structure consisting of a small, triple-stranded, anti-parallel b-sheet and a cystine knot. The S. huwena lectin-like peptide(SHLP-I) has no neurotoxic activity but can agglutinate human and mice erythrocytes at a minimum concentration of 125 pg/ml and 31 /cg/ml, respectively. The agglutination activity of SHLP-I can be inhibited by mannosamine. SHLP-I consists of 32 amino acid residues and three disulfide bond linkages which are the same as those in HWTX-I. SHLP-I also shows homology with a fragment of great tettle lectin. Further studies on the determination of the 3D solution structure of SHLP-I by 2D-NMR are in progress. Wasp kinin analogues-a lead to new drugs and pesticidexj T. Pick,' R. Rocchi? and B. Hue' (`Department of Pharmacology, University of Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center, Meibergdreef 15, I 105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands; `Biopolymer Research Center, CNR, Department of Organic Chemistry, University of Padova, via Marsolo I, I-35131 Padova, Italy; and `Laboratory of Neurophysiology, CNRS, URA 11, University of Angers, rue Haute de Reculee F, 49045 Angers Cedex, France). Kinins, like bradykinin, are small polypeptides with mol. wts between 1000 and 2500. Some of them are released from mammalian tissues during pathogenic disorders. Bradykinin may be a brain peptide, but its possible function is still obscure. Kinin-like polypeptides have been isolated from social wasp venoms and from venoms of related solitary wasps, which sting their prey in the nerve ganglia. Strategies for the development of new pesticides or new drugs include synthesis of mimics of the supposed pharmacophore of, for example, a peptide molecule. We have synthesized and studied the pharmacology of a number of wasp kinins and their analogues. The kinins were studied using both a number of isolated mammalian intestinal muscle preparations and the insect synaptic transmission. Intestinal muscles are much less sensitive to cyclic kinins than to their linear analogues. However, the effects of cyclic and linear kinins are qualitatively similar, including the effects of specific

