VIROLOGY

20,

333-343

(1963)

inhibition

of Interferon Virus

by an Infection Type 3 (PIV-3)

with

Parainfluenza
SVANTE
Institute of Virology, Accepted

HERMODSSON
University February of Uppsala, 11, 1965 Sweden

The autointerference of Newcastle disease virus (NDV) in calf kidney cultures is inhibited by a previous infection with PIV-3. PIV-3 also enhances the reproduction infected with the latter virus. This effect of PIV-3 of NDV in cultures persistently appears to be associated with the infectious virus particles and to be due to an inhibition of the production and antiviral action of interferon. Interferon produced by footand-mouth disease virus is also inhibited by PIV-3. INTRODUCTION

It has been suggested by Wagner (1960) that a persistent infection may be the result of an equilibrium between virus and interferon. This hypothesis would be strengthened by the finding of a factor that will suppress interferon and increase the reproduction of virus in persistently infected cells. A slightly cytopathogenic strain of PIV-3 had such an effect. An infection with this virus inhibited the autointerference of Newcast.le disease virus (NVD) in calf kidney cultures and suppressed the production and antiviral action of NDV interferon. The present report is concerned with this phenomenon.
MATERIALS AND METHODS

CelZ cultures. Calf kidney cultures were prepared from trypsinized kidneys of newborn calves. Growth medium consisted of Hanks' salt solution wit,h 0.5% lactalbumin hydrolyzate, 10% calf serum, 100 I.U. penicillin and 100 pugstreptomycin per milliliter. The same medium without serum was used as maintenance medium. Viruses. Stock suspensions of strain 23 of PIV-3 (Dinter et al., 1960) and strain 205 of NDV (Dinter and Bakos, 1953) were prepared in calf kidney cultures. PIV-3 was inoculated undiluted, whereas NVD was
333

inoculated diluted 10-l since autointerference appeared after inoculation of undiluted virus material. The culture fluids were harvested after incubation for 3 days at 37". The stock suspensions of PIV-3 cont,ained 108-s.5TCDBO and 64 HA units per milliliter and the NDV stocks 1O7-7-5 TCDsO and 16 HA units per milliliter. UV-irradiated NDV was prepared from virus grown in the allantoic cavity of chick embryos. Before irradiation the virus susof 10Q.3TCDsO pension had an infectivity per milliliter. In some experiments the Sendai strain of parainfluenza virus type 1 and a Yugoslavian strain "Z" of pseudorabies virus were used. The stock suspensions of these viruses were also prepared in calf kidney cultures. Pseudorabies virus was stored at -6O", and the other viruses were stored at 4". Antisera. Hyperimmune rabbit serum against PIV-3 and NDV were obtained by three weekly injections of 20 ml of infectious virus material. NDV antiserum was prepared by immunization with virus cultivated in the allantoic cavity of chick embryos and PIV-3 antiserum from virus grown in calf kidney cultures. The virus suspensions were administered intravenously, intraperitoneally, and subcutaneously. The animals were bled 1 week after the last injection and the sera were stored

334

HERMODSSON

at -20". The antisera had an HI titer of 1:3200 against homologous virus, and no cross reaction occurred with the heterologous virus at a serum dilution of 1: 10. Assay of infectivity. Infectivity was determined for roller t,ube cultures of calf kidney cells. Each of 4 or 5 tubes was inoculated wit,h 0.1 ml of serial tenfold dilutions of the virus samples. After incubation at 37" for 7 days the cultures were examined for cyt,opathic changes and hemadsorbing capacity. The hemadsorption test was carried out according to the modification of Chanock et al. (1958). The number of TCDSO was determined by Karber's method. The HA titraAssay of hemagglutinin. tions were performed in tubes by the pattern t,est. Serial twofold dilutions of the virus material in 0.15 M NaCl were mixed with an equal volume (0.5 ml) of a 0.5% suspension of guinea pig erythrocytes. The tests were read after 2 hours at 4", and the titer was expressed as the reciprocal of the highest initial dilut'ion giving partial agglutination. Virus assays in mixed infections. In experiments in which the samples contained both PIV-3 and NDV the virus suspensions were treated with either PIV-3 serum or NDV serum in order to neutralize the corresponding virus. Before assay of infectivity the virus samples were diluted 1O-2, mixed with an equal volume of antiserum diluted 1: 40 in Hanks' salt solution, and incubated at 37" for 2 hours. The HA titers were determined after a similar treatment of undiluted virus material. By this procedure the titer of homologous virus could be reduced from lo7 to less than 101." TCD,, per milliliter and from 64 to less than 4 HA units per milliliter. The titers obtained after treatment with PIV-3 antiserum was considered to reflect the amount of NDV and vice versa. This implies that the majority of virus produced at a mixed infection with PIV-3 and NDV does not consist of recombinants. Evidence for a recombination was not forthcoming, when samples from mixed infections were tested for 5 different markers of PIV-3 and NDV, respectively. Assay for interferon activity. Samples to be assayed for interferon activity were pretreated by centrifugation and addition

of NDV antiserum as described in the following section. Since some samples also contained PIV-3, PIV-3 antiserum was added at a final dilution of 1: 40. The interferon tests were performed in roller tube cultures of calf kidney cells. The medium in these cultures was replaced by serial twofold dilutions of the assay samples in maintenance medium. One milliliter of each dilmion was inoculated into each of two tubes. After incubation for 20 to 24 hours at 37" the cult,ures were exposed to a challenge infection with lo4 TCDBO of Sendai virus. Four days later when the control cultures infected with Sendai virus were severely degenerated, the culture fluids were assayed for HA activity. The interferon titer was expressed as the highest dilmion giving at least a fourfold reduction of the HA titer compared with the controls. Preparation of XDV interferon. Flask cultures containing about 5 x lo7 calf kidney cells and 50 ml medium were inoculated with 10F TCDsO of NDV. After incubation for 4 days at 37" the culture fluids were harvested and concentrated five- to tenfold by dialysis against powdered polyethylene glycol (PEG 20 M, Carbowax, Carbide and Carbon Chem. Co., U.S.A.). After concentration the fluid was dialyzed overnight at 4" against Earle's salt solution. Virus was removed by centrifugation at 55,000 g for 1 hour and an additional centrifugation of the supernatant at 80,000 g for 2 hours in rotor R 40 of a Spinco model L centrifuge. In order to remove remaining viral activity NDV antiserum was added; 4.5 ml of the final supernatant was mixed with 0.5 ml of NDV antiserum diluted 1: 8 and the mixture was incubated at 37" for 2 hours. Staining with fluorescent antibodies. Monolayers of calf kidney cells were cultivated on coverslips in Leighton tubes. After infection with PIV-3 or NDV or both together the cells were washed in phosphatebuffered saline (PBS), fixed in acetone, and air-dried. Staining with fluorescent antibodies was performed by the indirect met,hod (Weller and Coons, 1954), using antiserum diluted 1: 16 in PBS and goat antirabbit globulin conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate (Microbiological

INHIBITION

OF INTERFERON

Associates, Bethesda, Maryland). The preparations were examined with a Zeiss fluorescence microscope equipped with a darkfield condenser and a mercury lamp (Osram HBO 200). The primary filter was BG12 and the secondary `(Zeiss 50" alone or in combination with "Zeiss 47." For photography a Kodak Tri-X film was used. Ultrauiole t irradiation. The virus suspensions were dialyzed overnight at 4" against Earle's salt solution. Five milliliters of the dialyzed fluid was placed in a g-cm petri dish and exposed for 120 seconds to two 15watt germicidal lamps at a distance of 18 cm. After 60 seconds of exposure the virus suspension was changed to another dish and to facilitate complete inactivation the petri dishes were also rocked gently during irradiat,ion.
RESULTS

Days

FIG. 1. Multiplication of NDV in cultures simultaneously inoculated with both NDV and PIV-3 (A-A 1 and in cultures infected only with NDV (0-o).

Inhibition

of the Autointerference

of NDV
I I 1234567 I I Days
FIG. 2. Multiplication of PIV-3 in cultures simultaneously inoculated with both PIV-3 and NDV (A-A) and in cultures infected only with PIV-3 (0-e).

When calf kidney cultures were inoculated with large amounts of the stock suspension of NDV only slight virus multiplication occurred as a rule. This was found to be due to the presence of an interferonlike substance in the virus suspension used as inoculum (Hermodsson, 1963). This autointerference, however, could be inhibited by a simultaneous inoculation of PIV-3. Simultaneous Inoculation of PIV-3

I

I

I

I

Flask cultures containing approximately 5 x lo7 calf kidney cells and 50 ml medium were simultaneously inoculated with 0.5 ml of the stock suspensions of PIV-3 and NDV. After different periods of incubation at 37", samples of the media were withdrawn and assayed for infectivity and hemagglutinating activity as described in Methods. Figure 1 shows t,he multiplication of NDV in cult,ures infected solely with this virus and in cultures simultaneously inoculated with both PIV-3 and NDV. The yield of NDV was about loo-fold greater in the double-infected cult,ures than in the cultures infected only with NDV. A st'ronger cellular degeneration also appeared in the former than in the latter cultures. These cyto-

pathic changes were presumably for the main part due to NDV since the PIV-3 used is charact,erized by low cytopathogenicity (Dinter et al., 1960). High titers of infectious PIV-3 were also produced in the double-infected cultures during the first 2 days after inoculation (Fig. 2). The decrease of infectivit,y which then occurred in these cultures but not in the cultures infected with PIV-3 only was probably a consequence of the degeneration of the cells. In a similar experiment, the results of which are presented in Fig. 3, the culture fluids were changed each day and assayed for hemagglutinating activity. The cultures infect.ed only with NDV contained no demonstrable amounts of hemagglutinin, but the cultures simultaneously inoculated with PIV-3 and NDV yielded 32-64 HA units of both viruses on the days 2 and 3 after infection.

336

HERMODSSON

I

Sing/e

infecfion

1

d

~Simultaneous

in feet.

I

12345 Day aff er in fee fion 4 NDV 0 PI v-3
FIG. 3. Production of hemagglutinin in cultures inoculated only with PIV-3 and NDV, respectively, and in cultures simultaneously inoculated with both these viruses.

when the cultures were inoculated with NDV alone. Figure 4 shows the yields of infectious NDV when the intervals between the virus inoculations were 1 and 3 days, respectively. In the cultures previously infected with PIV-3 a rapid multiplication of NDV was obtained. When PIV-3 had been inoculated after NDV, however, the reproduction of NDV was inhibited until the 4th day after superinfection. After that time a significant increase of the NDV infectivity occurred. Similar results were obt.ained at greater intervals between the inoculation of NDV and PIV-3. Figure 5 shows an experiment with an interval of 5 days. The inoculation of NDV resulted in a persistent infection with production of small amounts of virus. An increased reproduckion of NDV was obtained after superinfection with PIV-3. This increase was demonstrable 4 days after superinfection, and 1 and 2 days later the titers of infectious NDV were about 1000 times higher in the double-infected cultures than in the controls infected with NDV alone. The multiplication of PIV-3 was delayed in the cultures previously infected with NDV (Fig. 5). Equally high titers of PIV-3, however, were ultimately attained in the doubly infected cultures as in the cultures infected with PIV-3 only (Fig. 2). Analogous results were obtained when

f23'4567 Days

FIG. 4. Multiplication of NDV in doubly infected cultures at different intervals between the inoculations of PIV-3 and NDV. O-0 Superinfected with NDV 1 day after inoculation of PIV-3. e----o Superinfected with NDV 3 days after inoculation of PIV-3. n---n Superinfected with PIV-3 1 day after inoculation of NDV. A-A Superinfected with PIV-3 3 days after inoculation of NDV.

8-

I I f I III I 234567891011 Days I I I I II

Inoculation

of PIV-3 at Different

Times

The effect of PIV-3 on the autointerference of NDV was investigated when PIV-3 was inoculated at different times before and after NDV. The virus inoculations and the assays were performed in the same way as in the experimenk of the previous section. Under these experimental conditions autointerference was obtained

FIG. 5. Effect of superinfection with PIV-3 on the multiplication of NDV in persistently infected cultures. PIV-3 was inoculated 5 days after NDV as indicated by the arrow. O-O NDV in cultures infected only with NDV. O--O NDV in doubly infected cultures. n---n PIV-3 in doubly infected cultures.

337

the media were assayed for PITT-3 and NDV hemagglutinin, respectively. Both types of hemagglutinins were produced irrespective of whether PIV-3 was inoculated before (Fig, 6) or after NDV (Fig. 7). In the latter case, NDV hemagglutinin was not demonstrable until 4-6 days after superinfection with PIV-3 or about 2 days after the demonstration of PIV-3 hemagglutinin (Fig. 7). Content of Viral Antigens in the CelEs To investigate whether the formation of NDV antigen was greater in the doubly infected cultures than in the cultures ahowing autointerference after a single infection with NDV, the cells were stained with fluorescent antibodies. Cultures infected wilh KDV at a multiplicity of about 1 after incubation at 37" for 2 days showed no conspicuous fluorescence after treatment with NDV antiserum (Fig. 8). An obvious in~~nuno~~~orescen~e of NDV, however, occurred in about 60% of the cells in cultures which 1 day prior to the inoculation of NDV had been infected of about 10 with PIV-3 at a multiplicity (Fig. 9). When the same cultures were treated with PIV-3 antiserum, nearly 100% of the cells displayed a distinct fluorescence confined to the cytoplasm (Fig. 10). A similar fluorescence was found in cultures only infected with PIV-3 and treated with PPV-3 ant,iserum (Fig. 11). No cross reaction was obtained between cells infected with PIV-3 and NDV antiserum or between cells infected with NDV and PIV-3 antiserum. These results, therefore, indicate that calf kidney cells can be doubly infected with PIV-3 and NDV and that PIV-3 in such cultures can increase the amount of NDV antigen in the cells by inhibiting the autointerference of NDV. Effect of PITT-3 Infection on the Antiviral Action of NDV Interferon In experiments which will be published elsewhere it was found that the autointerference which appears in calf kidney cultures inoculated with high concentrations of NDV is due to interferon in the inoculum. Since this autointerference is inhibited by an infection with PIV-3, it was supposed
Day infection offer superwit.& PIV-3

12345 Day affer infecfion I NDV n PIV-3

superwith NDV

Fra. 6. Production of hemagglutinin in doubly infected cultures, when PIV-3 was inoculated before WDV.

1 day

befween

infecfions

13

days

between

infections

F` 5\ -3 J,$<2ICT

n*
5 days befween

4
infecfions

I

7days

between

infections

I NDV n Pf V-3
FIG. 7. Production of hemagglutinin in doubly infected cultures, when PIV-3 was inoculated at different intervals after NDV.

338

HERMODSSON

FIGS. 8-11. Virus-infected calf kidney cells stained with fluoresceut antibodies. A1agnification: X 2000. The cells were fixed 2 days after inoculation of NDV and 3 days after inoculation of PIV-3. FIG. 8. Cells infected with NDV and stained with fluorescent antibodies against NDV. FIG. 9. Cells infected with both PIV-3 and NDV and stained with fluorescent antibodies against NDV. FIG. 10. The same culture stained with fluorescent antibodies against PIV-3. FIG. 11. Cells infected only with PIV-3 and stained with fluorescent antibodies against PIV-3.

INHIBITION

OF INTERFERON

339

that the latter virus can suppress the production and antiviral action of interferon. The influence of a PIV-3 infection on the antiviral action of NDV interferon was investigated in calf kidney cultures which prior to the addition of interferon and challenge virus had been infected with PIV-3. The details of the experiments were as follows. Two flask cultures were infected with PIV-3 at a multiplicity of approximately 5. After one day of incubation at 37" the culture fluid of one of these flasks was replaced by fresh maintenance medium containing 25% NDV interferon concentrat,e (see Methods). The medium of the other culture was changed to the same medium without interferon. Control cultures not infected wit,h PIV-3 were treated in the same way. After another day of incubation the cultures were challenged wit,h lo5 TCDjo of NDV. The multiplication of NDV was then followed by withdrawing samples of the culture fluids at different times and assaying them for infectivity. As shown in Fig. 12 the reproduction of NDV was strongly inhibited in cultures treated with interferon, unless the cultures had previously been infected with PIV-3. In the lat'ter cultures equally high titers of NDV were attained as in the controls. Analogous results were obtained with pseudorabies virus as challenge virus. These experiments thus provide evidence for that PIV-3 suppresses the antiviral action of NDV interferon. Ejfect of PIV-3 Infection of NDV Interferon on the Production

8
7 6 5 4 3 2

r

1

I f234

I

I Days

I

I

FIG. 12. Effect of NDV interferon on the multipliin calf kidney cultures previously infected with PIV-3. PIV-3 was inoculated 1 day prior to interferon and all cultures in the experiment were challenged with 10' TCD,, of KDV 1 day after the inoculation of interferon. o---e Inoculated with NDV. n---n Inoculated with interferon and NDV. A-A Inoculated with PIV3, interferon, and KDV. O---O Inoculated with PIV-3 and NDV.

cation of NDV

TABLE YIELD OF INTERFEROX A MIXED INFECTION
IN

1

CULTURES EXPOSED TO WITH PIV-3 AND NDV titer per ml culture fluid of virus 4 <l/l <l/l l/16

Interferon Virus inoculated

Day after inoculation 1 i 2 ' <l/l <l/l l/8 <l/l <l/l l/16 3

Flask cultures were inoculated with either PIV-3 or NDV or with both these viruses at a multiplicity of 5 for PIV-3 and 0.05 for NDV. Aft,er different periods of incubation at 37" the culture fluids were assayed for interferon as described under Methods. The experiment was concluded after 4 days of incubation when t.he doubly infected cultures showed almost complete cellular degeneration. As shown in Table 1 no interferon was found in cultures infected with both PIV-3 and NDV or with PIV-3 alone. On the contrary, the cultures infect,ed solely with NDV contained interferon with a titer of l/16.

PIV-3 + NDV PIV-3 NDV

<l/l <l/l <l/l

Ejject of PIV-3 Infection on the Interfering Activity of UV-Irradiated NDT' The interfering activity of UV-irradiated influenza virus has been suggested by Isaacs (1959) to be due to the formation of interferon. It was therefore investigated whether PIV-3 eliminates the antiviral resistance which appears in calf kidney cultures after treatment with UV-irradiated NDV. Flask cultures were infected with PIV-3 at a multiplicity of approximately 5. After

340

HERMODSSON

were assayed for infectivity of NDV as described under Methods. As shown in Fig. 13 the UV-irradiated virus inhibit.ed the multiplication of NDV unless the cultures had been previously infected with PIV-3. In the latter cultures even higher titers of NDV were attained than in the controls infected with NDV only.
I I I 2 Days I 3 I 4 1

Effect of PIV-3 on Interferon Unrelated Virus

of

an

FIG. 13. Effect of a previous infection with PIV-3 on the interference between UV-irradiated NDV and active NDV. W-irradiated NDV was inoculated 1 day after PIV3 and 1 day prior to the inoculation of active NDV. 0-0 Inoculated with active NDV. O---O Inoculated with UVirradiated KDV and active NDV. A--A Inoculated with PIV3, UV-irradiated NDV, and active NDV. TABLE 2

EFFECT OF PIV-3 ON THE ANTIVIRAL ACTIOX OF FOOT-AXD-MOUTH DISEASE VIRUS (FMDV) INTERFERON Inoculateda Yield of NDV (HA units/ml)b 64 <4 64 <4

NDV Interferon + NDV PIV-3 + interferon PIV-3 + interferon

+ NDV

a Roller tube cultures were inoculated with PIV-3 at a multiplicity of about 10. FMDV interferon was added after 1 day of incubation at the cultures 37". After another day of incubation were challenged with lo4 TCDso of NDV. b The culture media were assayed for NDV hemagglutinin 4 days after challenge.

It was further investigated whether PIV-3 inhibits t.he antiviral effect of interferon produced in calf kidney cultures infect'ed with the subtype O2 of foot-andmouth disease virus (FMDV) . Roller tube cultures were infected with PIV-3 at a multiplicity of about 10. After 1 day of incubation the media of these cultures and uninfected controls were replaced by 1 ml of FMDV interferon prepared according to the method described by Dinter and Philipson (1962). This interferon had a titer of 1:4 when tested against lo4 TCDso of Sendai virus. After another day of incubation the cells were challenged with lo4 TCDEO of active NDV. Four days after challenge infection the media were assayed for NDV hemagglutinin. As shown in Table 2 no hemagglutinin was found in the cultures treated with interferon and challenged with NDV. On the other hand, 64 HA units per milliliter were produced in the cultures which prior to the inoculation of interferon and NDV were infected with PIV-3. An inhibition of the antiviral effect of FMDV interferon was also obtained when pseudorabies virus was used as a challenge virus. Association of the Anti-interferon PIV-3 with Its Infectivity Effect of

1 day of incubation these cultures and uninfected cultures were inoculated with 1 ml UV-irradiated NDV. After another day of incubation these cultures and untreated controls were challenged with lo5 TCD50 of active NDV. With this concentration of apvirus no obvious autointerference peared. Samples of the culture fluids, removed at different periods of incubation,

To investigate whether the inhibitory effect of PIV-3 on the autointerference of NDV is due to other factors than the infectious virus particles, experiments were performed in which the effect of untreated PIV-3 was compared with the effect of the same virus suspension after inactivation of infectivity by different methods or after

INHIBITION

OF INTER.FERON TABLE 3

341

removal of the virus particles by centrifugation. Virus was inact'ivated by addition of 25% bovine convalescent serum with a HI-titer of 1:512 against PIV-3, by incubation at 43" for 12 hours, or by UV irradiation. In order to remove virus by centrifugation, the stock suspension of PIV-3 was centrifuged three times at 80,000 g for 1 hour in a Spinco model L centrifuge. These four different suspensions and the untreated stock suspension were each mixed with an equal volume of NDV, and the mixtures were inoculated in serial twofold dilutions into roIler tube cultures. Controls inoculated with corresponding amounts of NDV in maintenance medium were included in the experiment. After incubation for 4 days at 37" the media were assayed for NDV hemagglutinin. Reduced yields of NDV hemagglutinin were obtained in the cultures inoculated with only NDV in dilutions 1: 2 to 1: 32 as well in the cultures inoculated with NDV and the treated PIV-3 suspensions (Table 3). Since the autointerference of NDV was inhibited by untreated PIV-3, this effect appears to be associated with the infectious virus particles of PIV-3.
DISCUSSION

EFFECT OF DIFFERENT PREPARATIONS OF PIV-3 ON THE AUTOINTERFERESCE OF NDV Yield of NDV (HA units/ml) 4 days after inoculation Inoculated Dilution 1:2 NDV 1:8 of NDV 1:32 1:128

8
64 8

8
64 8

16
64 16

64
64 64

1JDV + untreated PIV3
NDV + heat-inactivated PIV-3" NDV + UV-irradiated

8
8 8

8
8 8

8
8 16

64
64 64

PIV-3b XDV + serum-treated
PIV-Xc P\TDV + PIV-3d centrifuged

a Incubated 12 hours at 43". 6 According to Methods. "Added with 257, bovine convalescent serum with a HI titer of l/512 against PIV-3. d Supernatant after three cycles of centrifugation at 80,000 g for 1 hour.

In a mixed infection with NDV and PIV-3, the latter virus exerted an inhibitory effect on the autointerference of NDV and thereby enhanced the multiplication of NDV. A similar phenomenon has recently been described (Kumagai et al., 1961; Matumote et al., 1961). These authors found that iYDV multiplied faster in cultures infected with hog cholera virus than in normal cultures. Other cell-virus systems in which one virus favors the growth of another virus are not known, but presumably this type of interaction is not restricted to the viruses mentioned here. A prerequisite for one virus to stimulate the multiplication of another is probably that the former has a weak interfering activity. Strain 23 of PIV-3 used here had this property. Nor was it possible to demonstrate interferon in calf kidney cultures infected -with this strain although interferons

are produced by infect,ions with other viruses in the same cell system (Cooper and Bellett, 1959; Tyrrell, 1959; Dinter and Philipson, 1962). A clear interference between PIV-3 and heterologous viruses is known to occur, however, in other cells and with other strains of PIV-3. Henle et al. (1958) have shown that MCN and Lung-To cells infected with the strain 6-6 acquire resistance against certain cytopathogenic viruses. It has further been demonstrated (Chany, 1961) that KB cells infected with strain EA 102 produce an interferon-like inhibitor which is active against poliovirus. It is not known whether the stronger interfering activity of PIV-3 in the latter cellvirus systems is due to the cells or the virus strains employed. The PIV-3 used in this study was further characterized by a low cytopathogenicity in the sense that the reproduction of this virus in calf kidney cells was not accompanied by the destruction of more than 30% of the cells even after incubation for 12 days.

342

HERMODSSON

This property of PIV-3 facilitated the demonstration of the inhibitory effect of this virus on the aut,ointerference of NDV. The inhibitory effect of PIV-3 on the autointerference of NDV appeared to be associat,ed with the infectivity of PIV-3 since no effect was obtained when the virus particles were removed by cent,rifugation or were inactivated by antiviral serum, inThe cubation at 43", or UV irradiation. int,eraction between PIV-3 and NDV appeared to t,ake place intracellularly and to be closely associated with the synthesis of PIV-3. In cultures persistently infected with NDV the reproduction of this virus was first activated when the cultures of PIV-3. showed strong multiplication Also, when the medium of the persistently infected cultures were replaced by a highly infectious suspension of PIV-3, increased of NDV was not obt'ained multiplicat,ion until several days after superinfection with PIV-3 at the time when the cells were actively producing the latter virus. Evidence for that the cells were doubly infected with PIV-3 and NDV was obtained by the fhrorescent ant,ibody technique. The inhibition of the autointerference of NDV was probably established by the ability of PIV-3 to suppress the production and antiviral action of NDV interferon. PIV-3 also inhibited the antiviral action of interferon produced by an unrelated virus. There are some hypotheses and experimental results which may contribute toward an understanding of this phenomenon. Isaacs (1959) has suggested that the action of interferon is localized to a metabolic process that is common to most viruses. Since interferon has a weak effect on viral synthesis when t,his is actually in progress (Lockart et aZ., 1962), it seems not illogical that the antiviral act,ion of interferon on NDV or other viruses is inhibited in cells already infected with PIV-3. The production of interferon which normally appears in cultures infected with NDV could not be demonstrated in cultures exposed to a mixed infection with NDV and PIV-3. This ability of a virus to suppress the formation of interferon has also been observed in other cell-virus systems (Lin-

denmann, 1960; Isaacs, 1962). Lindenmann found that chorioallantoic membranes treated with inactivated influenza virus produced less interferon if t,he membranes prior to, simultaneously with, or immediately after treatment with inactivated virus were infected with active influenza virus. The converse phenomenon has also been reported (Isaacs, 1959), i.e., that active influenza virus stimulates an increased production of interferon after treatment with inactivated virus. These experiments led Isaacs (1959) to suggest, that there exists some form of competition between the synthesis of virus and that of interferon. In analogy with the experiment of Isaacs it was expected that cells infected with NDV and synthetizing interferon would produce more interferon by superinfection with PIV-3. This effect was not obtained. Less interferon was produced after inoculation of PIV-3 in cultures previously infected with NDV (unpublished dat,a). The multiplication of NDV was also increased in these cultures as described above. These results suggest that there exists an equilibrium between interferon and virus and that, depending upon the nature of the virus, this reaction is dislocated in favor either of viral synthesis or of protection of cells. Factors other than viruses which in vitro can inhibit the synthesis or action of interferon are oxygenation (Isaacs et al., 1961), cortisone (Kilbourne et al., 1961)) pH (de Maeyer and de Somer, 1962), and temperature (Isaacs, 1962). To what extent these factors also affect the progress of virus infections in viva is at present a matter of speculation. However, it is conceivable that PIV-3, which in adults is considered to be an innocuous virus, might. influence the progress of infections with other more virulent viruses.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT The author wishes to express his gratitude to Mrs. SynnSve Hermodsson for excellent technical assistance. REFEREXCES
CHANOCK, DREWS,

R. M.,

B. E.,

PARROT, BELL, J.

R. H., COOK, K., AXA., REICHELDERFER, T.,

INHIBITION
KAPIKIAN,

OF INTERFERON
ISAACS,

343

A. Z., MBSTROTA, F. M., and HUEBNER, R. J. (1958) Newly recognized myxoviruses from children with respiratory disease. New Engl. J. A!ied. 258,207-213. CIIASY, C. (1961). An interferon-like inhibitor of viral multiplication from malignant cells (the viral autoinhibition phenomenon). Virology 13, 485-492. COOPER, P. D., and BELLETT, A. J. D. (1959). il transmissible interfering component of vesicular stomatitis virus preparation. J. Gen. Microbial.

21,485-497.
E., and DE SOMER, P. (1962). Influence of pH on interferon production and activity. ATature 194, 1252-1253. DINTER, Z., and BAKOS, K. (1953). Ueber die Ausscheidung des Virus der Newcastle-Krankheit nach der Testinfektion immuner Hiihner. Arch. Exptl. Veterinaermed. 7,514-519. DINTER, Z., and PHILIPSON, L. (1962). An interferon produced by foot and mouth disease virus (F'MDV) in calf kidney cells. Proc. Sot. Exptl. BioLMed. 109,893~897. DISTER, Z., HERMODSSON, S., and BAKOS, K. (1960). Studies on variants of a bovine strain of parainfluenza 3 virus. I. Isolation and growth characteristics. Acta Pathol. Microbial. Stand. 49, 485-492. HENLE, G., DEINHARDT, F., BERGS, V. V., and HEXLE, W. (1958). Studies on persistent infections of tissue cultures. I. General aspects of the system. J. Exptl. Med. 108, 537-560. HERMODSSOX, S. (1963). Role of interferon in the of Newcastle disease virus autointerference (NDV). Submitted for publication in Acta Pathol. Microbial. Stand. ISAACS, A. (1959). Viral interference. In "Virus Growth and Variation" (A. Isaacs and B. W. Lacey, eds.), pp. 102-121. Cambridge Univ. Press, London and New York.
DE MAEYER,

A. (1962). Bntiviral action of interferon. Brit. Med. J. 353-355. ISAACS, A., PORTERFIELD, J. S., and B.~Ros, S. (1961). The influence of oxygenation on virus growth. II. Effect on the antiviral action of interferon. Virology 14,450-455. KILBOURNE, E. D., &ART, 15. M., and POKORXY, B. A. (1961). Inhibition by cortisone of the synthesis and action of interferon. Nature 190, 650-651. KU~UGAI, T., SHIMIZU, T., IKEDA, S., and MATUMOTO, M. (1961). A new in vilro method (END) for detection and measurement of hog cholera virus and its antibody by means of effect, of HC virus on Newcastle disease virus in swine tissue culture. I. Establishment of standard procedure. J. Immunol. 87,245-256. LINDENNANN, J. (1960). Interferon und inverse Interferenz. 2. Hyg. Infektionskrankh. 146, 287-

309.
LOCKART,

R. Z., JR., SREEVALSART, T., and HORN, B. (1962). Inhibition of viral RNA synthesis by interferon. ViTology 18, 493-494. MATUMOTO, M., KUXGAI, T., SHINIZU, T., and IKEDA, S. (1961). A new in vitro method (END) for detection and measurement of hog cholera virus and its antibody by means of effect of HC virus on Newcastle disease virus in swine tissue culture. II. Some characteristics of END method. 1. Immunol. 87, 257-268. TYRRELL, D. A. J. (1959). Interferon produced by cultures of calf kidney cells. Nature 184, 452
453. WAGSER,

R. R. (1960). Viral interference. Some considerations of basic mechanisms and their potential relationship to host resistance. Bacteriol. Rev. 24, 151-166. WELLER, T. H., and COONS, A. H. (1954). Fluorescent. antibody studies with agents of varicella and herpes zostcr propagated in vitro. Proc. Sot. Expel. Biol. Med. 86, 789-794.

