8304 Abstracts

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL JANUARY 2002

B~A 32 ents for Detectable GlutenofContent: Implications for Ingredi- 9 ~,m~l' The Recombinant Major Birch Pollen Allergen Bet v 1 Induces Immnnochemical Analysis Various Foods and Food Mediator Release in Human Intestinal Mast Cells WheatAllergic and Celiac Sprue Patients
Ashley L Lardizabal, Lynn M Niemann, Sue L Hefle University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE Unidentified wheat presence in the food supply presents a serious health risk to both wheat-allergic and celiac sprue patients. The Codex Alimentarius had previously set a level of less than 200 ppm for a food to be considered "gluten-free". Codex is considering changing this level to 20 ppm in the belief that this will better serve the celiac sprue patient. A commercially available wheat gluten detection kit that has a lower limit of detection of 10 parts per million wheat gluten [5 ppm gliadin] was used to test a variety of foods and ingredients for detectable gluten content. The test also exhibits some cross-reactivity to both barley and rye glutens. There is no commercial test available for total wheat protein, so this test is the only measure of a food's lack of wheat content. Foods tested included a variety of non-wheat foods at high risk for cross-contamination from the farm through food processing, foods labeled "wheat free" or "gluten free", and foods and food ingredients commonly avoided by celiac and wheat-allergic patients that originate from wheat or related cereals, but with questionable gluten content. Samples tested included at least two different lot numbers of each product. Results of this study indicate that some food products with questionable wheat content, such as alcoholic beverages, alcoholic carriers, alcohol-based flavorings, most types of vinegar, and most soy sauces, registered below 10 ppm in the assay. While seed oats did not show the presence of wheat gluten, oat-based cereal products had detectable wheat gluten content, probably due to contamination by wheat during commodity handling. Some food products labeled as wheat or gluten "free" exhibited detectable levels of gluten ranging from 22 to 71 parts per million. Based on the results of this study, the dietary choices for celiac sprue patients should not be as restricted as formerly assumed, and ingredients such as many vinegars and alcohol-based flavorings can likely be ingested without problem. However, wheat-allergic and celiac sprue patients must exercise care in choosing "gluten-free or wheat-free" -labeled foods, as some can contain appreciable amounts of wheat.

Gernot Sellge*, C Mierke*, S Laffer§, A Lorentz*, MP Manns*, R Valenta§, SC Bischof['* *Medical School of Hannover, Hannover, Germany

§University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria Bet v 1, the major birch pollen allergen, has been cloned and shows homologies to various food allergens (e.g. tomato, hazelnut, apple). Here we show that human mast cells can be activated for mediator release by recombinant Bet v 1 after passive sensitisation with recombinant IgE against Bet v 1 and serum from patients with food and birch pollen allergy confirmed by RAST and provocation test. Mast cells were isolated from human intestinal tissue and purified up to 100% via magnetic cell sorting (MACS TM) and subsequent culture. Then, they were incubated with chimeric (human Fc and mouse Fab) monoclonal IgE Ab Bip 1 against Bet v 1 or patients serum and were subsequently challenged with monomeric, dimeric, or trimeric Bet v 1. Next, in a third step super-crosslinking was performed with polyclonal rabbit anti-Bet v 1 Ab. Binding of Bipl and Bet v 1 was confirmed by FACS analysis. Mast cells released histamine and leukotriene C 4 upon Bipl (monoclonal anti-Bet v 1) crosslinking with dimeric and, less pronounced, trimeric Bet v 1. Monomeric Bet v 1 failed to induce mediator release. Interestingly, super-crosslinking of monomeric Bet v 1 bound to intestinal mast cells via chimeric Bipl induced significant histamine release. After incubation with serum from patients with birch pollen, tomato and/or hazelnut allergy supposed to contain polyclonal antiBet v 1 mast cells secreted histamine upon challenge with monomeric and dimeric Bet v l. In contrast, we did not detect any histamine release after incubation of mast cells with serum from control patients. The data show that human mast cells bind antigen-specific IgE and can be activated for mediator release by subsequent crosslinking with appropriate recombinant antigens. This assay offers new probabilities for the in vitro study of anaphylaxis in response to natural and genetically modified allergens.

Bet v 19 ~JP~WBinding to Recombinant (r) Pathogenesis-Related (PR)for SoyHomologue Soybean Protein rSAM22: Explanation

#~

Histamine Release From Human Basophils In Vitro and IgE-

933 Anaphylaxis to Wheat Beer (WB)
Thomas Herzinger*, G Kick*, D Ludolph-Hauser§, Bernhard Przybilla§
*Clinic und Poliklinik fiir Dermatologie und Allergologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit~it, Munich, Germany §Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany Despite its worldwide consumption, beer has rarely been reported to elicit allergic reactions. We report a 59 year-old male patient who had suffered from angioedema and generalized urticaria 3 h after drinking 1.5 1 of WB and eating a pretzel. One month later, he had developed generalized pruritus, urticaria, and ultimately unconsciousness during a game of golf, 30 min after having drunk 1 1 of WB. Other alcoholic beverages, like wine or lager beers, were well tolerated. There was an immediate type skin prick test reaction to a commercial wheat flour extract, but not to a series of other commercial allergens. When using native material for skin prick testing, there were 3+ reactions to one brand of WB, 2+ reactions to wheat malt and another brand of WB, and a 1+ reaction to barley malt, which were all not observed in control subjects. There were specific IgE antibodies in the serum to wheat, barley and rye flour, to barley malt and to chicken meat. An oral challenge test with incremental doses of WB caused wheals occurring on the face after the ingestion of a cumulative dose of 1.6 1. Oral challenge with wheat flour also produced wheals on the face after the ingestion of a cumulative dose of 120 g. There have been sporadic reports of allergy to barley malt contained in lager beers. WB is brewed by using both barley and wheat malt, and our patient exhibited clinical reactions exclusively to wheat. This case is the first of a beer allergy specifically attributable to a sensitization to wheat.

Induced Anaphylactic Reactions and Severe Oral Allergy Syndrome (OAS) in Birch Pollen-Allergic Subjects
Jrrg Kleine-Tebbe*, Anna Martin§, Andrea Wangorsch~ Dring N CrowellC, Uwe-Frithjof Haustein§, Stefan Vieths¥ *Department of Dermatology, Universit~it Leipzig, Berlin, Germany §Department of Dermatology, Universit~it Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany ~/Paul-Ehrlich-Institute, Langen, Germany ~Department of Biology, Indiana University - Purdue University, Indianapolis, IN Birch pollen-allergic subjects (BPAS) can develop severe OAS and systemic anaphylactic reactions by soy-containing food items (J Kleine-Tebbe et al, J Allergy Clin Immunol 2000; 105(1,p2):S132). A PR protein in soy (SAM22, Accession Nr. P26987, DN Crowell et al., Plant Mol Biol 1992;18:459) revealing 53% amino acid sequence identity to Bet v 1 appears to be the link between birch pollen sensitization and soy-related anaphylaxis, rSAM22 was produced in a procaryotic expression system (vector: pET-16b, E. coil cell: BL21-DE3, Novagen, Merck Eurolab, Germany). The His-tagged fusion protein was purified by chromato focussing, purity-checked by SDS-PAGE and coupled to paper disks for EAST. Allergen-specific IgE to rSAM22 was markedly increased in sera from BPAS compared to commercially available solid phase bound soy-proteins (CAP, Pharmacia Diagnostics, Germany). Binding of IgE to rSAM22 and a soy protein isolate was inhibited almost completely by rBet v 1 (J Kleine-Tebbe et al, Allergy 2001; 56 (Suppl 68):96). Preliminary results with basophils from various BPAS demonstrate crosslinking of cell bound IgE and substantial dose dependent histamine release (>30% of the total cellular histamine) not only by extremely small concentrations of rBet v 1 (< fg to pg/ml) but also by rSAM22 (fg to pg/ml). Interestingly, mediator release to rSAM22 occurred not only in BPAS with clinical reactions to soy products,

