doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2003.09.022

J. Mol. Biol. (2003) 333, 965­975

The Occupancy of Ions in the K1 Selectivity Filter: Charge Balance and Coupling of Ion Binding to a Protein Conformational Change Underlie High Conduction Rates
Yufeng Zhou and Roderick MacKinnon*
Molecular Neurobiology and Biophysics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA Potassium ions diffuse across the cell membrane in a single file through the narrow selectivity filter of potassium channels. The crystal structure of the KcsA Kþ channel revealed the chemical structure of the selectivity filter, which contains four binding sites for Kþ. In this study, we used Tlþ in place of Kþ to address the question of how many ions bind within the filter at a given time, i.e. what is the absolute ion occupancy? By refining ° the Tlþ structure against data to 1.9 A resolution with an anomalous signal, we determined the absolute occupancy of Tlþ. Then, by comparing the electron density of Tlþ with that of Kþ, Rbþ and Csþ, we estimated the absolute occupancy of these three ions. We further analyzed how the ion occupancy affects the conformation of the selectivity filter by analyzing the structure of KcsA at different concentrations of Tlþ. Our results indicate that the average occupancy for each site in the selectivity filter is about 0.63 for Tlþ and 0.53 for Kþ. For Kþ, Rbþ and Csþ, the total number of ions contained within four sites in the selectivity filter is about two. At low concentrations of permeant ion, the number of ions drops to one in association with a conformational change in the selectivity filter. We conclude that electrostatic balance and coupling of ion binding to a protein conformational change underlie high conduction rates in the setting of high selectivity.
q 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. *Corresponding author

Keywords: potassium channel; KcsA; permeation; selectivity filter; ion occupancy

Introduction
All Kþ channels exhibit a set of characteristic ion conduction properties, of which, the presence of multiple potassium ions within the pore appears ° to be universal.1 ­ 5 The 2.0 A resolution structure þ of the KcsA K channel, solved in the presence of 200 mM Kþ, revealed multiple ion-binding sites in its permeation pathway:6 two near the extracellular entryway where potassium ions reside just outside the filter, one halfway across the membrane in a water-filled cavity just internal to the filter, and ° four in the narrow 12 A long selectivity filter where permeating ions bind in an essentially
Abbreviation used: SAD, single wavelength anomalous difference. E-mail address of the corresponding author: mackinn@rockefeller.edu

dehydrated state (Figure 1A). The selectivity filter, which is formed by the highly conserved Kþ channel signature sequence TVGYG, is the crucial structural element that facilitates the diffusion of potassium ions at rates approaching 108 ions per second under physiological electrochemical gradients.5 In the selectivity filter, potassium ions are distributed nearly evenly over the four binding sites, which we refer to as positions 1 ­ 4, numbered from extracellular to intracellular (Figure 1B). Each ion-binding site is surrounded by eight oxygen atoms contributed by the backbone carbonyl groups of the TVGY sequence and the side-chain of the threonine residue. The crystal structure of the KcsA Kþ channel shows clearly that the selectivity filter contains multiple discrete Kþ-binding sites. However, the structure reveals only where potassium ions bind, it does not reveal how many ions bind at once.

0022-2836/$ - see front matter q 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

966

The Occupancy of Ions in the Kþ Selectivity Filter

Figure 1. A, Ion-binding sites in the permeation pathway of KcsA. The gray lines indicate the external and internal membrane surfaces. Two diagonally opposed subunits of the tetrameric channel are shown as a yellow trace. The selectivity filter, corresponding to residue T75 through G79, is colored in red. Kþ-binding sites along the permeation pathway are shown as green spheres, and water molecules surrounding the sites are shown as red spheres. The Fo 2 Fc omit map (contoured at 3s) validating the Kþ sites and the water molecules is shown as a blue mesh. B, The selectivity filter region (two subunits) of the structure shown in A. The selectivity filter signature sequence and the surrounding amino acid residues (from E71 to D80) are shown in ball-and-stick representation. The four Kþ-binding sites in the filter are represented as green spheres and numbered 1 through 4, from extracellular to intracellular. The 2Fo 2 Fc electron density map validating the structure is colored in blue. C, Structure of the selectivity filter region in the presence of Tlþ. The structure, solved in 160 mM Tlþ, is represented in the same way as in B, except the Tlþ binding sites are colored in pink. D, Positions of the Tlþ and Kþ-binding sites in the selectivity filter. The one-dimensional electron density (r) of Tlþ and Kþ was obtained by sampling the difference Fourier omit maps along the central axis of the filter (as described in Methods). The level of the residue G79 a-carbon atom was set as zero on the x-axis. The four ion-binding sites are numbered in the same way as in B and C. Figures 1A ­ C, 3 and 5 were made with Bobscript25,26 and Raster3D.27

The observed electron density is actually an average image of all accessible ion-binding states represented within the crystal. To understand the atomic details of the conduction mechanism we need to know how many ions reside in the filter; that is, what is the absolute occupancy. There are two reasons why it is difficult to determine the absolute occupancy of the ion-binding sites. First, binding sites not occupied by Kþ are likely to be occupied by water molecules,7 and the electron density difference between a potassium ion (18 electrons) and a water molecule (ten electrons) is not great enough to distinguish easily their relative contributions to the diffraction pattern. Second, the

Debye­ Waller temperature factor (B-factor) and occupancy of an atom are correlated, making it difficult to quantify the occupancy. In a previous study, we inferred the ion occupancy by comparing the electron densities of Kþ and Rbþ (Rbþ, like Kþ, permeates potassium channels) within the selectivity filter at various concentrations of each ion.8 Because the magnitude of electron density at the binding sites varies with ion concentration as well as the permeating ion species, comparison of Kþ and Rbþ provided indirect information about ion occupancy. The results suggested that when the concentration of Kþ in solution is higher than about 20 mM there are two ions in the selectivity

The Occupancy of Ions in the Kþ Selectivity Filter

967

filter at a given time, and that the two ions move in a concerted fashion between two configurations: a Kþ ­ water ­ Kþ ­ water configuration in which ions bind at positions 1 and 3, and a water ­Kþ ­ water ­ Kþ configuration in which ions bind at positions 2 and 4. When the Kþ concentration in solution is much less than 20 mM, ion occupancy in the filter decreases, and the filter switches to a different conformation.6 The comparative study of Kþ and Rbþ,8 although very informative, did not enable the direct determination of absolute ion occupancy. Even with the heavier rubidium ion (36 electrons), the diffraction data did not permit us to separate the B-factor from the occupancy during refinement. Besides Kþ and Rbþ, three other ions are known to permeate potassium channels: Tlþ, NHþ and Csþ.9 ­ 11 To 4 obtain the absolute occupancy of ions, the best option is to crystallize KcsA in Tlþ instead of Kþ, and measure the occupancy of the thallium ions. Tlþ is an excellent substitute for Kþ because it permeates potassium channels, and because its ° ° radius (1.4 A) is more similar to that of Kþ (1.33 A) than is the radius of other known permeating ions. For crystallographic purposes, Tlþ offers distinct advantages: its 80 electrons provide a strong diffraction signal and at certain X-ray wavelengths it produces an anomalous signal, which provides additional information about Tlþ in the crystal. These features of Tlþ allow us to determine the absolute occupancy of ions in the selectivity filter more accurately. The primary goal of this study is to determine how many ions bind in the selectivity filter at once. We achieved this goal in four steps. First, we solved the structure of KcsA in Tlþ and compared it with the structure in Kþ to confirm that the two complexes have similar structures. Second, we applied two different approaches to determine the absolute Tlþ occupancy. Third, we used the Tlþ occupancy as a standard to estimate the occupancy of potassium ions as well as Rbþ and Csþ. Fourth, we determined the Tlþ occupancy at different concentrations of Tlþ and observed how the filter structure changes as a function of the number of ions present in the filter. Our findings lead us to two important conclusions: first, that two potassium ions reside in the conductive conformation of the selectivity filter, probably as a result of electrostatic balance between potassium ions and the protein, and second, that the two-ion (conductive) state is achieved through a protein conformational change of the filter upon binding of the second potassium ion. These conclusions form the basis of understanding high conduction rates in the setting of high selectivity in Kþ channels.

KcsA was co-crystallized with an antibody Fab fragment. The Fab fragment provides in the crystal well-ordered protein ­protein contacts necessary for high-quality X-ray diffraction. The Fab binds to the turret of the channel at the extracellular side, but leaves the channel structure and its ion permeation pathway unperturbed.6 Although the KcsA structures in this study are structures of KcsA ­ Fab complexes, we focus only on the channel region, and for simplicity refer to these as structures of KcsA. We determined a structure in 160 mM Tlþ at ° 1.9 A resolution (80 mM Naþ was present in the crystallization condition to maintain ionic strength). The model was refined to free and crystallographic residuals of 22.8% and 20.8%, respectively, and contains 534 amino acid residues, 360 water molecules, two partial lipid molecules and five thallium ions (four in the selectivity filter and one in the cavity; the Tlþ at the extracellular entryway to the filter was excluded because its occupancy is low). This structure is nearly identical with the structure of KcsA in 200 mM Kþ (Figure 1A), with a root mean square deviation ° ° (rmsd) of 0.43 A for the entire channel and 0.12 A for the selectivity filter region, from residue E71 to D80 (Figure 1B and C). We compared the ion distribution of Tlþ and Kþ in the selectivity filter. As shown in the one-dimensional maps of electron density sampled along the axis of the filter (Figure 1D), Tlþ and Kþ bind at essentially identical positions, and both are distributed nearly evenly over four positions, sites 1 ­4. The filter conformation and distribution of Kþ (Figure 1B) and Tlþ (Figure 1C) corresponds to the high-Kþ structure, described in an earlier study.6 Therefore, we refer to the structure shown in Figure 1C as the highTlþ structure in the following discussion. Tl1 occupancy The near identity of the structures in Tlþ and Kþ and the same ion distribution profiles indicate that Tlþ is a good Kþ analog for estimating ion occupancy in the selectivity filter. We applied two different approaches to quantify the Tlþ occupancy, both employing the same data set that provided the high-Tlþ structure discussed ° above (Figure 1C). The data were strong to 1.9 A resolution, complete (Table 1), and contained an anomalous signal from the thallium ions. The anomalous signal, explained in more detail below, plays a role in both of our approaches for estimating ion occupancy. Also, in both approaches, the effect of B-factors, which in theory account for the thermal motion of atoms, must be considered very carefully, because B-factors and atom occupancies are always correlated. In our first approach we calculated a set of structure factors (Fc) based on the high-Tlþ structure, and compared these with the experimental data (Fo). The refinement procedure adjusts the ion occupancies in the structure to minimize the

Results
Structure of KcsA in Tl1 In order to obtain high-resolution structures,

968

The Occupancy of Ions in the Kþ Selectivity Filter

Table 1. Crystallographic data statistics
Salt concentration TlNO3 (mM) 3 25 65 80 100 160 240 RbCl (mM) 200 CsCl (mM) 200
a b

NaNO3 (mM) 237 215 175 160 140 80 0

° Resolution (A) 2.9 2.8 2.3 2.9 2.4 1.9 2.8 2.4

Rsyma 0.095 0.136 0.083 0.103 0.093 0.069 0.107 0.074

Completeness (%) 92.9 99.8 100 96.6 99.8 97.1 96.3 99.1

Refinement statistics Rfree/Rwork (%)b 24.3/21.2 27.3/23.8 29.2/27.1 30.6/26.1 24.9/21.8 22.8/20.8 28.1/23.1 23.8/21.8

2.4 0.071 98.8 24.9/21.9 P Rsym P lIi 2 kIiP Ii ; where kIi l is the average intensity of symmetry-equivalent reflections. ¼ ll= R ¼ lFo 2 Fc l= Fo ; 5% or 10% of the data that were excluded in refinement were used in the Rfree calculation. P

residual between Fc and Fo. Since atoms interacting with each other are expected to have similar B-factors, we made the assumption that the B-factors of the thallium ions (BTlþ ) in the selectivity filter should be very close to the B-factors of the immediately surrounding atoms (which includes all backbone atoms of the selectivity filter TVGY sequence and the side-chain atoms of the Thr residue). In the first half-cycle of refinement we obtained B-factors for each of the surrounding atoms by initially setting the occupancy of all Tlþ sites in the model either to 1.0 or 0.5, before carrying out individual B-factor refinement on all atoms in the model. Next we calculated the average B-factor value of the atoms surrounding the Tlþ sites. In the second half-cycle, the BTlþ were set at this averaged value; then individual occupancy refinement was carried out for each Tlþ site. Several cycles of alternating B-factor and occupancy refinement were carried out using both experimental amplitudes and anomalous differences (see Methods). One additional adjustment should be considered: if a site is not occupied by an ion, it is likely to be occupied by a water molecule. Since this refinement approach does not distinguish the relative contribution of an ion and a water molecule to the X-ray diffraction, the occupancy obtained should be the apparent ion occupancy (uion,app). It is related to the true ion occupancy (uion) according to the equation: uion;app ¼ ½uion Nion þ ð1 2 uion ÞNwater =Nion ð1Þ where Nion and Nwater are the number of electrons in the ion (NTlþ ¼ 80) and water (Nwater ¼ 10), respectively. The results of the refinement showed that after three cycles, the average apparent occupancy of Tlþ (uTl ,app) for the four ion-binding sites in the filter converged to about 0.8 per site (Figure 2A), corresponding to 0.75 for uTl and 0.25 for water (1 2 uTl ), yielding an average of three thallium ions and one water molecule in the filter at a given time. The average B-factors of the thallium ions and of the atoms surrounding the Tlþ
þ þ þ

° sites remained about 24 A2 through each cycle of refinement. The above refinement method carries an unknown systematic error that depends on the

Figure 2. Refinement of Tlþ occupancy in the selectivity filter using the first approach (A) and the second approach (B) as described in Results. The data represent the average occupancy of the four Tlþ sites in the filter obtained from each cycle of the refinement. For each approach, the refinement was carried out twice with the initial occupancy value set at either 1 (open square) or 0.5 (filled diamond).

The Occupancy of Ions in the Kþ Selectivity Filter

969 Occupancy of K1, Rb1 and Cs1 in the selectivity filter The above refinement procedures require highresolution data, electron-dense ions, and strong anomalous scattering. Our data for KcsA crystallized in permeant ions other than Tlþ could not meet this standard. Therefore, we used the Tlþ occupancy as a reference to estimate the occupancy of Kþ as well as Rbþ and Csþ. That is, we compare the electron density peaks of Kþ, Rbþ and Csþ to that of Tlþ, and use the known Tlþ occupancy to estimate the occupancy of the other ions. We used the structure of KcsA in 200 mM Kþ determined previously (Figure 1B),6 and the structure in 160 mM Tlþ as described above (Figure 1C). We determined the structures of

accuracy of the structure model. Since the refinement compares an experimental structure factor set against a theoretical structure factor set derived from a model, the error of every atom in the model (over 4000) will contribute to the error in occupancies calculated for the binding sites. Therefore, the conclusion requires verification by an alternative procedure. For this purpose, we carried out single wavelength anomalous difference (SAD) refinement.12,13 Anomalous scattering occurs when the photon energy of an X-ray beam causes changes in the quantum state of the electrons within an atom, such as Tlþ at a wavelength of ° 0.95 A. As a consequence, the measured structure factors will have a special property: pairs of structure factors (called Friedel pairs Fh,k,l and F2h, 2 k, 2 l) whose amplitude are normally equal become unequal. The difference in amplitude, called the anomalous difference, arises only from the thallium ions and not the water or protein atoms. The fundamental advantage to this second approach is that the anomalous difference depends only on 25 parameters to be refined; the location ðx; y; zÞ; B-factor and occupancy of the five Tlþ positions; four in the filter and one in the cavity. The refined model of the protein structure made one important contribution to the SAD refinement by providing a scale factor to place the entire data set on an absolute scale through comparison of Fc and Fo (see Methods). Use of the model for this purpose is not very sensitive to small errors in the model and, as one should expect, the scale factor derived using the model was within 10% of that obtained through Wilson statistical analysis using the TRUNCATE function in CCP4.14 On the basis of our first refinement procedure (above), we set ° the initial B-factors at 24 A2 and the initial occupancies to be either 1.0 or 0.5. Cycles of SAD refinement were carried out using a protocol similar to that described in our first approach to occupancy refinement. Using all data within the ° resolution range 20­ 2.0 A, the average occupancy for the four Tlþ sites in the selectivity filter was 0.63 after two cycles of refinement (Figure 2(B)), corresponding to an average of 2.5 thallium ions in the filter at any given time. Since water molecules do not generate an anomalous signal, this result required no further correction. This refinement approach includes an unknown error, because the anomalous difference between two structure factors is small, typically only a small percentage of the structure factors. The accuracy of the refinement depends on the accuracy of the data measurement. Two different methods for estimating Tlþ occupancy in the selectivity filter of KcsA yielded an average Tlþ occupancy of 0.75 for each site (three ions total in the filter) or 0.63 for each site (2.5 ions total in the filter): the two results are not very different. Since the second method depends on fewer parameters, we think it is more accurate. In the following analysis we assume an occupancy of 0.63 for Tlþ at each position in the filter.

Figure 3. Structure of the selectivity filter region in the presence of Rbþ (A) or Csþ (B). Both structures were solved in the presence of the corresponding ion at a concentration of 200 mM. The selectivity filter region of the structures are shown in the same way as in Figure 1B and C, except the Rbþ binding sites are represented as red spheres and the Csþ-binding sites are represented as gold spheres.

970 ° KcsA in 200 mM Rbþ and 200 mM Csþ at 2.4 A resolution (Table 1). The protein structures in Rbþ and Csþ are very similar to the high-Kþ or the high-Tlþ structures (the rmsd between the struc° ture in Rbþ and in high-Kþ is 0.30 A for the entire ° channel and 0.23 A for the selectivity filter region, and the rmsd between the structure in Csþ and in ° ° high-Kþ is 0.33 A for the entire channel and 0.37 A for the selectivity filter region), except there are only three major occupied ion positions in the selectivity filter instead of four (Figure 3). We placed each data set on a common scale and calculated one-dimensional electron density maps sampled along the axis of the filter (Figure 4A). The maps were calculated using coefficients (Fo 2 Fc), where Fc is the inverse-Fourier transform of a refined model in which the selectivity filter ions and protein atoms have been omitted, and phases from a model refined in the absence of selectivity filter ions (with the filter harmonically restrained). The area of each peak in Figure 4A, which under certain assumptions (see Methods) is proportional to the apparent ion occupancy (uion,app), was integrated and converted to ion occupancy assuming that each Tlþ peak represents 0.63 Tlþ, and that a water molecule is present at a site when an ion is not (equation (1)). The results (Figure 4B) suggest that the Kþ occupancy in the selectivity filter is about 0.53 per site (average over four sites), in agreement with our previous conclusion that there are two potassium ions in the filter at a given time.8 The total ion occupancy for Rbþ and Csþ is also about two, even though these larger ions distribute differently in the filter than Kþ and Tlþ. This finding implies that the total positive charge in the selectivity filter is conserved near two. Considering that the selectivity filter contains many oxygen atoms, all pointing a partial negative charge towards the narrow ion pathway, we suggest that two permeating ions serve as "counter-charges", which are required to maintain the structural stability of the filter. Structure of the selectivity filter at low concentrations of ion Without the counter-charges provided by permeating ions, the selectivity filter changes its conformation. At 3 mM Kþ (and additional 200 mM Naþ to maintain ionic strength) it was shown in a previous study that the backbone carbonyl group of Val76 rotates away from the center of the pore, that the Ca of Gly77 faces towards the pore, and that ions are absent at positions 2 and 3 (Figure 5A). We refer to this structure as the low-Kþ structure. The difference between the high-Kþ and low-Kþ structure is significant at the selectivity filter region, whereas the remainder of the channel is essentially unchanged.6 In 25 mM Tlþ (and additional 215 mM Naþ to maintain ionic strength) the filter adopts the lowTlþ structure, which is nearly identical with that observed in 3 mM Kþ (Figure 5B): comparing the

The Occupancy of Ions in the Kþ Selectivity Filter

Figure 4. Kþ, Rbþ and Csþ occupancy in the selectivity filter. A, The relative electron density (r) of Kþ, Rbþ, Csþ and Tlþ. The one-dimensional electron density of Rbþ and Csþ was obtained and plotted in the same way as in Figure 1D. The electron density of Kþ and Tlþ are shown for comparison. B, Occupancy of Rbþ, Csþ and Tlþ at each position was deduced from the areas of the peaks in A, using average Tlþ occupancy of 0.63 at each site as the absolute scale. The occupancy of Kþ at each position was deduced using the same method except the one-dimensional electron density was calculated ° using higher-resolution data (up to 2.0 A instead of ° resolution). 2.4 A

low-Tlþ and low-Kþ structure, we find that the ° ° rmsd is 0.49 A for the entire channel and 0.46 A þ for the selectivity filter region. Since Tl is more electron-dense than Kþ, we used structures with Tlþ to study the relationship between ion occupancy and filter conformation. We analyzed seven structures in concentrations of Tlþ ranging from 3 mM to 240 mM; in each case, the ionic strength was kept constant by the addition of Naþ (Table 1). One-dimensional electron density maps for five of the structures are shown in Figure 6A. The high-Tlþ structure, similar to the high-Kþ structure, was observed at concentrations higher than 100 mM Tlþ, and the low-Tlþ structure was observed at concentrations lower than 65 mM Tlþ. At 80 mM Tlþ the electron density of the channel is poorly defined for the selectivity filter atoms but well defined for the remainder of the channel (not shown). The apparently disordered selectivity filter at 80 mM Tlþ probably represents an average of low and high concentration structures within

The Occupancy of Ions in the Kþ Selectivity Filter

971

Figure 5. The selectivity filter conformation in A 3 mM Kþ or B 25 mM Tlþ. Both structures are presented the same way as in Figure 1B and C.

the crystal; that is, a point of transition from one structure to the other. We could not refine accurately the ion occupancy in the low-Tlþ structures because the resolution of the data was not sufficiently high and because the anomalous differences were too small. Therefore, we estimated the occupancy using the same approach used for Kþ, Rbþ and Csþ. Data sets were placed on a common scale, maps calculated, and peak areas were integrated and the corresponding occupancy of each site was computed (Figure 6B). The total number of ions in the selectivity filter was obtained by summing the occupancies of all four positions in the filter. As shown in Figure 6C, the total number of ions in the filter is always greater than two for the highTlþ conformation and less than one for the low-Tlþ conformation. A sharp transition from one to two ions accompanies the transition from the low to the high Tlþ conformation of the filter. Given the near identity of the KcsA structures in Kþ and Tlþ in both the low- and high-ion conformations, we

Figure 6. Correlation between the ion occupancy in the filter and the conformation of the filter. Seven structures of KcsA were solved in various concentrations of Tlþ. The selectivity filters in three of them adopted the highTlþ conformation shown in Figure 1C and another three adopted the low-Tlþ conformation shown in Figure 5B. In one structure, solved in 80 mM Tlþ, the electron density of the filter was disordered. In each of the following panels, the filter conformation of the corresponding structure was indicated. A, One-dimensional electron density (r) profiles of five structures obtained and plotted in the same way as Figure 1D. B, Change of Tlþ occupancy at every position with respect to the solution concentration of Tlþ. The occupancies were deduced using the same approach as that used in Figure 4. C, Change of total number of ions in the filter with respect to concentration of Tlþ. The total number of ions in the selectivity filter (y-axis) was obtained by summation of the occupancies at all four positions (as shown in B).

972

The Occupancy of Ions in the Kþ Selectivity Filter

conclude that the correlation between ion occupancy and filter conformation is the same when the channel is in Kþ.

Discussion
Ion occupancy in the K1 selectivity filter In this study we measured the absolute occupancy of ions in the selectivity filter of a Kþ channel. Occupancy was studied by X-ray crystallography using Tlþ, an electron-dense Kþ analog that produces an anomalous diffraction signal. We conclude that an average of 2.5 thallium ions are present in the selectivity filter at a given time, and that the ions are distributed fairly evenly over four equally spaced ion-binding sites. Using Tlþ as an electron density standard, we estimate that an average of about 2.0 ions, Kþ, Rbþ or Csþ, reside in the filter at once. Like Tlþ, Kþ is distributed evenly over the four sites. On the basis of previous work, the even distribution, or nearly equal occupancy at all four sites, has been attributed to a nearly balanced mixture of two configurations: Kþ ­water ­ Kþ ­ water (1 ­3 configuration) and water ­ Kþ ­ water ­ Kþ (2 ­ 4 configuration) in sites 1 to 4 within the crystal.8 The estimate for Kþ occupancy of about 0.5 at each site made in this study is in good agreement with the proposed conduction mechanism. The Tlþ occupancy from high-resolution diffraction data containing an anomalous signal is direct, whereas the Kþ occupancy determination is more indirect, based on electron density integration and Tlþ as a standard. It is interesting, however, that this indirect approach yielded essentially the same total occupancy, around 2.0, for Kþ, Rbþ, and Csþ. The consistency in total occupancy for the alkali metal cations argues that the indirect approach is probably fairly accurate. We do not know whether the slightly higher occupancy estimated for Tlþ (2.5 ions versus 2.0 for the alkali metals) is significant. It is possible that the higher electronic polarizability of Tlþ compared to the alkali metals could account for a slightly stronger binding energy and higher overall occupancy.15 If this is the case, then Tlþ would sometime occupy adjacent positions within the selectivity filter. However, the difference between 2.5 for Tlþ and 2.0 for the alkali metal cations is small and may not be significant. The most important conclusion from the occupancy measurements is that they demonstrate unequivocally that multiple potassium ions, on average about two, reside simultaneously in the short selectivity filter of Kþ channels. Effect of ionic radius on binding in the filter Kþ, Tlþ, Rbþ and Csþ form a series of permeant ° ° ° cations with radius 1.33 A, 1.40 A, 1.48 A, and ° , respectively. In contrast to Kþ and Tlþ, Rbþ 1.69 A and Csþ reside predominantly at only three

positions in the filter; their larger ionic radius clearly affects their distribution even though the protein structure of the filter is very similar for all four ions (Figures 1 and 3). In trying to understand the anomalous distribution of the larger ions (compared to Kþ or Tlþ) we have to consider that ions and water molecules are not expected to bind independently to sites within the filter. It is more realistic to think of the filter as a "binding site" for a queue of ions and water (i.e. the "substrate" is a queue of two ions and two water molecules, most often in an alternating arrangement). With such a picture in mind, we speculate that the length of the queue may be too long when the ions are Rbþ or Csþ, or possibly that the "structural periodicity" of the ion ­ water queue is suboptimal in the case of Rbþ or Csþ. The filter with its four very similar, equally paced sites is a highly periodic structure; it might be significant that Kþ and Tlþ both have a radius that is very close to that of an oxygen atom, that is, around the size of a water molecule, allowing a queue with regular spacing that is possibly in register with sites in the selectivity filter. Charge balance in the filter The smaller (Kþ) and larger (Csþ) permeant ions have very different distributions in the filter but the total number of ions residing in the filter at a given time is the same for both, about 2.0. We think that this finding reflects the importance of charge balance within the filter, which directs 20 ° oxygen atoms toward the center of a 12 A long, narrow cylinder, and each oxygen atom is associated with a partial negative charge. Thus, the ions seem to serve as counter-charges necessary for maintaining the filter's three-dimensional structure. Charge balance is also an important feature of the proposed conduction mechanism: two potassium ions (separated by one water molecule) oscillate between 1­ 3 and 2 ­4 configurations until a third potassium ion enters from one side and the ion ­ water queue shifts, displacing a potassium ion from the opposite side.8 In other words, two potassium ions are stable in the filter, but three ions, representing a transition state, would be less stable. Effect of ion occupancy on the structure of the selectivity filter A systematic study of the selectivity filter structure determined at seven different concentrations of Tlþ shows that it adopts two distinct and welldefined structures at low (65 mM and below) and high (100 mM and above) concentrations (Table 1; Figures 5 and 6). This does not mean to say that the selectivity filter is "floppy", but rather that it exists in one of two conformations that are associated with one (or fewer) and two ions, and that the equilibrium between the two structures is driven by the association of the second ion to the singly occupied filter (Figure 6C). The low and

The Occupancy of Ions in the Kþ Selectivity Filter

973

high-Tlþ structures are essentially identical with the low and high-Kþ structures described previously,6 but the transition between the two conformations has a midpoint closer to 20 mM in Kþ and to 80 mM in Tlþ.8 The low-ion structure is most certainly not occurring during the ion conduction "cycle", after all, physiological concentrations of Kþ surrounding an open, conducting Kþ channel are well above the concentration range at which the structural transition takes place, and such a large conformational change is probably incompatible with conduction rates approaching 108 Kþ per second. But, for reasons outlined below, we do think that the observed conformational change is directly related to the Kþ channel's ability to conduct Kþ at very high rates. Ion-binding-induced conformational change as a principle for high conduction rates The most remarkable feature of the Kþ channel is its high conduction rate in the setting of extraordinary selectivity for Kþ over Naþ. High selectivity would seem to imply near-optimal coordination sites for Kþ that should give rise to high-affinity binding. How then do potassium ions move through the pore at rates approaching the diffusion limit? One explanation for the existence of high conduction rates in the setting of high selectivity is electrostatic repulsion between ions. This mechanism was first proposed by electrophysiologists,1,16 ­ 18 and is supported strongly by the demonstration of two potassium ions inside the selectivity filter of Kþ channels. We think that the ion-dependent conformational change within the selectivity filter implies a second mechanism for maintaining high conduction rates in a selective ion channel. What are the energetic consequences of an ion-induced conformational change? To answer this question, imagine that the selectivity filter did not undergo a conformational change, but instead maintained its high Kþ (conductive) conformation even at low concentrations of Kþ when it became singly occupied. Figure 7 illustrates this idea. We observe experimentally a protein conformational change when the occupancy goes from 1.0 to 2.0 ions (Figure 7A), but hypothetically we might have observed an occupancy increase within a pre-formed high-ion structure; that is, without an associated conformational change (Figure 7B). It is evident that the observed protein conformational change has a simple thermodynamic consequence: the affinity of ions in the doubly occupied (conductive) state will be lowered. In other words, the "energy cost" of the conformational change to achieve the conductive state is "paid for" by some of the free energy of ion binding, resulting in weaker binding. The very same concept has been considered at length for substrate catalysis by enzymes to explain high substrate specificity in the setting of a high Km.19 We think that this same principle applies to the Kþ channel. It rationalizes our obser-

Figure 7. Transition between low- and high-ion structures may be important for high conduction rates. A, Experimentally observed conformational change when the occupancy in the selectivity filter changes from 1.0 to 2.0 ions. B, In a hypothetical case, the selectivity filter is held in a pre-formed, high-ion structure. Two ions will bind with lower affinity if binding energy is used to perform work to change the protein's conformation.

vation of two ion-dependent conformations of the selectivity filter, and explains how Kþ can bind selectively but not too tightly.

Methods
Protein purification To prepare the KcsA ­ Fab complex in Tlþ, the complex was purified in 50 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 150 mM KNO3 and 5 mM detergent (decylmaltoside; DM) as described.6,20 Before setting up crystallization trials, the complex was dialyzed against a buffer containing 50 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 5 mM DM and the desired amount of TlNO3. The ionic strength of all the dialysis buffers were kept constant by addition of NaNO3. To prepare the KcsA ­ Fab complex in Rbþ and Csþ, the complex was purified in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM KCl and 5 mM DM. Before setting up crystallization trials, the complex was dialyzed against a buffer containing 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 5 mM DM and either 150 mM RbCl or 150 mM CsCl. Crystal preparation Crystals of space group I4 were grown at 20 8C by equilibrating a 1:1 mix of the protein and reservoir solution against the reservoir (18 ­25% (w/v) PEG400, 50 mM magnesium acetate, 50 mM sodium acetate at pH 5.4 or Hepes at pH 7.0) using the sitting-drop method. Cryo-protection of the crystal was achieved through vapor-diffusion by increasing the concentration of PEG 400 in the reservoir slowly to 40%. The salt concentration in the drop increased during this process; for crystals grown in Tlþ, the final free Tlþ concentration was estimated to be 3 mM, 25 mM, 65 mM, 80 mM, 100 mM, 160 mM, or 240 mM; for crystals grown in Rbþ or Csþ, the final ion concentration was estimated to be 200 mM.

974

The Occupancy of Ions in the Kþ Selectivity Filter

Crystallographic analysis Data were collected at station A1 and F1 of the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source, and at station X-25 of the National Synchrotron Light Source (Brookhaven National Laboratory) (Table 1). The data were processed with Denzo, Scalepack21 and the CCP4 package.14 All the structures were solved by molecular replacement using the published KcsA ­ Fab structure (PDB code 1K4C). The models were refined by several cycles of manual rebuilding (using program O22), simulated annealing, minimization and individual B-factor refinement using CNS.23 One-dimensional electron density profiles were obtained as described.8 Briefly, for comparing the ion distribution in different permeating ions (Kþ, Tlþ, Rbþ and ° Csþ), all the data sets were scaled to 2.4 A resolution using the Kþ data as the reference set; for comparing the ion distribution in different concentrations of Tlþ, all the ° data sets were scaled to 3.0 A using the 160 mM Tlþ data set as the reference set. All models, without ions, were refined against their corresponding data set, and the selectivity filter residues (TVGYG) were removed from the model before difference Fourier maps were calculated. One-dimension electron density profiles were obtained by sampling the difference maps along the central axis of the selectivity filter using MAPMAN.24 Removing the selectivity filter before map calculation causes only a small change in the model phases, but can reduce the local error in the selectivity filter region of the electron density map significantly. Occupancy was estimated for Kþ, Rbþ and Csþ by comparing one-dimensional electron density maps with Tlþ as a standard of known occupancy (see below). To test the validity of using one-dimensional maps for this purpose, we calculated structure factors and electron density maps from atomic models containing the different ions. We found that the relative peak areas in one-dimensional electron density maps calculated from these model maps were nearly proportional to the relative number of electrons in the model ion. Onedimensional maps take advantage of the straight line of ions in the Kþ channel, and allow us to avoid electron density overlap with protein oxygen atoms that line the perimeter of the selectivity filter. Tl1 occupancy refinement Ion occupancy refinement was carried out using data collected on the crystal grown in 160 mM TlNO3. Before occupancy refinement, the model structure was refined to an Rfree and Rwork of 22.8% and 20.8%, respectively. All measured data between the resolution limits of 20 ° and 1.9 A were used for the refinement (except for a random set of reflections (10%) used for calculation of Rfree), and the Friedel's pairs of the data were averaged. Then the Friedel's pairs were separated, and all measured data between the resolution limits of 20 and ° 2.0 A were used to refine the Tlþ occupancy (except 10% for Rfree calculation). Two refinement approaches were used (see Results for details). For both approaches, the wavelength-dependent parameters of the Tlþ scattering factors fTl (a function of f0 and f00 ) were calculated using CROSSEC from the CCP4 suite.14 An f0 of 2 9.731 electrons and f00 of 9.636 electrons were used for the occupancy refinement. In order to obtain absolute occupancy using the SAD refinement approach, the experimental data must be placed on the absolute scale.

To do so, we first applied a scale factor obtained from the Wilson analysis of our data (using the TRUNCATE function in CCP4.14 Next we calculated a set of structure factors (Fc) using the refined structure model described above, and scaled our experimental data (Fo) to the calculated data. The structure factor calculation, scaling of data sets, and occupancy refinement were carried out using CNS,23 unless specified otherwise. Protein Data Bank accession codes The atomic coordinates and structure factors for the high Tlþ, low Tlþ, Rbþ, and Csþ complexes are deposited with the Protein Data Bank under PDB codes 1R3J, 1R3K, 1R3I, and 1R3L, respectively.

Acknowledgements
We thank the staff at CHESS A1 and F1 and BNL X-25 for assistance in data collection, A. Kaufman for help in protein purification, members of the MacKinnon laboratory for helpful discussions, F. Valiyaveetil, M. Zhou and S. Lockless for advice on the manuscript, and F. Weis-Garcia for assistance with monoclonal antibodies. This work was supported by NIH grant GM47400. R.M. is an Investigator in the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

References
1. Neyton, J. & Miller, C. (1988). Discrete Ba2þ block as a probe of ion occupancy and pore structure in the high-conductance Ca2þ-activated Kþ channel. J. Gen. Physiol. 92, 569­ 586. 2. Vestergaard-Bogind, B., Stampe, P. & Christophersen, P. (1985). Single-file diffusion through the Ca2þactivated Kþ channel of human red-cells. J. Membr. Biol. 88, 67 ­ 75. 3. Begenisich, T. & Deweer, P. (1980). Potassium flux ratio in voltage-clamped squid gient-axons. J. Gen. Physiol. 76, 83 ­ 98. 4. Hodgkin, A. L. & Keynes, R. D. (1955). The potassium permeability of a giant nerve fibre. J. Physiol. (London), 128, 61 ­88. 5. Hille, B. (1992). Ionic Channels of Excitable Membranes, Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA. 6. Zhou, Y. F., Morais-Cabral, J. H., Kaufman, A. & MacKinnon, R. (2001). Chemistry of ion coordination and hydration revealed by a Kþ channel-Fab ° complex at 2.0 A resolution. Nature, 414, 43­ 48. 7. Alcayaga, C., Cecchi, X., Alvarez, O. & Latorre, R. (1989). Streaming potential measurements in Ca2þactivated Kþ channels from skeletal and smooth muscle. Coupling of ion and water fluxes. Biophys. J. 55, 367­ 371. 8. Morais-Cabral, J. H., Zhou, Y. F. & MacKinnon, R. (2001). Energetic optimization of ion conduction rate by the Kþ selectivity filter. Nature, 414, 37 ­ 42. 9. LeMasurier, M., Heginbotham, L. & Miller, C. (2001). KcsA: it's a potassium channel. J. Gen. Physiol. 118, 303­ 313. 10. Heginbotham, L. & MacKinnon, R. (1993). Conduction

The Occupancy of Ions in the Kþ Selectivity Filter

975

11.

12. 13.

14. 15. 16. 17.

18. 19. 20.

properties of the cloned Shaker Kþ channel. Biophys. J. 65, 2089­ 2096. Eisenman, G., Latorre, R. & Miller, C. (1986). Multiion conduction and selectivity in the highconductance CAþ þ -activated Kþ channel from skeletal muscle. Biophys. J. 50, 1025­ 1034. Hendrickson, W. A. (1991). Determination of macromolecular structures from anomalous diffraction of synchrotron radiation. Science, 254, 51 ­58. Phillips, J. C. & Hodgson, K. O. (1980). The use of anomalous scattering effects to phase diffraction patterns from macromolecules. Acta Crystallog. sect. A, 36, 856­ 864. Collaborative Computational Project number 4 (1994). The CCP4 suite: programs for protein crystallography. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 50, 760­ 763. Tessman, J. R. & Kahn, A. H. (1953). Electronic polarizabilities of ions in crystals. Phys. Rev. 92, 890­ 895. Hess, P. & Tsien, R. W. (1984). Mechanism of ion permeation through calcium channels. Nature, 309, 453­456. Almers, W. & McCleskey, E. W. (1984). Non-selective conductance in calcium channels of frog muscle: calcium selectivity in a single-file pore. J. Physiol. 353, 585­ 608. Hille, B. & Schwarz, W. (1979). K channels in excitable cells as multi-ion pores. Brain Res. Bull. 4, 159­162. Jencks, W. P. (1987). Catalysis in Chemistry and Enzymology, Dover, New York, NY. Doyle, D. A., Cabral, J. M., Pfuetzner, R. A., Kuo,

21. 22.

23.

24.

25. 26.

27.

A. L., Gulbis, J. M., Cohen, S. L. et al. (1998). The structure of the potassium channel: molecular basis of Kþ conduction and selectivity. Science, 280, 69 ­ 77. Otwinowski, Z. & Minor, W. (1997). Processing of X-ray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode. Methods Enzymol. 276, 307­ 326. Jones, T. A., Zou, J. Y., Cowan, S. W. & Kjeldgaard, M. (1991). Improved methods for building protein models in electron-density maps and the location of errors in these models. Acta Crystallog. sect. A, 47, 110 ­ 119. Brunger, A. T., Adams, P. D., Clore, G. M., DeLano, W. L., Gros, P., Grosse-Kunstleve, R. W. et al. (1998). Crystallography and NMR system: a new software suite for macromolecular structure determination. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 54, 905­921. Kleywegt, G. J. & Jones, T. A. (1996). xdlMAPMAN and xdlDATAMAN--programs for reformatting, analysis and manipulation of biomacromolecular electron-density maps and reflection data sets. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 52, 826­ 828. Kraulis, P. J. (1991). MOLSCRIPT: a program to produce both detailed and schematic plots of protein structures. J. Appl. Crystallog. 24, 946­950. Esnouf, R. M. (1999). Further additions to MolScript version 1.4, including reading and contouring of electron-density maps. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 55, 938 ­940. Merritt, E. A. & Bacon, D. J. (1997). Raster3D: photorealistic molecular graphics. Methods Enzymol. 277, 505 ­524.

Edited by D. Rees (Received 27 June 2003; received in revised form 4 September 2003; accepted 5 September 2003)

