Inr. J. Biochem.Vol. 24, No. 8, pp. 1267-1283,1992 Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved

0020-711X/92 $5.00+ 0.00 Copyright 0 1992Pergamon Press Ltd

MINIREVIEW
PLANT FRUCTOSE-l ,6-BISPHOSPHATASES: CHARACTERISTICS AND PROPERTIES
WILLIAM NEL and STEPHANUSE. TERBLANCHE* Department of Biochemistry, University of Zululand, Private Bag X1001, Kwa Dlangezwa 3886, Republic of South Africa [Tel. 0351-93911; Fax 0351-937351 (Received 18 October 1991)
Abstract-l.

In this minireview the properties and characteristics of plant fructose-1,6-bisphosphatases (o-fructose-l ,6-bisphosphatase I-phosphohydrolase, EC 3.1.3.11) are discussed. 2. The properties and characteristics of the chloroplastic and cytoplasmic forms of the enzyme are reviewed. 3. For purposes of comparison some reference is made to fructose-1,6-bisphosphatases from other

1. HISTORICAL REVIEW Fructose bisphosphatase (FBPase) (D-fructose-l ,6bisphosphatase I-phosphohydrolase, EC 3.1.3.1 l), present in a variety of tissues of animals, plants and micro-organisms, catalyses the hydrolysis of fructose1,6-bisphosphate (FBP) to yield fructose-6-phosphate

(F6P) and inorganic phosphate (Pi). It was Gomori who in 1943 first reported the specific Mg2+ requiring phosphatase in the livers and kidneys of a number of mammalian species. FBPase is both an interesting and important enzyme for, although it always catalyses the hydrolysis of FBP to F6P and inorganic phosphate, it is involved in several quite different metabolic pathways (Raines ef al., 1988). For example, in Escherichiu co/i and Saccharomyces cerevisiae it is necessary for growth on substances such as glycerol, succinate and acetate, in bumblebee flight muscles it is involved in a shuttle between fructose mono- and bisphosphate which liberates heat, while in mammalian tissues it catalyses a reaction essential for gluconeogenesis and/or glucogenesis. The enzyme preparations described by Gomori (1943), were characterized by an alkaline pH optimum, and showed little or no activity in the neutral pH range. Similar pH-activity curves were later reported by various authors who isolated the enzyme from a large variety of sources and are summarized in a review by Horecker et al. (1975). Evidence, however, accumulated that suggested that this pH optimum was the result of changes in structure and catalytic properties caused by the isolation pro-

cedures. Pogell and McGilvery (1952) attributed this increase in activity at high pH to the action of proteolytic enzymes associated with cell particles in the extracts. Indeed, similar activation was observed when extracts, after heating to destroy the endogenous activator, were incubated with papain (Pogell and McGilvery, 1952) or with a particulate fraction from rabbit liver (Horecker et al., 1975). It was not until 1971 that a homogeneous neutral FBPase was isolated from rabbit liver (Traniello et al., 1971) and beef liver (Byrne et al., 1971). The FBPase with a maximum activity at pH 8.4-9.4 is designated "alkaline enzyme" and the intact natural species with a maximum activity at about pH 7.6 is designated "neutral enzyme" (Traniello et al., 1971; Ulm et al., 1975). The characteristics of FBPase from mammalian tissues, micro-organisms and plants are summarized in a review by Pontremoli and Horecker (1971).
Occurrence and General Properties In animals

*To whom correspondence

should be addressed.

FBPase has been isolated and characterized from a variety of vertebrate tissues, micro-organisms and plants (Tejwani, 1983; Benkovic and de Maine, 1982). The highest activity of the enzyme is observed in gluconeogenic tissues such as liver and kidney. However, the enzyme is also present in muscle and, taking into account the relative mass of liver and muscle, a rat or rabbit has at least as much total FBPase in muscle as in liver. The enzymes isolated from various sources share some common properties. The enzyme is a tetrameric protein with a molecular mass of about 140,000 and requires a divalent cation such Mg2+ or Mn2+ for its activity. The order of
1267

1268

WILLIAMNEL and STEPHANUS TERBLANCHE E. In seaweed

enzyme affinity is FBP > sedoheptulose-1,7-bisphos@BP) > ribulose-1,5bisphosphate (RBP). The enzyme is activated by monovalent cations such as K+, NH: and by chelators such as EDTA. FBPase is allosterically inhibited by AMP. The enzyme is modified by proteolytic enzymes with a consequent shift in pH optimum from 7.5 to 9.2 and the abolition of AMP inhibition.
phate

In micro -organisms The only common property shared by FBPases from microbial sources is the activation of the enzyme by Mg*+ or Mn*+ (Tejwani, 1983). The enzyme from various micro-organisms differs in molecular mass, pH optimum, regulation by AMP, phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) and monovalent cations. The molecular mass of the enzyme has been reported to be as low as 100,000 and as high as 500,000 depending on the source. Unlike the mammalian enzyme, the microbial enzyme can be dissociated either into two or six sub-units, the dissociated sub-units retaining their catalytic activity. FBPase plays different physiological roles in autotrophic organisms (Tejwani, 1983). In heterotrophs it catalyses an essential step in gluconeogenesis and consistent with this function, which occurs under conditions of energy sufficiency, the enzyme is most active at neutral pH in the presence of a chelator, has a low K,,, for FBP, shows substrate inhibition and is strongly inhibited by AMP. In autotrophs, FBPase catalyses an essential reaction of the Calvin-Bassham cycle and functions when energy is readily available. Most autotrophic FBPases are more active at alkaline pH even in the presence of EDTA, have a higher K,,, for FBP, are not inhibited by excess substrate, and are often inhibited by ATP rather than by AMP. In algae A chloroplast type of FBPase has been purified from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (Huppe and Buchanan, 1989). Unlike its counterpart from spinach chloroplasts, this FBPase showed a strict requirement for dithiol reductant irrespective of Mg2+ concentration. The enzyme from the two sources resemble each other immunologically, in subunit molecular mass and response to pH. In the presence of dithiothreitol, the pH optimum for both the algal and spinach enzymes shifted from 8.5 to a more physiological value of 8.0 as the Mg2+ concentration was increased from 1 to 16 mM. At 1 mM estimated to be close to Mg'+, a concentration physiological, the algal FBPase was active only in the presence of reduced thioredoxin and was most active with Chlamydomonas thioredoxin f. Under these conditions, the enzyme showed a pH optimum of 8.0. The data suggested that the Chlamydomonas enzyme resembles its spinach counterpart in most respects, but it has a stricter requirement for reduction and less strict reductant specificity.

A FBPase has been identified in the chloroplasts of the marine green seaweed Codium fragile (Yu and Pedersen, 1989). This enzyme could be activated more than IO-fold by the presence of 1OmM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 2-fold by light. The activity of this enzyme could also be stimulated by spinach thioredoxin. Differential responses between the dark form (not reduced chemically in vitro) and the light form (DTT-treated) of FBPase to pH and Mg*+ were noticed. When the enzyme was reduced by DTT, an apparent shift in pH optimum from about pH 9.0 to 8.0 could be observed. The reduced form of this enzyme showed a higher affinity for Mg*+ compared to the dark form. These results suggest that a ferredoxin/thioredoxin system seems to operate in
Codium fragile. In plants

The plant FBPases are more similar to the mammalian FBPase than to microbial enzymes (Tejwani, 1983). The enzymes has been studied mainly from castor bean endosperm and spinach. Molecular mass of the plant FBPase is very close to the enzyme from mammalian sources. In plants two FBPase isoenzymes are necessary for photosynthesis to take place (Kelly et af., 1982). One form, localized in the cytosol, is involved in sucrose synthesis from triose phosphates exported from the chloroplasts. The other, found within chloroplasts, takes part in the regeneration of RBP in the photosynthetic carbon reduction cycle. These enzymes have potentially regulatory roles as their estimated activities in vitro are little more than sufficient to account for the observed rates of CO2 fixation and sucrose biosynthesis (Kelly et al., 1982). In addition, both catalyse a reaction which is essentially irreversible. One striking feature of FBPases are the way in which they are regulated. The chloroplast enzyme is unique, in this respect, as its activity is stimulated in the light through pH changes, Mg2+ levels and also by light-modulated reduction of essential disulphide groups via the ferredoxin-thioredoxin f system (Buchanan, 1980). Conversely the cytosolic form of the plant enzyme is similar to that of mammals and yeast in that it is inhibited by metabolic affecters such as AMP (Zimmermann et al., 1978). The enzyme from Escherichia coli is also AMP sensitive but is less sensitive than mammalian and yeast enzymes to FBP. Castor bean endosperm. During examination of fatty seeds the reserve lipids are rapidly converted into sucrose (Scala et al., 1968a,b). PEP derived from triglyceride is converted into hexose by the enzymes of the gluconeogenic pathway. FBPase is thus an important enzyme in the process of gluconeogenesis in plants. The enzyme has been partially purified from the fatty endosperm of castor bean during germination. It has an optimal activity at pH 6.7 and its activity is not inhibited by AMP. More recently,

Plant fructose-1,bbisphosphatases

1269

Youle and Huang (1976) have provided evidence to show that the properties of the enzyme reported previously by Scala et al. (1968a) are not that of the native enzyme, owing to the modification of the enzyme due to the effect of cellular acid in the endosperm during the extraction procedure. They have also reported a 25-fold increase in the activity of FBPase during germination. The enzyme is inhibited by AMP and has an optimal activity at neutral pH. In these aspects, the castor bean endosperm enzyme is similar to the native neutral FBPase found in mammalian tissues. Spinach chloroplusts. The steps involved in the conversion of 3-phosphoglycerate into F6P and glucosed-phosphate (G6P) are very similar to those of gluconeogenesis (Halhwell, 1978). There is considerable evidence that several of the enzymes of the reductive pentose phosphate pathway are affected by light. Enzyme activity that is promoted by a relative alkaline pH and an increase in Mg*+ is thus increased in light and diminished in the dark. Chloroplast FBPase is a key regulatory enzyme of the reductive pentose phosphate pathway. The enzyme is activated on illumination of intact chloroplasts or leaves and activity decreases again in the dark (Kelly er al., 1976b). It is also reductively activated by photoreduced ferrodoxin and the two newly identified chloroplast proteins, thioredoxin and ferredoxin reductase (Buchanan et al., 1979).

Application of the Procedures to Crude Spinach Leaf Homogenates

The coupled-enzyme assay operates without interference when crude homogenates are used as the source of enzymes. If spinach leaves are held in darkness for at least 1 hr prior to extraction, a correct estimation of the cytoplasmic FBPase activity may be obtained by assaying at pH 7.5. At this pH the chloroplast enzyme is completely inactive providing that reducing agents such as dithiothreitol are not included in the reaction mixtures (Kelly et al., 1982). A reasonable estimate of the activity of chloroplast FBPase may then be obtained by assaying for this enzyme at pH 8.8 as described above and subtracting from the observed activity that activity previously measured at pH 7.5 and therefore attributable to the cytoplasmic enzyme.
Isolation and PuriJication Purljication of pea chloroplast FBPase

Pea chloroplast FBPase was purified by the method of Zimmermann et al., (1976) with minor modifications (Bhoo and Hahn, 1989).
Purification of spinach leaf chloroplast FBPase Method 1. Nishizawa et al. (1982) purified spinach leaf chloroplast FBPase by subjecting a leaf extract first to a pH 4.5 fractionation and subsequently to ammonium sulphate fractionation, Sephadex G-100 chromatography, dialysis concentration versus solid sucrose, DEAE-cellulose chromatography, concentration by ultrafiltration, hydroxyapatite chromatography and concentrational dialysis. Pure preparations of chloroplast FBPase have also been obtained with other purification procedures (Wolosiuk and Buchanan, 1976; Preiss and Greenberg, 1971; Lazaro et al., 1974; Zimmermann et al., 1976). Method 2. The first four steps of the purification procedures are common to both chloroplast and cytoplasmic enzymes (Kelly et al., 1982). Chromatography on DEAE-Sephadex A-50 separates the chloroplast enzyme from the cytoplasmic enzyme and therefore the procedures differ. The procedure has been used successfully a number of times by Kelly et al. (1982) and in at least three other laboratories (Takabe et al., 1979; But et al., 1980; Charles and Halhwell, 1980a). The procedure by Kelly et al. (1982) involves an extraction step followed by two ammonium sulphate precipitations, DEAE-Sephadex A-50 chromatography and a filtration through Sephadex G-200.
3. STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES

2. ASSAY

METHODS

Principle

The assay employs a calorimetric determination of Pi released by FBPase on the hydrolysis of FBP to F6P (Taussky et al., 1953). The assay is carried out in the presence of MgZ+ and DTT. The chloroplast FBPase is specific for FBP and does not utilize other phosphate metabolites as a substrate at a significant rate. For determination of FBPase activity in crude extracts with the calorimetric assay, it is necessary to rule out the contribution of nonspecific phosphatases by performing the assay with other organic phosphate substrates, e.g. ATP. An alternate assay for FBPase is based on the reduction of NADP+, which is measured spectrophotometrically (Nishizawa et al., 1982). In this assay, the newly formed F6P is converted first to G6P (by added phosphohexose isomerase) and then, in the presence of NADP+, to 6-phosphogluconic acid and NADPH (by added glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase). The spectrophotometric assay is particularly useful when one wishes to monitor the course of the reaction continuously (e.g. in kinetic studies) or when the sample being assayed contains endogenous Pi. However, the calorimetric assay is more rapid and convenient than the spectrophotometric assay, particularly if there are numerous samples to be assayed, but Pi must be removed prior to assay.

FBPase have been isolated from a variety of mammalian, avian and plant tissues. In a review by Benkovic and de Maine (1982) it is described as a tetramer enzyme with a molecular mass between

1270

WILLIAM NEL and STEPHANUS E. TERBLANCHE

127,000 and 148,000 Da and a sub-unit molecular mass of 34,00&38,500 Da. This structure seems to be a general characteristic of FBPase, but the molecular differences are greater than can be accounted for by alterations in methods of isolation.
Physical properties

A comparison of the chloroplast and cytoplasmic FBPase with respect to several physical and kinetic parameters is presented in Table 1. The properties of the leaf cytoplasmic enzyme are more or less comparable to those of mammalian FBPases, but the chloroplast enzyme is somewhat unique in being insensitive to AMP and highly sensitive to the redox state of its environment (Buchanan et al., 1971). This latter property has been extensively investigated in view of the observed in vivo light induced increase of activity at physiological pH (Kelly et al., 1976b) and the mimicking of this light effect in vitro by DTT, which simultaneously increase the number of sulphydryl groups on the enzyme molecule and leads to the appearance of activity at physiological pH (Zimmermann et al., 1976). The activation is a consequence of a greatly increased affinity for the substrate FBP. In previous research by Lazaro et al. (1975) it was shown that the FBPase from spinach leaf was stable at acidic and neutral pH, but at pH 8.8 it was partly split into two fully active similar sub-units, with molecular mass between 50,000 and 60,000. So they could be considered as monomers of a dimeric FBPase. These results are similar to those found earlier in the photosynthetic FBPase from the bacterium Rhodopseudomonas polustris (Springgate and Stachow, 1972) and the gluconeogenic one from the mould Candida utilis (Rosen et al., 1967). Even in the late seventies researchers were still under the impression that FBPase existed as a 16 sub-unit molecule with each sub-unit having a molecular mass of less than 10,000 (Chueca et al., 1977). Analytical ultracentrifugational studies performed on spinach chloroplast FBPase shows that the tetrameric oxidized (inactive) or reduced (active) enzyme dissociates into inactive dimers and monomers at alkaline pH. If the enzyme is dimeric,
Table Property Molecular weight Number of sub-units Isoelectric point Optimum pH S,,,(fructose 1,6-bisphosphaterd S,,,(Mg2+ )" Effect of I mM AMP Substrate specificity I. Comparison of the moperties of the fructose

the dissociation process is, at least, partially reversible, and the oxidized inactive tetrameric enzyme is less prone to dissociation into dimers and monomers than the reduced tetramer. The irreversibility of the dissociation process may be explained by a sulphydryl-disulphide interchange (Gontero et al., 1985). Marcus et al. (1980) reported that treatment of spinach chloroplast FBPase with subtilisin resulted in a partial loss of enzyme activity measured at pH 8.3 due to a shift of the pH optimum of the enzyme to a more alkaline pH. The subtilisin treated enzyme remained tetrameric but sodiumdodecylsulphate (SDS)-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis revealed that the native 44,000 molecular mass sub-unit was converted to a species of 40,000 molecular mass. FBPase, purified 1300-fold from pea leaf chloroplasts had a molecular mass of 40,000 for the monomer, as determined by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Bhoo and Hahn, 1989). A homogeneous preparation of thioredoxin linked FBPase were prepared by Nishizawa and Buchanan (1981) from leaves of corn (Zea mays cultivar Golden-Cross-Bantam leaves), a classical C4 plant. The enzyme had a molecular mass of 184,000 and consisted of 4 apparently identical sub-units, each with a molecular mass of 46,000. This FBPase is substrate specific and required Mg*+ for activity and was activated specifically by thioredoxin f, which could be reduced either photochemically by the ferredoxin/thioredoxin system or chemically by dithiothreitol. The substrate acted synergistically with reduced thioredoxin f in the activation of FBPase. Selected oxidants, including dehydroascorbate and oxidized glutathione, deactivated the enzyme following activation by reduced thioredoxin f.
Amino acid homology

A comparison of amio acid sequence of the enzyme from pig kidney cortex (Marcus et al., 1982) and sheep liver (Fisher and Thompson, 1983) reveals 90% identity. This high degree of homology is also evident from sequence information available for several tissues of rabbit (Xu et al., 1982) and rat liver FBPase (Rittenhouse et a/., 1983), and from the NH,-terminal region of muscle FBPase (MacGregor et al., 1982).
from soinach leaf chloroolasts and cvtoolasm"

bisohosohatases

Chloroplast enzyme 160,000 4 4.5 8.8b 80 M IOM No effect Specific for fructose-l,6-bisphosphate' displays

Cytoplasmic enzyme I30,000 4 5.2 8.0 2.5 M 0.13 mM Inhibition Specific for fructose-l,6-bisphosphate a broad optimum between 7.5 and 8.5. enzyme displays

`Data from Zimmermann er al., 1976 and 1978. bI" the absence of dithiothreitol. Enzyme preincubated with dithiothreitol `Assayed at the optimum pH in the absence of dithiothreitol. dThe chloroplast enzyme displays positive cooperativity towards fructose MichaelisMenten kinetics.

1,6-bisphosphate

and Mg2+; the cytoplasmic

Plant fructose-1,6-bisphosphatases More surprising, however, was to find significant sequence homology between mammalian and chloroplast FBPase (Harrsch et al., 1985) since the properties of the chloroplast enzymes are clearly distinct from cytosolic gluconeogenic FBPase. The chloroplast enzyme is not regulated by AMP (Preiss et al., 1967; Buchanan et al., 1971) and exhibits a unique light-dependent activation mechanism via disulphide bond reduction by way of a ferredoxin-thioredoxin system (Buchanan et al., 1979; Marcus et al., 1988). FBPases from Succhuromyces cerevisiae and from Escherichiu coli has a characteristic which is distinctive from the above-mentioned mammalian gluconeogenic and chloroplastic FBPases. The Saccharomyces cerevisiue enzyme is phosphorylated in vivo by a cyclic AMP-dependent event which is presumed to be part of a signalling mechanism for the degradation of yeast FBP (Muller and Holzer, 1981; Gancedo et al., 1983). In vitro phosphorylation of yeast FBPase by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase has permitted the structural identification of this unique phosphorylation site located at residue 11 from the NH,-terminus of the yeast enzyme (Rittenhouse et al., 1986). In Escherichia coli, the inhibition of FBPase by AMP is relieved by PEP, a characteristic of the enzyme from some microorganisms but not shared by mammalian, yeast or chloroplast FBPase (Tejwani, 1983). Structural studies, which included sequence information on S-carboxylated tryptic peptides from yeast and Escherichia coli FBPase, show that all sequenced peptides can be aligned within the amino acid sequence of the mammalian enzyme (Marcus et al., 1986). Previous structural work (Marcus et al., 1982; Harrsch et al., 1985) taken in conjunction with the results of Marcus et al. (1986) demonstrate that, in spite of significant differences in properties, all FBPases have a high degree of homology. The alignment of tryptic peptides from yeast FBPase did not require the introduction of deletions or insertions and revealed sequence homologies ranging from 30 to 100%. Five tryptic digests of Escherichia coli FBPase were also sequenced and showed a 30-73% homology with a precise region of pig kidney FBPase. Additional work by (Rittenhouse et al., 1986) established that yeast FBPase has a dissimilar NH,-terminal region which extends beyond the NH,-terminus of mammalian FBPases and that the unique phosphorylation site was located at Ser-1 1 of the yeast enzyme. In another investigation by Harrsch et al. (1985) the FBPase from spinach chloroplast was reduced, S-carboxymethylated with iodoacetic acid and cleaved with either cyanogen bromide or trypsin. Some of the resulting purified peptides were sequenced and showed amino acid sequences highly homologous to residues 72-86, 180-199 and 277-3 19 of pig kidney FBPase. The comparison of the sequence data for 78 out of an estimated total of 410 amino acid residues of the spinach chloroplast

1271

FBPase subunit with that of the determined sequence of pig kidney FBPase reveals 5 1% amino acid identity. Most remarkably, this is an unusual case of two enzymes that most likely originated from the same precursor but only the chloroplast enzyme contains disulphide bonds. Amino acid sequence data reported on a total of 285 residues (approx 75% of the structure) of the spinach chloroplast enzyme reveals a 46% sequence identity with pig kidney FBPase (Marcus et al., 1987). These studies have disclosed the position of 3 cysteine residues of spinach chloroplast FBPase, but these cysteine residues are probably not those involved in the light regulation of the enzyme. The amino acid sequence of a region consisting of 46 additional residues is reported by Marcus et al. (1988). This region is located near the middle of the primary structure of the enzyme and it shows no similarity in sequence to that of other FBPases. It includes a 16 residue insert not present in other FBPases. This sequence insert has 2 cysteines separated by only 4 amino acid residues (Cys-Val-Val-ASN-VaCys), a characteristic feature of at least three other enzymes containing redox-active cysteines. It appears likely that this region of chloroplast FBPase is involved in light-dependent activation. The chloroplast enzyme from wheat, when compared with the enzyme from Escherichia coli, Succhuromyces cerevisiae, Schizusuccharomyces pombe,

sheep and pig, exclusively has an insertion of 12 extra amino acids in the variable region (residues 165-190) of the protein and also within this region there are 3 cysteine residues not found in other FBPases. This feature of the chloroplast FBPase may be important regarding the light regulation of this enzyme with 2 of these cysteine residues contributing to the disulphide bond which is reduced by thioredoxin to sulphydryl groups during light activation (Buchanan, 1980; Meunier et al., 1981; Pradel et al., 1981). In yeast (Succhuromyces cerevisiue) a different strategy for controlling enzyme activity has been adopted and protein degradation is part of the regulatory process. This yeast FBPase has an amino terminal extension which is believed to be the recognition site required for phosphorylation by c-AMP-dependent protein kinase (Rittenhouse et al., 1986). This phosphorylation causes de-activation of the yeast FBPase and is also thought to be part of a signalling mechanism for the degradation of this enzyme when it is no longer needed. This is in contrast with the chloroplast enzyme which is relatively stable, possibly because in this case activation and de-activation are regular events mediated by light. In both of these FBPases the regulation of the enzyme has been brought about by the introduction of additional residues to the basic FBPase sequence. Another unique feature of chloroplast FBPase, as compared to FBPases from other sources, is that it is synthesized in the cytosol as a precursor with a transit peptide and is subsequently transported to the

1272

WILLIAMNEL

and

STEPHANUS TERBLANCHE E.

chloroplast protein.

where it is processed

to the mature

4. KINETIC PROPERTIES

pH activation

The induction period of photosynthesis upon illumination may be ascribed either to the gradual activation of some of the enzymes of the Calvin cycle or to the autocatalytic build-up of intermediates (Walker, 1976; Heldt, 1976). Evidence has been provided which favours the view that induction is essentially related to the concentration of intermediates (Robinson and Walker, 1980; Leegood and Walker, 1980a). However, the possibility cannot be excluded that light activation of chloroplast enzymes could become limiting under certain conditions in the photosynthetic process. For instance, the activation of FBPase shows a characteristic lag upon illumination of intact chloroplasts, even when the concentration of intermediates is sufficiently large in the stroma (Laing ef al., 1981). At the molecular level, the activation of this enzyme implies chemical and structural modifications. Reduction of the enzyme by the ferredoxinthioredoxin electron transport system (Buchanan, 1980) is probably part of this process, as well as conformational changes due to increase in pH and in concentration of Mg2+ and substrate in the stroma (Meunier et al., 1981; Aragnol et al., 1985). The photo-induced electron transfer from Photosystem 1 to FBPase is probably very fast. Under saturating light conditions, the pH rise in approx 20 set (Haraux and De Kouchkovsky, 1979) as, probably, does the stromal concentration of Mg2+, a major counter-ion of proton transfer through the thylakoid membrane (Dilley and Vernon, 1965). These changes in pH and Mg2+ are too fast to explain convincingly a lag of several minutes. A possible explanation of the slowness of the induction relies on the slowness of the pH-induced conformational change of FBPase which has been postulated on the basis of catalytic results (Minot et al., 1982). A slow conformation change of chloroplastic reduced FBPase is detected on raising the pH from 7 to 8 or lowering the pH from 8 to 7 (Gontero et al., 1984a). These conformation changes are fully reversible. In the time scale investigated these processes occur in 1 step. Their time constants and their amplitudes were determined and analysed as a function of proton concentration. The results obtained are consistent with the view that on ionization or protonation of a strategic ionizable group the protein undergoes a slow conformational transition that may be followed by conventional fluorescence techniques. Since illumination brings about a pH rise of chloroplastic stroma from 7 to 8, their results suggest that light activation of FBPase is at least in part due to a slow conformation change of the enzyme.

The conformational transitions of reduced FBPase from spinach chloroplasts which occur upon raising the pH from 7 to 8 or, inversely, decreasing it from 8 to 7, have been analysed spectrometrically by monitoring the induced fluorescence changes either of an extrinsic fluorescence probe or of intrinsic tryptophan residues (Pradel and Aragnol, 1986). A simple model is presented to relate the catalytic activity to the conformation state of the reduced enzyme. Upon pH increase and ionization of a strategic group the inactive enzyme undergoes a fast conformational change and is then slowly converted into an active state. These conformation changes are fully reversible. Two parameters of the slow relaxation, the observed rate constant and the amplitude, have been analysed as a function of the proton concentration in the absence of the ligand, in the presence of substrate, in the presence of Mg*+ and also in the presence of Mg*+ and of a substrate analogue. When the reduced enzyme has bound M8+, the observed rate constant of the slow relaxation is identical to that of the catalytic activity. The results obtained suggest that pH induced conformational change is the ratelimiting step in the overall activation of FBPase. Contrary to previous reports (Chehebar and Wolosiuk, 1980; Wolosiuk et al., 1980; Rosa, 1981) FBP is unable to activate FBPase. Mg*+ does not activate the oxidized enzyme either, but has a significant stimulatory effect on the DTT activation of the enzyme. The effects of both FBP and Mg*+ are negligible in the presence of thioredoxin f. It is therefore, most likely that the sugar phosphate and divalent cation do not play any significant role in vivo during light activation of FBPase (Gontero et al., 1984b). This activation process rests on the functioning of the ferredoxin-thioredoxin reductase system and on the pH-induced changes of activity of FBPase (Buchanan et al., 1979; Minot et al., 1982; Charles and Halliwell, 1980b).
Light activation

Spinach chloroplast FBPase exist in both oxidized and reduced forms. Only the latter has the kinetic properties that allows it to function at physiological concentrations of FBP and Mg*+ . Treatment of the enzyme with DTT decreases the K,,, for FBP from 0.8 to 0.33 mM, decreases the K,,, for Mg2+ from 9 to 2 mM, and substantially alleviates inhibition by phosphate. Illumination of freshly prepared type A chloroplasts causes a conversion of oxidized to reduced enzyme. The rate of this conversion does not limit the rate of CO2 fixation. In the dark the reduced enzyme partially revert back to the oxidized form. If catalase is omitted from the reaction medium the rate of CO2 fixation by chloroplasts is decreased and seems to be limited by the rate of conversion of the enzyme to the reduced form (Charles and Halliwell, 1981d). Thus, the dithiol systems that are operative in the stroma of the illuminated chloroplast may function in

Plant fructose- I &bisphosphatases a protective capacity to maintain FBPase in the reduced form in the presence of light-generated oxidants such as H*O,. Fine control of the enzyme activity in vivo would be achieved by changes in the stromal concentrations of H+ and Ca2+ (Charles and Halliwell, 1980b, 1981b). Laing et al. (1981) reports that after the onset of illumination the activity levels of FBPase rise 20-fold and rapidly decrease again when the light is turned off. The catalytic activity of the activated enzyme is dependent on the pH and the Mg2+ concentration in the assay medium. Chloroplasts have the ability to inactivate the enzyme virtually completely in the dark phase by a combined effect of changes of the reductive state of the electron transport carrier, changes of stromal Mg*+ and pH. FBPase activity increased more than IO-fold upon illumination of wheat leaves (Leegood and Walker, 1982). Darkening caused a relatively slow but complete reversal of light activation. The effects of O2 and CO2 concentrations and light intensities on the activation were measured. In rate-limiting light, 2% 0, stimulated the enzyme whereas varying the CO2 concentration had little effect. In saturating light, lowering the 0, tension had no effect, but CO, at near-saturation concentrations for photosynthesis inhibited the enzyme. Dark inactivation was completely prevented by incubation of leaves in N,, but was facilitated by 02, indicating that O2 is the major oxidant in darkened leaves. Therefore, while FBPase is redox-regulated in leaves, modulation of the activity by this mechanism is unlikely to contribute to the regulation of CO* fixation in leaves. Most of the work to date on CO, fixation and the enzymes of the Calvin cycle has been carried out with chloroplasts from mature spinach leaves, although, more recently, wheat chloroplasts have been studied (Leegood and Walker, 1980a,b). Studies by Robinson and Wiskich (1976, 1977) and Stankovic and Walker (1977) have shown that chloroplasts isolated from young pea leaves have markedly different properties in relation to their CO, fixation ability. For instance, adenine nucleotides cross the mature spinach chloroplast envelope at only very low rates (Heldt, 1969), but they are apparently able to cross the envelope of young pea chloroplasts rapidly. In fact, both adenine nucleotides and pyrophosphate are required by young pea chloroplasts for optimum rates of CO2 fixation apparently because of an unidentified "ATPconsuming reaction" that occurs in the stroma at high rates (Robinson and Wiskich, 1976). It was also shown that chloroplasts isolated from older peas show significantly lower rates of CO2 fixation and less stimulation by adenine nucleotides and pyrophosphate. Light activation of FBPase in isolated spinach (Robinson and Walker, 1980; Charles and Halliwell, 1981b) and wheat (Leegood and Walker, 1980a) chloroplasts are too rapid and great in extent to account for the induction period of CO2 fixation

1273

(Walker, 1976). Light activation of the spinach enzyme is brought about by the generation of the reduced form of the protein thioredoxin via a reduced ferredoxin-thioredoxin reductase enzyme (Buchanan et al., 1979). Reduced thioredoxin acts on spinach chloroplast FBPase so as to decrease its K,,, values for M$+ and substrate, enabling the enzyme to achieve close to its maximum velocity at physiological concentrations of substrate and Mg'+ (Charles and Halliwell, 1981b). The thioredoxin system is presumably also responsible for the light activation of FBPase in wheat chloroplasts (Leegood and Walker, 1980b). By contrast, Anderson et al. (1979) have suggested that light activation of FBPase in pea chloroplasts occurs by a completely different mechanism from that in spinach chloroplasts, in that it involves a thylakoid-bound light-effect mediator that is close to ferredoxin in the electron-transport chain, rather than a soluble thioredoxin molecule. However, a thioredoxin has recently been detected in pea chloroplast fractions (Schiebe and Anderson, 1981). Anderson et al. (1979) have also claimed that the rate of activation of FBPase by the light-effect mediator in pea chloroplasts controls the rate of CO, fixation, but the chloroplasts used in these experiments were prepared by methods unlikely to yield a significant percentage of type A chloroplasts. The FBPase activity of type A chloroplasts isolated from young (9-day-old) pea plants, assayed at physiological pH, substrate and Mg2+ concentrations, increased rapidly on illumination (Charles and Halliwell, 1981a). The enzyme activity detected was more than sufficient to account for observed rates of CO2 fixation both during the induction period and during steady state CO, fixation, whether or not dihydroxyacetone phosphate had been added to the preparation. Omission of catalase from the suspension medium had no effect. On switching off the light, CO2 fixation by the chloroplasts ceased at once, yet FBPase activity decreased much more slowly. Chloroplasts from older (13-20-day-old) peas only fixed CO2 rapidly if catalase was present in the assay medium. The FBPase activity detected under physiological assay conditions was again more than sufficient to account for observed rates of CO2 fixation. In the presence of added dihydroxyacetone phosphate (0.1 mM), however, the rate of CO* fixation appeared to be determined by the rate of light activation of FBPase. In general, the rates of CO2 fixation and enzyme activation, and the final enzyme activity achieved, decreased markedly with age of plants. The results presented by Charles and Halliwell (1981a) enabled them to assess the relative importance of light activation of FBPase (Anderson et al., 1979) in regulation of CO, fixation in pea chloroplasts. The results show that the light activation of FBPase in young pea chloroplasts (isolated from 9-day-old pea seedlings) is too rapid and too

1274

WILLIAM NEL and STEPHANUS TERBLANCHE E.

great in extent to account for the observed induction period of CO2 fixation. It follows that the induction period is due to factors other than light activation of FBPase and probably reflects the time taken to increase the concentration of Calvin cycle intermediates at the onset of illumination (Walker, 1976). On switching off the light, CO,-fixation ceases abruptly, and yet enough enzyme activity remains even after 15 min in the dark to support more than the maximum rate of CO1 fixation observed. Obviously, dark "deactivation", presumably by a reversal of the lightactivation system is not a mechanism by which FBPase is prevented from functioning in the dark. Changes in stromal pH and cation concentrations are much more significant control mechanisms (Charles and Halliwell, 1980b,c). By using mature spinach chloroplasts, Charles and Halliwell (198 1b) have reached similar conclusions. By conrast, deactivation is apparently quicker in wheat chloroplasts, although sufficient FBPase activity remains after 5 min of darkness to support a COZ fixation rate of about 120 pmol/mg of chlorophyll per hour (Leegood and Walker, 1980b). Experiments conducted on chloroplasts from 13and 20-day-old peas gave essentially the same results and Charles and Halliwell (1981a) therefore derived at similar conclusions from their results. However, the light activation of FBPase in the presence of catalytic amounts of a Calvin cycle intermediate appeared to be controlling CO2 fixation during the induction period in chloroplasts from 13-day-old peas. This observation gives support to Walker's (1976) explanation of the induction period of photosynthesis, i.e. a need for an autocatalytic built-up of Calvin cycle intermediates rather than light activation of catalysts. The function of the light-activation system in pea chloroplasts is therefore in the first instance to generate the physiologically active form of the enzyme. In spinach chloroplasts, the physiological active form is converted into a form with much higher K,,, values for substrate and Mg*+ by H,O*, which is generated in the light in intact chloroplasts (Charles and Halliwell, 1980~). The catalase requirement for CO, fixation and enzyme activation in pea chloroplasts becomes greater with increasing physiological age. Chloroplasts contain no catalase activity (Halhwell, 1978), but in uiuo they are closely associated with peroxy-somes to remove any HzOz that is generated. The results presented by Charles and Halliwell (1981a) for chloroplasts from 9-day-old peas, which do not require catalase for enzyme activation of CO2 fixation, suggest that a rather efficient mechanism for the removal of HzOz exist in the stroma of these chloroplasts or else that little H,Oz is generated. The decreased enzyme activation in the older chloroplasts in the absence of catalase presumably reflects the inability of the activation system to keep up with the effects of H,O*.

HzOz is formed in the light by spinach chloroplasts (Forti and Gerola, 1977), probably due to the transfer of reducing equivalents generated by photosynthetic electron transport to O2 to form the toxic superoxide anion radical (0; ) (Asada et al., 1974; Egneus et al., 1975). Superoxide is then converted into H,O, by superoxide dismutase, high activities of which are present in chloroplasts (Jackson et al., 1978). Hz02 slowly inactivates chloroplast superoxide dismutase (Asada et al., 1975) and rapidly inhibits CO* fixation by type A chloroplasts at the level of FBPase and SBPase (Egneus et al., 1975; Kaiser, 1976; Forti and Gerola, 1977). Clearly, H202 must be removed from chloroplasts in order to allow the Calvin cycle to operate, yet these organelles contain no catalase (for a review, see Halliwell, 1978). However, Foyer and Halliwell (1976) proposed that NADPH, reduced glutathione and ascorbate act via glutathione reductase (Halhwell and Foyer, 1978) and ascorbate peroxidase (Groden and Beck, 1979; Kelly and Latzko, 1979) to remove H,O,. Charles and Halliwell (1980a) proposed on the basis of kinetic evidence, that a reduced form of the enzyme FBPase, obtained by treatment with thiol compounds, is the form that actually functions in the Calvin cycle. If this is so, it follows from the results of Heldt et al. (1978) that thiol-treated FBPase should be susceptible to inactivation by H,O*. Charles and Halliwell (1980~) investigated the effects of H,O, on the two available forms of the enzyme, freshly purified and thiol-treated FBPase. They showed that thiol-treated FBPase is severely inhibited by H,O,, whereas freshly purified FBPase is little affected. This observation is in good agreement with previous kinetic data (Charles and Halliwell, 1980a), which suggested that thiol-treated FBPase is well suited to a role in viuo. Inhibition of the thioltreated FBPase by Hz02 is reversible by assay at high substrate concentrations or by DTT treatment, indicating that the effect of H,O, is an oxidation of essential thiol groups. As mentioned earlier, H,O, might be removed by an ascorbate/glutathione system in chloroplasts, but it seems that this process is not always completely efficient since CO2 fixation by intact chloroplasts is often stimulated by the addition of catalase (Egneus et al., 1975). For the Calvin cycle to operate at significant rates, FBPase and SBPase must be maintained in the reduced (thiol-treated) forms throughout periods of illumination. This can be achieved in vivo by the light-dependent generation of membranebound dithiol groups and of the dithiol form of the protein thioredoxin, whose action is mimicked in vitro by DTT (Anderson and Avron, 1976; Buchanan et al., 1979). Although it has been suggested that the thiol systems play a part in controlling the rate of the Calvin cycle at the FBPase step, this seems unlikely, because the rates of conversion of the reduced enzyme to the oxidized form in the dark are very slow, both in uivo and in vitro, and conversion of the

Plant fructose-l,6-bisphosphatases oxidized form back into the reduced form by these systems is also slow (for a review see Halliwell, 1978). It seems more likely that the dithiol systems exist in uiuo to prevent inhibition of the reduced forms of FBPase and SBPase by any light-generated H,O, that escapes the action of the ascorbate/glutathione system and that the final control of the enzyme activity in oivo is achieved by changes in stromal pH and cation concentrations (Kelly et al., 1976a; Charles and Halliwell, 1980a,b,c).
Ferredoxin-thioredoxin

1275

activation of FBPase occurs in f system that converts an inactive oxidized form of the enzyme into a reduced active form (Buchanan, 1980; Buchanan et al., 1979). The thioredoxin f protein isolated from spinach leaves is a dimer which dissociates in two apparently identical halves when ionic strength is raised. The dimer has a mol. mass of 16,000. The reduced thioredoxin dimer contains four available sulphydryl groups that may reduce two strategic disulphide bridges of FBPase, leading to enzyme activation (Soulie et al., 1981). Experimental results presented by them show that dimeric thioredoxin f, when continuously regenerated in its reduced state, may activate oxidized FBPase. If thioredoxin is not continuously regenerated to its reduced state by DTT or by light, it cannot reduce FBPase, and therefore activate FBPase unless thioredoxin is in a large excess with respect to this enzyme. The reaction between thioredoxin and FBPase may be depicted by the equilibrium: The light-mediated
vivo by way of a ferredoxin-thioredoxin

reduced thioredoxin + oxidized FBPase *oxidized thioredoxin + reduced FBPase

The results of Soulie et al. (1981) show that this equilibrium is nearly completely shifted towards the left-hand side. The existence of such an equilibrium has two important implications. Firstly it shows that the activation of FBPase can proceed significantly only if the above equilibrium is continuously pulled to the right, that is if reduced thioredoxin is continuously regenerated by a reducing agent or by light. Secondly, it allows us to predict that if reduced and active FBPase is mixed with an excess of oxidized thioredoxin, the enzyme must become de-activated while oxidized thioredoxin becomes reduced. These

molecular mechanisms are extremely attractive to explain how FBPase becomes deactivated in vivo when light is turned off. Experimental results have been presented that show that electrons can be transferred from NADPH to thioredoxin via NADP+ reductase and alternatively from thioredoxin to NADP+. It can therefore, be speculated that when the light is turned off, reduced thioredoxin transfers its electrons, first to the reductase and then to NADP+. Thioredoxin, therefore, appears in its oxidized state, reacts with FBPase and de-activates the enzyme. The series of reactions which are believed to occur is depicted in Scheme. 1. The activation process can be mimicked in vitro by reduction of the enzyme with DTT (Pradel et al., 1981). In both cases the activation reaction involves the reduction of a critical disulphide bond in the enzyme. This activation mechanism is a characteristic of chloroplast FBPase that distinguishes the chloroplast enzyme from cytosolic FBPase (Tejwani, 1983; Kelly et al., 1982). In addition the enzyme is not sensitive to AMP inhibition (Preiss et al., 1967; Buchanan et al., 1971) a property of all cystosolic gluconeogenic FBPases (Tejwani, 1983). The affinity relation between chloroplastic FBPase and ferredoxin and thioredoxin from spinach leaves, two components of the proposed light activation system of this enzyme, was analysed using affinity ferredoxinand thioredoxintechniques on Sepharose columns (Pla and Lopez-Gorge, 1981). Oxidized and reduced ferredoxin did not show enzyme affinity, whereas thioredoxin, both the oxidized and the DTT-reduced forms, had strong FBPase affinity at pH 7.5; this affinity apeared diminished at pH 8.0. When the affinity experiments were performed in the presence of 5 mM M$+, only 30 and 12% of FBPase remained bound to thioredoxin-Sepharose at pH 7.5 and 8.0 respectively. These percentages were reduced to 6% when the Mg2+ concentration was increased to lOmM, suggesting that a rise of stromal pH and Mg2+ concentration could account for a loosening of the FBPase-thioredoxin linkage. No difference was observed in the behaviour of the chloroplastic thioredoxin f and thioredoxin m, and cytoplasmic thioredoxin cf and thioredoxin cm. These results support the existence of an in vivo FBPase-thioredoxin interaction, in accordance with the light activation mechanism by the ferredoxin-thioredoxin system.

Scheme 1. Tentative mechanism of de-activation of reduced fructose bisphosphatase by thioredoxin in the dark. rFruP,ase and oFruP,ase: reduced and oxidized fructose bisphosphatase; oTh and rTh: oxidized and reduced thioredoxin; rRed and oRed: reduced and oxidized NADP+-reductase. (Taken from Soulie
er al., 1981.)

1276
5. REGULATION

WILLIAM NEL OF ENZYME ACTIVITY

and

STEPHANUS E. TERBLANCHE

Regulation of the enzyme activity occurs by a variety of distinct mechanisms. These include AMP inhibition (most sources), cyclic- AMP dependent phosphorylation (yeast) and light dependent activation (chloroplasts) (Marcus et nl., 1986).
Metal ions

Thiol treated spinach chloroplast FBPase is powerwith refully inhibited by Ca2+ non-competitively spect to its substrate, FBP; 500pM Ca2+ causes virtually complete inhibition and the K, is 40 PM (Charles and Halliwell, 1980b). Fluorescence titration experiments of chloroplastic FBPase by FBP and Mg2+ were effected using the inactive dimeric, the inactive Mg2+ tetrameric and the active tetrameric enzyme forms. Mg2+ binding to the inactive dimeric enzyme exhibits a positive cooperativity; FBP exhibits no cooperativity at all. The binding of either Mg2+ or FBP to the inactive oxidized tetramer exhibits a succession of negative and positive cooperativitities. Upon reduction of the inactive tetramer by DTT and activation, the ligandbinding properties of the enzyme are changed. Mg2+ and FBP are bound to the active enzyme with a positive cooperativity. Whatever the state of FBPase, one ligand is bound per sub-unit. The affinity constants of Mg 2+ for the active or inactive enzyme forms are much greater than those of FBP. The metal ion gives to the enzyme the right conformation to bind the sugar phosphate (Meunier et al., 1981). Illumination of isolated type A chloroplasts caused a rapid increase in FBPase activity as assayed at physiological substrate and Mg2+ concentrations (Charles and Halliwell, 1981a). Activation was accelerated by addition of dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) to the chloroplasts and decreased by inorganic phosphate concentrations greater than those optimal for CO, fixation. At all times, measured FBPase activity was greater than was necessary to account for the observed rates of CO* fixation. Activation of purified FBPase in vitro by DTT or reduced thioredoxin was extremely slow, but was greatly accelerated in the presence of physiological concentrations of Mg2+ and FBP if Ca2+ was present. Increased concentrations of FBP greatly increased the rate and extent of activation, whereas in its absence Ca2+ had no effect. Neither inorganic phosphate nor DHAP significantly affected the rate of activation. Ca2+ strongly inhibited the activity of the activated form of FBPase. It is proposed that free Ca2+ within chloroplasts is involved in preventing FBPase from functioning in the dark, and that free and or bound Ca2+ facilitates the rapid reductive activation of this enzyme upon illumination.
Substrate analogues

2,6-bisphosphate (F2,6-BP), a powerful inhibitor of rat liver FBPase (Gottschalk et al., 1982). Kinetic studies with pig kidney FBPase confirmed, in general, the results obtained with rat liver enzymes. Since the isolated pig kidney enzyme does not contain the CAMP-dependent phosphorylation site present in rat liver FBPase, these results show that the phosphorylation site is not required for F2,6-BP inhibition. Treatment of pig FBPase with subtilisin under conditions which result in the loss of allosteric AMP inhibition did not change enzyme inhibition by F2,6-BP. Studies on the effect of F2,6-BP on chemical modification of kidney FBPase demonstrated that F2,6-BP behaves like the substrate FBP, in decreasing SH-group reactivity and in protecting the active site modification by pyridoxal Y-phosphate. The above results, as well as those of kinetic studies with spinach chloroplast FBPase indicate that the interaction of F2,6-BP with FBPase occurs at the active site of the enzyme (Stitt et al., 1982). The kinetic results agree with those expected for a system which exhibits positive cooperativity in substrate binding in the presense of a competitive inhibitor. Since the chloroplast enzyme is not inhibited by AMP, the results also demonstrate that the AMP site of FBPase is neither required nor directly involved in F2,6-BP inhibition.
6. CYTOSOLIC FBPase

Occurrence and General Properties

Photosynthetic cells require FBPase both in the chloroplast and in the cytoplasm (Kelly et al., 1982). In the chloroplast, it is one of the enzymes constituting the Calvin cycle of CO, fixation. In the cytoplasm, it is required for the synthesis of sucrose from triose phosphate, which is the major form of reduced carbon exported from chloroplasts during photosynthesis (Fig. 1). Both enzymes have potential regulatory roles, since the estimated in viuo activities are little more than sufficient to accommodate the observed rates of CO, fixation and sucrose formation.

ADP-GLUCOSE

FBPase from two very distinct sources was utilized to study the interaction of the enzyme with fructose-

Fig. 1. Requirement for fructose bisphosphatase (heavy arrows) in both chloroplasts and cytoplasm of leaf cells (from Kelly et al., 1982).

Plant fructose- 1,bbisphosphatases

1211

The identification of FBPase activity in the cytoplasm of Euglena cells and spinach leaves has been reported and separation of this cytoplasmic enzyme from its chloroplast counterpart was also achieved (Latzko et al., 1974). The results of Zimmermann et al. (1978) have demonstrated that the cytoplasm of spinach leaves contains FBPase very similar to the FBPase present in gluconeogenic tissues of plants (Youle and Huang, 1976) and animals (Pontremoli and Horecker, 1971) but quite different from chloroplast FBPase (Buchanan et al., 1971; Zimmermann et al., 1976). There seems little doubt that in mature leaves the enzyme is a component of the metabolic pathway which achieves the synthesis of sucrose from triose phosphate exported from chloroplast (Bird et al., 1974; Kelly et al., 1976a). Regulation Since animal gluconeogenesis is believed to be regulated, at least in part, at the FBPase reaction (Opie and Newsholme, 1967) the question arises as to whether some control of sucrose synthesis in plant leaves might also be dependent on the properties of FBPase. This proposal seems likely since (a) the observed enzyme activity is of the same order as the rate of sucrose synthesis in leaves and (b) the enzyme possesses regulatory properties making it sensitive to pH and the concentrations of Mg*+, NH: and AMP in the cytoplasm. In addition to its potential regulatory role in the cytoplasm, cytoplasmic FBPase could also indirectly influence chloroplast carbon metabolism because the continued export of triose phosphate or glycerate-3-phosphate from the chloroplast is dependent on the simultaneous import of a stoichiometric amount of Pi, half of which is supplied by FBPase and the other half from hydrolysis of sucrose-phosphate and PPi during sucrose synthesis (Zimmermann et al., 1978). Results from Weeden and Buchanan (1983) have demonstrated that cytosolic FBPase, also unlike the chloroplast enzyme, is inhibited by F2,6-BP, a regulatory metabolite recently identified in plant tissues, including leaves where it occurs partly if not totally in the cytosol (Latzko et al., 1974). The two inhibitors, AMP and F2,6-BP act synergistically, suggesting that the leaf cytosolic FBPase is controlled by the prevailing levels of these metabolites (Latzko et al., 1974). Similar results were obtained with the enzyme from castor bean endosperm (Kruger and Beevers, 1984). Inorganic phosphate which inhibits spinach leaf FBPase (Harbron et al., 1981) had only a very weak effect on the enzyme from castor bean endosperm either on its own or in combination with F2,6-BP. However, Pi greatly enhanced the inhibition of low concentrations of both F2,6-BP and AMP (Kruger and Beevers, 1984). Pea and maize root FBPase has properties which taken collectively, place it at a roughly intermediate
BC 24/E-G

position between the FBPase of chloroplasts and the FBPase of the cytosol (Woodrow et al., 1982). With respect to affinity for FBP and sensitivity to AMP, it behaves like the chloroplast enzyme, but with respect to affinity for Mg2+ and response to pH, it compares closely with the cytosolic enzyme. It is probably better suited to the latter category since it appears to be outside the root plastids, probably in the cytosol. Kinetic Properties Temperature Weeden and Buchanan (1983) have found that temperature is also a factor affecting the activity of cytosolic FBPase from spinach leaves. When stored briefly at 0-12C cytosolic FBPase purified from spinach leaves showed diminished activity when assayed at 22C. The changes affected by low temperature exposure were reversed by incubation for 40 min at 22C prior to assay. Cytosolic FBPase from pea leaves also exhibit a significant and reversible loss of activity when incubated at 5C. Significantly, the chloroplast FBPase differed and was not inhibited by exposure to low temperatures. The temperature sensitivity results and the earlier reported differential response to AMP and F2,6-BP (Cseke et al., 1982) suggest that the cytosolic and chloroplast enzymes are different proteins. Additional evidence for this conclusion comes from the present finding that the cytosolic FBPase differs from chloroplast FBPase in that it (a) was not activated by the reduced forms of thioredoxin for ct, (b) was not significantly inhibited by an antibody prepared against spinach chloroplast FBPase, (c) showed no response to this antibody in ELISA analysis and (d) showed an electrophoretic mobility relative to the solvent front of 0.2 vs 0.5 for chloroplast FBPase. Metal ions Mg2+ is an essential cofactor for cytoplasmic FBPase. At pH 7.5, the K, for this metal ion is 0.13 mM with either 0.06 or 0.02 mM FBP, but at lower pH values a considerably higher K, is evident. The optimum pH for cytosolic FBPase is 8.0 (Zimmermann et al., 1978). Metabolic intermediates The majority of FBPases so far studied are inhibited by AMP (Scala et al., 1968b; Youle and Huang, 1976; Pontremoli et al., 1966; Taketa and Pogell, 1965), and in this respect the leaf cytoplasmic enzyme proved to be no exception: enzyme activity is reduced by 50% by about 0.4mM AMP and completely inhibited by about 2 mM AMP. The inhibition is partially relieved by higher M2+ levels, possibly as a result of Mg-AMP complex formation. The sensitivity to AMP was similar to that of the enzymes from castor bean endosperm (Youle and Huang, 1976) and

1278

WILLIAMNEL and STEPHANLJS TERBLANCHE E.

rat liver (Taketa and Pogell, 1965) and contrasted with the extreme susceptibility of muscle FBPase to AMP inhibition (Opie and Newsholme, 1967) and total absence of any effect of the nucleotide on the chloroplast enzyme (Buchanan et al., 1971). A number of other metabolic intermediates, including ADP, PEP, glycolate and glycerate 3-phosphate were tested for effects on cytoplasmic FBPase activity, but except for 64% inhibition caused by ADP, influences comparable to that caused by AMP were not observed (Zimmermann et al., 1978). Slight inhibition was caused by I-2mM concentrations of some substances, including certain amino acids and ammonium sulphate, and since increased NH: levels have been linked to decreased sucrose synthesis in Chlorella (Kanazawa et al., 1970) and maize (Blackwood and Miflin, 1976) the effect of ammonium sulphate was examined more closely. A relatively high concentration of this salt markedly reduced the enzyme affinity for FBP, although at the same time, the inhibition of the enzyme by high concentrations of the substrate was relieved. These observations could be explained if ammonium sulphate competed with FBP both at a catalytic site with higher affinity and at a regulatory site with lower affinity for the substrate. Activation of animal FBPase by NH,+ ions (Hubert et al., 1970) has been suggested to involve the cation acting at both a catalytic site and an allosteric site (Nakashima and Tuboi, 1976).
Inactivation by Acetylimidazole

molecular mass of about 130,000, quite similar to that of the enzyme from chloroplasts (Buchanan et al., 1971; Zimmermann et al., 1976), castor bean endosperm (Scala et al., 1968a) and mammalian tissues (Traniello et al., 1972). Dissociation and examination by sodium dodecyl sulphate-gel electrophoresis demonstrated that the enzyme was composed of four sub-units of equal mass (Zimmermann et al., 1978), as was also the case for other FBPases (Zimmermann et al., 1976; Traniello et al., 1972). However, the sub-units of the cytoplasmic enzyme were clearly of somewhat less mass than those of the chloroplast enzyme. A further difference between these two FBPases was detected by isoelectric focusing; the isoelectric point of the cytoplasmic enzyme was 5.2 while that of the choroplast enzyme was only 4.5 (Zimmermann et al., 1978).
Substrate SpeciJicity

The acetylation of tyrosine hydroxyl groups in proteins by acetylimidazole was used by Pontremoli et al. (1966) to demonstrate that separate catalytic and regulatory sites exist on liver FBPase. Qualitatively similar results were obtained for spinach leaf FBPase. Enzyme inactivation, presumably following acetylation of an active site tyrosine, was largely prevented by the presence of FBP, but not by AMP. Activity measured in the presence of AMP increased following incubation with acetylimidazole plus FBP, as expected if the regulatory site, but not catalytic site, was acetylated under these conditions. Parallel experiments with chloroplast FBPase suggested that this enzyme is structurally different from the liver and leaf cytoplasmic enzyme since it was only slowly inactivated by acetylimidazole in a process unaffected by the presence of FBP.
Molecular Properties

The cytoplasmic FBPase obtained after isoelectric focusing was specific for FBP and it had a very high affinity for this substrate. High concentrations of FBP, in the range of 0.1-2 mM, inhibited the enzyme. These responses to FBP concentrations are very similar to those of rat liver (Taketa and Pogell, 1965) and castor bean endosperm enzymes (Scala et al., 1968a), but quite distinct from those of the chloroplast enzyme for which a lower substrate affinity and no substrate inhibition is reported (Zimmermann et al., 1976). No reaction was detected with fructoseribulose-1,5-bisphosphate l-phosphate (F-l-P), (Rl,S-BP) or sedoheptulose-bisphosphate (SBP) as substrates (Zimmermann et al., 1978). Castor bean endosperm FBPase is also specific only for FBP (Youle and Huang, 1976; Kruger and Beevers, 1984), but the mammalian enzyme can also hydrolyse SBP (Pontremoli and Horecker, 1971). The enzyme from pea roots is also specific only for FBP (Woodrow et al., 1982).
Assay Methods on Cytoplasmic Spinach Leaf FBPase Principle

Filtration of spinach leaf cytoplasmic FBPase through a column of Sephadex G-200 indicated a FBP = F6P + G6P + NADP+ F6P G6P

FBPase may be assayed either calorimetrically by estimating the released Pi (Taussky et al., 1953) or spectrophotometrically (Kelly et al., 1982) by coupling the production of F6P to the reduction of NADP+ using the enzymes phosphoglucose isomerase and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. The latter approach is the method of choice since it permits the reaction to be followed continuously and can be used even with most crude extracts (see below). The reactions of the assay are as follows:

G'~~~~~hafl ) 6-phosphogluconolactone

+ NADPH + H+

Plant fructose-1,bbisphosphatases
Procedure

1279

The method and composition of the reaction mixture is described by Kelly et al. (1982).
Definition of Unit

tography, electrofocusing on a LKB 8101 Ampholine column and finally concentrated through a Diaflo XM-50 membrane.

7. CASTOR BEAN ENDOSPERM

The amount of enzyme required to hydrolyse 1 pmol of FBP per min is defined as 1 Unit of activity.
Application of the procedures homogenates to crude spinach leaf

Assay method

FBPase activity was measured as described previously by (Kruger et al., 1983; Kelly et al., 1982).
Isolation procedure

The coupled-enzyme assay operates without interference when crude homogenates are used as the source of the enzyme. The spinach leaves are held in darkness for at least 1 hr prior to extraction, a correct estimation of the cytoplasmic FBPase activity may be obtained by assaying at pH 7.5 as described; at this pH the chloroplast enzyme is completely inactive providing that reducing agents such as DTT are not included in the reaction mixture (Kelly et al., 1976b). A reasonably estimate of the activity of chloroplast FBPase may be obtained by assaying for the enzyme at pH 8.8 as described and subtracting from the oberved activity that activity previously measured at pH 7.5 and therefore attributable to the cytoplasmic
enzyme. Isolation and PuriJication Cytoplasmic FBPase from spinach leaves Method of Cseke et al. (1982). In this method an extract was made from spinach or pea leaves with a pH 7.7 phosphate buffer which was then subjected to ammonium sulphate precipitation, Sephacryl S-300 chromatography, dialysis, ultrafiltration concentration through an Amicon PM 30 membrane, chromatography on a DE 52 column and finally concentrated by dialysis against solid sucrose. The concentrated fraction, which was free of chloroplast FBPase, was used as a source of cytosolic FBPase. The preparation in 50% sucrose could be stored at 5C for several weeks without appreciable loss of activity. For kinetic studies, the preparation was diluted in a solution containing 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer at pH 7.5, 5% sucrose, and 14mM 2-mercaptoethanol. Weeden and Buchanan (1983) found that unless a protease inhibitor, phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and a relative high sucrose concentration (S-15% w/v) were included in the buffers used during extraction and purification, the cytosolic FBPase preparation from both spinach and peas was insensitive to AMP. Method of Kelly et al. (1982). This method has also been used successfully by Takabe et al. (1979), But et al. (1980) and Charles and Halliwell (1980a). An extract of spinach leaves were prepared in a phosphate buffer pH 7.5 which was then subjected to ammonium sulphate precipitation, DEAE-Sephadex chromatography, ammonium sulphate precipitation, cold acetone precipitation, Sephadex G-200 chroma-

Kruger and Beevers (1984) isolated FBPase from castor bean endosperm by preparing an extract in triethanolamine_HCl buffer pH 7.7 containing PMSF. This extract was then subjected to ammonium sulphate precipitation, dialysis, chromatography on a DEAE-cellulose column, ultrafiltration concentration through a Diaflo PM-10 membrane and finally chromatography through a Bio-Gel A-l column.
8. CONCLUDING REMARKS

It is obvious that the enzyme from various microorganisms differs in molecular mass, pH optimum, regulation by AMP, phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) and monovalent cations, but it shares a common property e.g. activation of the enzyme by Mg*+ or Mr?+. The microbial enzyme can be dissociated in 2 or 6 subunits. The reported molecular masses for the microbial enzyme varies between 100,000 and 500,000. The enzyme from mammals shares some common properties, e.g. it is a tetrameric protein with a molecular mass of about 140,000 and requires a divalent cation such as Mg2+ or Mn*+ for its activity. The plant FBPases are more similar to the mammalian FBPases than to the microbial FBPases. The molecular mass of the plant FBPases are very close to that of the enzymes from mammalian sources. In plants two FBPase isoenzymes are necessary for photosynthesis to take place. One form, localized in the cytosol, is involved in sucrose synthesis from triose phosphates exported from the chloroplasts. The other, found within chloroplasts, takes part in the regeneration of RBP in the photosynthetic carbon reduction cycle. From the abovementioned evidence it is clear that plant FBPases are very much more complex and sophisticated than mammalian FBPases and therefore needs more thorough investigation especially bearing in mind the importance of this enzyme in biotechnocologically orientated research programs. In conclusion it could be mentioned that a variety of avenues still exist regarding research on the plant FBPases.

Acknowledgemenfs-This work was financially supported by a grant from the South African Sugar Association and
the research Committee of the University of Zululand.

1280 REFERENCES

WILLIAM NEL and STEPHANUS TERBLANCHE E. fructose bisphosphatase (EC-3.1.3.1 1) in photosynthetically competent pea chloroplasts. Biochem. J. 200,
357-364.

Anderson L. E. and Avron M. (1976) Light modulation of enzyme activity in chloroplasts: Generation of membrane bound vicinal-dithiol groups by photosynthetic electron transport. Plant Physiol. 57, 209-213. Anderson L. E., Chin H. M. and Gupta V. K. (1979) Modulation of chloroplast fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase activity by light, Plant Physiol. 64, 491494. Aragnol D., Pradel J. and Cecchini J. P. (1985) Effect of ligand binding and of pH change on the accessibility of thiol residues of fructose- 1,6-bisphosphatase (EC 3.1.3.11) from spinach chloroplast. Biochim. biophys. Acta
829, 275-28

Charles S. A. and Halliwell B. (1981b) Light activation of fructose bisphosphatase (EC-3.1.3.1 I) in isolated spinach (Spinacia oleracea) cultivar Risk-Zwaan-Dynamo chloroplasts and deactivation by hydrogen peroxide: a physiological role for the thioredoxin system. Pfanta,
Berl. 151, 242-246.

Charles S. A. and HalliweII B. (1981~) The role of calcium ions and the thioredoxin system in regulation of spinach chloroplast fructose bisphosphatase. Cell Calc. 2,
21 I-224.

1.

Asada K., Kiso K. and Yoshikawa K. (1974) Univalent reduction of molecular oxygen by spinach chloroplasts on illumination. J. biol. Chem. 249, 2175-2181. Asada K., Yoshikawa K., Takahashi M., Maeda Y. and Enmanji K. (1975) Superoxide dismutases from a bluegreen alga, Plectonema borganium. J. biol. Chem. 250,
2801L2807.

Charles S. A. and Halliwell B. (1981d) Regulation and maintenance of the physiological (thiol-treated) form of spinach chloroplasts fructose bisphosphatase. Photosynth., Proc. Int. Congr., 5th. 4, 347-356.

Benkovic S. J. and de Maine M. M. (1982) Mechanism of action of fructose-1,6_bisphosphatase. In Advances in Enzymology (Edited by Meister A.), Vol. 53, pp. 45-82. Interscience, New York. Bhoo S-H. and Hahn T.-R. (1989) Purification and characterization of chloroplasts fructose-1,6_bisphosphatase from pea leaves. Korean Biochem. J. 4, 405410. Bird I. F., Cornelius M. J., Keys A. J. and Whittingham C. P. (1974) Intracellular site of sucrose synthesis in leaves. Phytochemistry 13, 59-64. Blackwood G. C. and Miflin B. J. (1976) The effect of nitrate and ammonium feeding on carbon dioxide assimilation in maize. J. exp. Bot. 27, 735-747. But J., Pradel J., Meunier J. C., Soulie J. M. and Richard J. (1980) The pH-induced dissociation of fructose-1,6bisphosphatase of spinach chloroplasts. FEBS Lett. 113, 286. Buchanan B. 8. (1980) Role of light in the regulation of chloroplast enzymes. A. Rev. Plan1 Physiol. 31, 341-374. Buchanan B. B., Schurman P. and Kalberer P. P. (1971) Ferredoxin-activated fructose-1,6_bisphosphatase of spinach chloroplasts. Resolution of the system, properties of the alkaline fructose diphosphate component and physiological significance of the ferredoxin-linked activation. J. biol. Chem. 246, 5952-5959. Buchanan B. B., Wolosiuk R. A. and Schurman P. (1979) Thioredoxin and enzyme regulation. Trends Biochem. Sci.
4, 93-95.

Chehebar C. and Wolosiuk R. A. (1980) The regulation of chloroplast fructose-l ,6-bisphosphatase (EC 3.1.3.11): Activation by fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase. Biochim. biophys. Acta 613, 429-438. Chueca A., Lazaro J. J. and Gorge J. L. (1977) Fructose-l& diphosphatase from spinach leaf chloroplasts: subunit structure. Plant Sci. Len. 8, 71-77. Cseke C., Weeden N. F., Buchanan B. B. and Uyeda K. (1982) A special fructose bisphosphate functions as a cytoplasmic regulatory metabolite in green leaves. Proc.
natn. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 79, 43224326.

Dilley R. A. and Vernon L. P. (1965) Ion and water transport processes related to the light-dependent shrinkage of spinach chloroplasts. Archs Biochem. Biophys. 111, 365-375. Egneus H., Heber U., Matthiesen U. and Kirk M. (1975) Reduction of oxygen by the electron transport chain of chloroplasts during assimilation of carbon dioxide.
Biochim. biophys. Acta 408, 252-268.

Fisher W. K. and Thompson E. 0. P. (1983) Amino acid sequence studies on sheep liver fructose bisphosphatase.
Aust. J. biol. Sci. 36, 235-250.

Forti G. and Gerola P. (1977) Inhibition of photosynthesis by azide and cyanide and the role of oxygen in photosynthesis. Plant Physiol. 59, 859-862. Foyer C. H. and Halliwell B. (1976) The presence of glutathione and glutathione reductase in chloroplasts: a proposed role in ascorbic acid metabolism. Pfanra 133,
21-25.

Gancedo J. M., Mazon M. J. and Gancedo C. (1983) Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate activates the CAMP-dependent phosphorilation of yeast fructose-1,dbisphosphatase
in vitro. J. biol. Chem. 258, 5998-5999.

Byrne W. L., Rajagopalan G. T., Griffin L. D., Ellis E. H., Harris T. M., Hochachka P., Reid L. and Geller A. M. ( 1971) Bovine hepatic fructose- 1,6-diphosphatase: Purification and properties. Archs Biochem. Biophys. 146, 118-133. Charles S. A. and HaIIiwell B. (1980a) Properties of freshly purified and thiol treated spinach chloroplast fructose bisphosphatase. Biochem. J. 185, 689694. Charles S. A. and Halliwell B. (1980b) Action of calcium ions on spinach (Spinacia oleracea) chloroplasts fructose bisphosphatase and other enzymes of the Calvin cycle. Biochem. J. 188, 775-779. Charles S. A. and HaIIiwell B. (198Oc) Effect of hydrogen peroxide on spinach (Spinacia oleracea) chloroplasts fructose bisphosphatase (EC-3.1.3.1 1). Biochem. J. 189, 373-376. Charles S. A. and Halliwell B. (1981a) Light activation of

Gomori G. (1943) Hexosediphosphatase.
139-149.

J. biol. Chem. 148,

Gontero B., Meunier J.-C., But J. and Richard J. (1984a) The slow pH-induced conformational transition of chloroplast fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (EC-3.1.3.1 I) and the control of the Calvin cycle. Eur. J. Biochem. 145,
485-488.

Gontero B., Meunier J.-C. and Richard J. (1984b) On the activation of two chloroplastic phosphatases by fructose bisphosphate, sedoheptulose bisphosphate and magnesium. Plant Sci. Lett. 36, 195-199. Gontero B., Meunier J.-C., Sauve P. and Richard J. (1985) Analytical ultracentrifugation studies on chloroplastic fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase. Plant Sci. 38, 17-22. Gottschalk M. E., Chatterjee T., Edelstein I. and Marcus F. (1982) Studies on the mechanism of interaction of

Plant fructose-l&bisphosphatases fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase with fructose-l,dbisphosphatase. J. biol. Chem. 257, 80168020. Groden D. and Beck E. (1979) H,O, destruction by ascorbate-dependent systems from chloroplasts. Biochim.
biophys. Acta 546, 426-435.

1281

lated intact chloroplasts. Biochem. biophys. Res. Commun.
70, 193-199.

Halliwell B. (1978) The chloroplast at work. A review of modern developments in our understanding of chloroplast metabolism. Prog. Biophys. molec. Biol. 33,
1-54.

Halliwell B. and Foyer C. H. (1978) Properties and physiological function of a glutathione reductase purified from spinach leaves by affinity chromatography. Planta 139,
9-18.

Haraux F. and De Kouchkovsky Y. (1979) Quantitative estimation of the photosynthetic proton binding inside the thalakoids by correlating internal acidification to external alkalination and to oxygen evolution in chloroplasts. Biochim. biophys. Acta 546, 455-471. Harbron S. C., Foyer C. and Walker D. A. (1981) The purification of fructose phosphate synthetase from spinach leaves; the involvement of this enzyme and fructose bisphosphatase in the regulation of sucrose biosynthesis. Archs Biochem. Biophys. 212, 237-246. Harrsch P. B., Kim V., Fox J. L. and Marcus F. (1985) Amino acid sequence similarity between spinach chloroplasts and mammalian gluconeogenic fructose-1,6bisphosphatase. Biochem. biophys. Res. Commun. 133,
520-526.

Kelly G. J., Zimmermann G. and Latzko E. (1982) Fructose. bisphosphatase from spinach leaf chloroplast and cytoplasm. In Methods in Enzymology (Edited by Meister A.), Vol. 90, pp. 371-378. Academic Press, New York. Kruger N. J. and Beevers H. (1984) Effect of fNCtOs%2,6bisphosphate on the kinetic properties of cytoplasmic fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase from germinating castor bean endosperm. Plant Physiol. 76,49-54. Kruger N. J., Kombrink E. and Beevers H. (1983) Pyrophosphate: fructosed-phosphate phosphotransferase in germinating castor bean seedlings. FEBS Lett. 153,
409412.

Laing W. A., Stitt M. and Heldt H. W. (1981) Control of carbon dioxide fixation changes in the activity of ribulose phosphate kinase and fructose bisphosphatase and sedo heptulose bisphosphatase in chloroplasts. Biochim. biophys. Acta. 673, 348-359.

Latzko E., Zimmermann G. and Feller U. (1974) Evidence for a hexosediphosphatase from the cytoplasm of spinach leaves. Hoppe-Seyler's Z. physiol. Chem. 355,
321-326.

Lazaro J. J., Chueca A., Lopez-Gorge J. and Mayor F. (1974) Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase from spinach leaf chloroplasts: purification and heterogeneity. Phytochemistry 13, 2455-2461.

Heldt H. W. (1969) Adenine nucleotide translocation in spinach chloroplasts. FEBS Lerr. 5, 1l-14. Heldt H. W. (1976) In The Intact Chloroplast (Edited by Barber J.), pp. 2 15-234. Elsevier Biomedical, Amsterdam. Heldt H. W., Chon C. J. and Lorimer G. H. (1978) Phosphate requirements for the light activation of ribulose-1,5-biphosphate carboxylase in intact spinach chloroplasts. FEES Lerr. 92, 234-240. Horecker B. L., Melloni E. and Pontremoli S. (1975) Fructose- I ,6-bisphosphatase: Properties of the neutral enzyme and its modification by proteolytic enzyme. Adv. Enzym. 42, 193-226. Hubert E., Villanueva J., Gonzalez A. M. and Marcus F. (1970) Univalent cation activation of fructose1,ddiphosphatase. Archs Biochem. Biophys. 138,
590-597.

Lazaro J. J., Chueca A., Lopez-Gorge J. and Mayor F. (1975) Fructose-1,6-diphosphatase from spinach leaf chloroplasts: molecular weight transitions of the purified enzyme. Plant Sci. Lett. 5, 49. Leegood R. C. and Walker D. A. (1980a) Autocatalysis and light activation of enzymes in relation to photosynthetic induction in wheat (Triticum aestivum, cultivar Sappo) chloroplasts. Archs Biochem. Biophys. 200,
575-582.

Leegood R. C. and Walker D. A. (1980b) Modulation of fructose bisphosphatase activity in intact chloroplasts.
FEBS Lat. 116, 21-24.

Leegood R. C. and Walker D. A. (1982) Regulation of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase activity in leaves. Planta 156,
449459.

Huppe H. C. and Buchanan B. B. (1989) Activation of a fructose bisphosphatase from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii by light mediated agents. 2. Naturf. Sect. C Biosci. 44,
487494.

MacGregor J. S., Hannappel E., Xu G-J., Pontremoli S. and Horecker B. L. (1982) Conservation of primary structure at the proteinase-sensitive site of fructose-l,dbisphosphatase (E.C. 3.1.3.11). Archs Biochim. Biophys. 214,
652664.

Jackson C., Dench J., Moore A. L., Halliwell B., Foyer C. H. and Hall D. 0. (1978) Subcellular localization and identification of superoxide dismutase in leaves of higher plants. Eur. J. Biochem. 91, 339-344. Kaiser W. M. (1976) The effect of hydrogen peroxide on CO1 fixation of isolated intact chloroplasts. Biochim.
biophys. Acta 440, 476482.

Marcus F., Edelstein I., Nishizawa A. N. and Buchanan B. B. (1980) Limited proteolysis of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase by subtilisin. Biochem. biophys. Res. Commun. 97,
13041310.

Marcus F., Edelstein I., Reardon I. and Heinrikson R. L. (1982) Complete amino acid sequence of pig kidney fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase. Proc. natn. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 79, 7161-7165.

Kanazawa T., Kirk M. R. and Bassham J. A. (1970) Regulatory effects of ammonia on carbon metabolism in photosynthesizing Chlorella pyrenoidosa. Biochim. biophys. Acfa 205, 401-408.

Marcus F., Gontero B. and Harsch P. B. (1986) Amino acid sequence homology among fructose-1,6-bisphosphatases.
Biochem. biophys. Res. Commun. 135, 374381.

Kelly G. J. and Latzko E. (1979) Soluble ascorbate peroxidase. Naturwissenschajien 66, 617-618. Kelly G. J., Latzko E. and Gibbs M. (1976a) Regulatory aspects of photosynthetic carbon metabolism. A. Rev.
Plant Physiol. 27, 181-205.

Marcus F., Harrsch P. B., Moberley L., Edelstein I. and Latshaw S. P. (1987) Spinach chloroplast fructose-1,d bisphosphatase: Identification of the subtilisin-sensitive region and of conserved histidine. Biochemistry 26,
7029-7035.

Kelly G. J., Zimmermann G. and Latzko F. (1976b) Light induced activation of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase in iso-

Marcus F., Moberly L. and Latshaw S. (1988) Comparative amino acid sequence of fructose- 1,6-bisphosphatases:

1282

WILLIAM NEL and STEPHANUS TERBLANCHE E. the product of a mosaic gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 16,
793 l-7942.

Identification of a region unique to the light-regulated chloroplast enzyme. Proc. natn. Acad. Sci. 85, 5379-5383. Meunier J.-C., But J., Soulie J. M., Pradel J. and Richard J. (1981) Substrate binding isotherms of spinach chloroplastic fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (EC 3.1.3.11) and the photoregulation of the Calvin cycle. Eur. J. Biochem. 113, 513-520. Minot R., Meunier J.-C., But J. and Richard J. (1982) The role of pH and magnesium concentration in the light activation of chloroplastic fructose bisphosphatase. FEBS Letf. 142, 118-120. Muller D. and Holzer H. (1981) Regulation of fructose-1,6bisphosphatase in yeast by phosphorylation/dephosphorylation. Biochem. biophys. Res. Commun. 103,
926933.

Rittenhouse J., Chatterjee T., Marcus F., Reardon I. and Heinrikson R. L. (1983) Amino acid sequence of the carboxyl terminal region of fructose- 1,6-bisphosphatase in relation to cyclic AMP-dependent phosphorylation.
J. biol. Chem. 258, 7648-7652.

Rittenhouse J., Harrsch P. B., Kim J. N. and Marcus F. (1986) Amino acid sequence of the phosphorylation site of yeast (Saccharomyces cereoisae) fructose-l,dbisphosphatase. J. biol. Chem. 261, 3939-3943. Robinson S. P. and Walker D. A. (1980) The significance of light activation of enzymes during the induction phase of photosynthesis in isolated chloroplasts. Archs Biochem.
Biophys. 202, 6 17423.

Nakashima K. and Tuboi S. (1976) Size-dependent allosteric effects of monovalent cations on rabbit liver fructose-1,6bisphosphatase. J. biol. Chem. 251, 43 154321. Nishizawa A. N. and Buchanan B. B. (1981) Enzyme regulation in 4 carbon pathway photosynthesis: Purification and properties of thioredoxin linked fructose-bisphosphatase and sedoheptulose-bisphosphatase from corn Zea mays cultivar golden-cross-bantam leaves. J.
biol. Chem. 256, 6119-6126.

Robinson S. P. and Wiskich J. T. (1976) Stimulation of carbon dioxide fixation in isolated pea chloroplasts by catalytic amounts of adenine nucleotides. Plant Physiol.
58, 156-162.

Nishizawa A. N., Yee B. C. and Buchanan B. B. (1982) Chloroplast fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase from spinach leaves. In Methods in Chloroplast Molecular Biology (Edited by Edelman M., Hallick R. B. and Chua N.-H.), pp. 707-713. Elsevier Biomedical, Amsterdam. Opie L. H. and Newsholme E. A. (1967) The inhibition of skeletal-muscle fructose- I ,6_bisphosphatase by adenosine monophosphate. Biochem. J. 104, 353-360. Pla A. and Lopez-Gorge J. (198 Thioredoxin/fructose- I ,61) bisphosphatase affinity in the enzyme activation by the ferredoxin-thioredoxin system. Biochim. biophys. Acta
636, 113-l 18.

Robinson S. P. and Wiskich J. T. (1977) Pyrophosphate inhibition of carbon dioxide fixation in pea chloroplasts by uptake in exchange for endogenous adenine nucleotides. Plant Physiol. 59, 422427. Rosa L. (1981) The rapid activation in uitro of the chloroplast fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase followed using a new assay procedure. FEBS Left. 134, 151. Rosen 0. M., Copeland P. L. and Rosen S. M. (1967) The dissociation of p-fructose- 1,6-diphosphatase by adenosine-5'-phosphate. J. biol. Chem. 242, 2760. Scala J., Patrick C. and Macbeth G. (1968a) FDPases of the castor bean endosperm and leaf: Properties and partial purification. Archs Biochem. Biophys. 127,
575-584.

Pogell P. M. and McGilvery R. W. (1952) The proteolytic activation of fructose- 1,6-diphosphatase. biot. Chem. J.
197, 293-302.

Scala L., Patrick C. and Macbeth G. (1968b) Castor been FDPase from endosperm tissue: Properties and partial purification. Life Sci. 7, 407412. Schiebe R. and Anderson L. E. (1981) Dark modulation of NADP-dependent malate dehydrogenase and glucose-6phosphate dehydrogenase in the chloroplast. Biochim.
biophys. Acta 636, 584.

Pontremoli S., Grazi E. and Accorsi A. (1966) Fructose diphosphatase from rabbit liver. VII. Tyrosine residues and adenosine monophosphate inhibition. Biochemistry
5, 3568-3574.

Pontremoli S. and Horecker B. L. (1971) Fructose-1,6bisphosphatases. In Methods in Enzymology (Edited by Boyer P. D.), Vol. IV, 3rd edn, pp. 611646. Academic Press, New York. Pradel J., Soulie J. M., Bus J., Meunier J.-C. and Richard J. (1981) Substrate-binding isotherms of spinach chloroplastic fructose-1,6_bisphosphatase (EC 3. I .3. I 1) and the photoregulation of the Calvin cycle. Eur. J. Biochem. 113, 507-511. Pradel L. and Aragnol D. (I 986) Effect of ligand binding on the pH-induced conformational change of fructose- 1,6bisphosphatase from spinach chloroplast. Biochim. biophys. Acta 871, 293-301.

Soulie J. M., But J., Meunier J.-C., Pradel J. and Richard J. (1981) Molecular properties of chloroplastic thioredoxin f and the photoregulation of the activity of fructose-1,6_bisphosphatase. Eur. J. Biochem. 119, 497-502. Springgate C. F. and Stachow C. S. (1972) Ligand induced molecular weight transitions in Rhodopseudomonas palustris fructose-1,6_bisphosphatase. Biochem. biophys. Res.
Commun. 49, 522.

Stankovic Z. S. and Walker D. A. (1977) Photosynthesis by isolated pea chloroplasts: Some effects of adenylates and inorganic pyrophosphate. Plant Physiol. 59, 428432. Stitt M., Mieskes G., Soling H-D. and Heldt H. W. (1982) On a possible role of fructose-2,6-bisphosphate in regulating photosynthetic metabolism in leaves. FEBS Left. 145,
217-222.

Preiss J., Biggs M. L. and Greenberg E. (1967) The effect of magnesium ion concentration on the pH optimum of the spinach leaf alkaline fructose diphosphatase. J. biol.
Chem. 242, 2292-2294.

Takabe T., Ishikawa H., Miyakawa M., Takenaka K. and Nikai S. (1979) A fluorescence study of the effects of pH and Mg2+ on the conformation of fructose- 1,6-bisphosphatase from spinach chloroplasts. J. Eiochem. Tokyo 85,
203.

Preiss J. and Greenberg E. (1971) Spinach leaf D-fructose1,6-diphosphate I-phosphohydrolase (FDPase) EC 3.1.3.11. In Methods in Enzymology (Edited by Boyer P. D.), Vol. 23, pp. 691-696. Academic Press, New York. Raines C. A., Lloyd J. C., Longstaff M., Bradley D. and Dyer T. (1988) Chloroplast fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase:

Taketa K. and Pogell B. M. (1965) Allosteric inhibition of rat liver fructose-1,6-diphosphatase by adenosine-5'monophosphate. J. biol. Chem. 240, 651-662. Taussky H. H., Shorr E. and Kurzmann G. (1953) A microcolorimetric method for the determination of inorganic phosphorus. J. biol. Chem. 202, 675.

Plant fructose- I ,6-bisphosphatases Tejwani G. A. (1983) Regulation of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase activity. In Advances in Enzymology (Edited by Meister A.), Vol. 54, pp. 121-194. Interscience, New York. Traniello S., Melloni E., Pontremoli S., Sia C. L. and Horecker B. L. (1972) Rabbit liver fructose-1,6-diphosphatase: Properties of the native enzyme and their modification by subtilisin. Archs Biochem. Biophys. 149, 222-23 1. Traniello S., Pontremoli S., Tashima Y. and Horecker B. L. (1971) Fructose-l ,6-bisphosphatase from liver-isolation of native form with optimal activity at neutral pH. Archs Biochem. Biophys. 146, 161-166. Ulm E. H., Pogel B. M., de Maine M. M., Libby C. B. and Benkovic S. J. (1975) Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase from rabbit liver. In Methods in Enzymology (Edited by Boyer P. D.), Vol. 42, pp. 369-374. Academic Press, New York. Walker D. A. (1976) In Intact Chloroplasts (Edited by Barber J.), pp. 235-278. Elsevier Biomedical, Amsterdam. Weeden N. F. and Buchanan B. B. (1983) Leaf cytosolic fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase. A potential target site in low temperature stress. Plant Physiol. 12, 259-261, Wolosiuk R. A. and Buchanan B. B. (1976) Studies on the regulation of chloroplast NADP-linked glycerol-3phosphate dehydrogenase. J. biol. Chem. 251,64566461. Wolosiuk R. A., Perelmuter M. E. and Chehebar C. (1980)

1283

Enhancement of chloroplast fructose- 1,6-bisphosphatase activity by fructose-1,6-bisphosphate and dithiothreitolreduced thioredoxin-f. FEBS L.&t. 109, 289. Woodrow I. E., Kelly G. J. and Latzko E. (1982) Fructose bisphosphatase of plant roots. Z. Pjanzenphysiol. 106,
119-127. Xu G.-F., Natalini P. P., Suda H., Tsolas O., Dzugaj A.,

Su S. C., Pontremoli A. and Horecker B. L. (1982) Rabbit liver fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (E.C. 3.1.3. I 1): Location of an active site lysyl residue in the carboxyl terminal fragment generated by a lysosomal proteinase.
Archs Biochem. Biophys. 214, 688694.

Youle R. J. and Huang A. H. C. (1976) Development and properteis of fructose- 1,6-bisphosphatase in the endosperm of castor-bean seedlings. Biochem. J. 154,647652. Yu S. and Pedersen M. (1989) Light-DTI activated fructose bisphosphatase in isolated chloroplasts from the marine green macro alga. Codium-Fragile sur hariot. Boi. Mar.
32, 79984.

Zimmermann G., Kelly G. L. and Latzko E. (1976) Efficient purification and molecular properties of spinach chloroplast fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase. Eur. J. Biochem. 70,
361-367.

Zimmermann G., Kelly G. L. and Latzko E. (1978) Purification and properties of spinach leaf cytoplasmic fructose- 1,6-bisphosphatase. J. biol. Chem. 253,
5952-5926.

