68

rature on healthy blood donors. However, when compared with the agematched volunteers in this study, these cells were reduced, indicating the nessecity of a relevant control group. Decreased "helper/ suppressor" ratios have also been presented in studies on other malignancies. Further studies are however needed to elucidate the biological basis for this imbalance in the immune system. Neuron-Specific Enolase Positive Cancer of the Lung. Ariyoshi, Y., Kato, K., Ota, K., Sato, T., Suchi, T., Suyama, M., Kunishima, K. Aichi Cancer Center Hospital, Nagoya 464, Japan. Neuron-specific enolase (NSE) is an isoenzyme of the glycolytic enzyme enolase that is expressed by neuronal and neuroendocrine cells. Recently it has been noted that small cell carcinoma of the lung (SCCL) which frequently exhibits neuroendocrine properties contains NSE. In the present study immunohistology and quantitative enzyme immunoassay were carried out on lung cancer tissues obtained from surgery or autopsy. Serum NSE levels were measured in 60 normal subjects, 50 patients with SCCL and 150 patients with nonSCCL. NSE was positively stained in a few tumor tissues of nonSCCL as well as most of tumor tissues of SCCL examined. Elevated NSE levels in sera of patients were observed in 75% of advanced SCCL and less than 30% of advanced non-SCCL if serum values exceeding 10ng/ml were set to be positive. Serum NSE levels changed in parallel with the clinical course during the treatments. Analysis of tumor response to chemotherapy showed that NSE producing nonSCCL was as sensitive to cytotoxic drugs as SCCL. The data presented here suggest that not only SCCL but also nonSCCL could have neuroendocrine properties, though the latter instances are limited. In cases with NSE positive cancer of the lung NSE is a useful disease marker and may be a therapeutic indicator of chemotherapy. Neuron Specific Enolase (NSE) During Treatment and/or Follow Up in Small Cell Lung Can~er (SCLC). 1 Kho-, G , Splinter , T Cooper 2 E3, Brown 2 "3 ~'' ' ' D., Muers , M., Peake , P., Pearson , S. i. University Hospital, Dijkzigt, Rotterdam. 2. Unit for Cancer Research, University of Leeds. 3. Killingbeck Hospital, Leeds. 4. Pontefract Informary, Yorkshire. There is growing evidence that the measurement of serum NSE can be of value in the assessment of monitoring SCLC. We have measured serum NSE-levels with a radioimmunoassay from Pharmacia in a large number of lungca, pts and investigated the use of measuring NSE-levels in SCLC during

treatment and frequent follow-up. 20 ng/ml of NSE were used as cut-off values for defining a raised level. Raised levels of NSE were found in lung ca. pts in: i/ii (9%) adenoca., 5/69 (7%) squamous cell ca, 7/15 (46%) large cell undiff, ca, 18/37 (50%) SCLClim. dis. and 31/39 (79%) SCLC-ext. dis., From July 82 heparin-plasma was collected from SCLC-pts before each chemotherapy (ct) course and every 6 wks during follow-up. 35 pts were included in the study: 25 pts from the start of treatment and 10 pts only during follow up. Ct consisted of cyclophosDhamide (i g/m 2) day i, doxgrubicin (45 mg/m 2) day 1 and VP-16 (i00 mg/m-) day i, 3, 5, q. 3 wks. 4 different patterns of NSE response could be recognized after the start of ct: persistently high NSE with a short survival; oscillating levels of NSE during ct or a rapid fall to normal level without prognostic values; a slow decrease of NSE to normal during 3 - 6 courses of ct, which was correlated with the longest survival of 70, 77, 78, 64 and 34 wks (the latter two died in CR). In 24/29 pts NSE-levels were raised at the same time as or preceeding clinical PD. 3/29 had a relapse of non-SCLC with normal NSE. Conclusions: A high percentage of pts both with SCLC and large cell undifferentiated lung ca have raised NSE-levels; frequent measurements of NSE during and after ct of SCLC may have a prognostic value and supports or predicts the clinical diagnosis of a relapse. I m m m o h i s t o c h e m i c a l Evidence for Endocrine Differentiation in Various Types of Lung Cancer. Linnoila, R. I., Funa, K., Norton, J.C., Mulshine, J., Matthews, M., Minna, J., Gazdar, A.F. National Cancer Institute, NCI-Navy Medical Oncology Branch, Bethesda, Maryland, U.S.A. Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and bronchial carcinoids are characterized by the presence of neuroendocrine (NE) antigens, enzymes and hormones. We investigated the occurrrence of 7 NE markers in 100 newly diagnosed lung cancers. We examined paraffin sections using an avidin-biotin immunoperoxidase method with monoclonal and/or polyclonal antibodies to chromogranin A (a structural protein in endocrine granules), Leu-7 (HNK-I, an antigen shared by neurons, endocrine cells and their tumors with human netural killer cells), neuron specific enolase, the amine serotonin, and the polypeptides bombesin, adrenocorticotropin, calcitonin. Our results: i) multiple (more than 3) NE markers were present in a large percentage of the cells of 18/28 SCLC tumors and 3/4 carcinoids; 2) 2/33 adenocarcinomas and 1/15 large cell carc-nomas expressed multiple NE markers in the majority of tumor cells; 3) multiple NE markers were present in a few cells of 9/33 adenocarcinomas, 3/15 large

