1

HCV RNA-dependent RNA polymerase as a target for antiviral development Michelle P Walker and Zhi Hong*
The lack of a highly effective and safe treatment option for the hepatitis C virus (HCV) has spurred aggressive efforts to identify new, more effective therapies. The RNA-dependent RNA polymerase encoded by HCV, which is strictly required for viral replication, has been the focus of intense drug discovery activity. This is in large measure due to successes in targeting the polymerases from other viral systems, coupled with recent advances in experimental systems for studying the HCV polymerase. Both nucleoside and non-nucleoside inhibitors of HCV polymerase have been identified through the innovative use of new screening tools and rational drug design. Some of these compounds have encouraging profiles and could be further developed into therapeutics. Initiation of clinical trials in the near future promises to yield exciting new information on the ability of these compounds to achieve sustained responses in suppressing HCV replication.
Addresses Ribapharm, Inc., 3300 Hyland Avenue, Costa Mesa, CA 92626, USA *e-mail: Zhihong@icnpharm.com Current Opinion in Pharmacology 2002, 2: 1471-4892/02/$ -- see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. DOI 10.1016/S1471489202001959 Abbreviations HCV hepatitis C virus  IFN- interferon- IRES internal ribosome entry site NS5B non-structural protein 5B  NS5BCT21 NS5B with C-terminal 21 residues deleted  NS5BCT55 NS5B with C-terminal 55 residues deleted NTP ribonucleotide RdRp RNA-dependent RNA polymerase SVR sustained viral response UTR untranslated region

Current therapies for HCV infection include subcutaneous interferon- (IFN-) monotherapy (IFN-2b, INTRON®; Schering Plough, Kenilworth, NJ, USA; IFN- 2a, Roferon-A; F Hoffman-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland), IFN- or pegylated-IFN- (PEG­IFN-2a, Pegasys; F Hoffman-La Roche Ltd) with oral ribavirin combination therapy (PEG­IFN- 2b/ribavirin combination, REBETRONTM; Schering Plough). The most effective therapy is the pegylated-IFN-/ribavirin combination, which achieves a sustained viral response (SVR) in 54­56% of patients (SVR is defined as the loss of serum HCV RNA, determined by reverse-transcription PCR, 24 weeks following antiviral therapy). However, for patients infected with HCV genotype 1a/1b, the predominant genotype found in the USA, Japan and parts of Europe, the SVR is at best 42­46% [5­7]. The inability of current therapies to achieve a high SVR with all HCV infections highlights the necessity of developing more potent and broad-spectrum inhibitors of all the HCV genotypes. The most promising antivirals target viral proteins or processes that are not endogenous to host cells. Close structural homologs of the HCV RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) do not exist within the uninfected host cell; thus, this protein represents an excellent target for antiviral investigation. The enzyme is encoded by the nonstructural protein 5B (NS5B) region of the HCV genome and is strictly required for replication of the single-stranded, positive-sense RNA genome and, indeed, the HCV NS5B RdRp has been one focus of the pharmaceutical industry for several years. The HCV NS5B polymerase contains the classic palm, fingers and thumb structural subdomains of a polymerase [8,9··]. The function of the palm subdomain is to form the catalytic centre of the nucleotidyl transfer reaction. This domain also contains the strictly conserved aspartic acid residues that chelate Mg2+ ions (a feature conserved among all polymerase families) required for nucleotide incorporation. The fingers subdomain interacts with the incoming nucleoside triphosphate, as well as the template base to which it is paired, and the thumb subdomain plays a role in positioning the RNA for initiation and elongation. Interestingly, a fully encircled active site, formed through interaction of the fingers and thumb subdomains, is found in HCV and the structurally related bacteriophage 6 polymerase [8,9··]. The interaction of these subdomains is thought to ensure coordinated movement and assist in modulating initiation, elongation and termination of RNA synthesis by encouraging high processivity of viral replication. This review summarizes publications of the past two years that detail the tools available for the identification of potent, novel inhibitors of HCV NS5B, including a

Introduction
170 million individuals are infected with the hepatitis C virus (HCV) worldwide. As many as 75% of patients with acute HCV infection will progress to chronic hepatitis. Up to 20% of these individuals may develop liver cirrhosis and 1­5% of these cases subsequently lead to hepatocellular carcinoma [1], resulting in nearly 10 000 deaths annually in the USA alone. Liver cirrhosis and cancer due to HCV infection are the leading causes for liver transplantation in developed countries [2]. In addition, HCV infection significantly impairs patients' quality of life and allograft survival following liver transplantation [3,4]. Hence, attaining highly effective, well-tolerated antiviral therapy is essential to alleviating the suffering and the economic burden to developed and developing countries alike.

2

Anit-infectives

Figure 1

replication complex, including the other non-structural proteins of HCV and cellular factors, could not be assessed. In fact, HCV studies have been globally hindered by the absence of an inexpensive and easily available in vivo or cell-culture replication system. Recently, the description of an elegant subgenomic replicon system in Huh-7 cells has allowed investigators to evaluate the effects of potential inhibitors in the more relevant context of the entire replication complex [13,14]. The replicon system lacks the potentially cytotoxic structural proteins, which are dispensable for viral replication. Instead, the neomycin phosphotransferase gene (neo), which confers resistance to the antibiotic G418, was introduced downstream of the HCV 5-untranslated region (UTR) and the internal ribosome entry site (IRES) sequences. The HCV non-structural proteins were expressed from a second IRES located downstream of neo. Transfection of the resulting bicistronic RNAs and selection of transformants with G418 led to amplification of cells supporting replication of the HCV replicons [13,14].

Ribbon model of HCV NS5B viewed looking into the NTP-binding tunnel. The  carbon trace for the majority of the molecule is shown in grey. Residues comprising the -loop region are highlighted in yellow, and the locations of the catalytic aspartic acid residues are shown in magenta. A single-stranded RNA molecule (green) has been modelled into the putative RNA-binding groove adjacent to the initiating (red) and elongating (dark blue) ribonucleoside triphosphates. Light blue spheres represent the metal binding sites. The putative interrogation site for the incoming nucleotide triphosphate is modelled in thin black lines, and the proposed allosteric GTP-binding site on the thumb subdomain is modelled in orange.

Potential drug targets within the NS5B polymerase
The RdRp activity of HCV NS5B polymerase is strictly required for HCV replication, highlighting this key viral enzyme as a relevant target for antiviral therapy. Catalysis by the NS5B polymerase may be simplified to a temporal sequence of events: template docking and nucleotide binding, initiation, elongation, termination and template release. Intense scrutiny of these activities using in vitro transcription systems with purified NS5B has provided a mechanistic view of the catalytic process. The resolution of the HCV NS5B crystal structure provides various models that can be tested to ascertain the reaction pathway of viral RNA synthesis [8,15,16]. Importantly, structural features particular to this class of polymerase have been revealed. Figure 1 shows the general structural features of this enzyme, as revealed by structural work described to date. A unique -hairpin in the thumb subdomain and the interaction between the `fingertips' and thumb subdomain were some of the early revelations for HCV polymerase [8]. Recent crystallization of NS5B complexed with ribonucleotides (NTPs) revealed four NTP binding sites, including a specific GTP binding site at the interface between the fingers and thumb, which may represent a unique allosteric regulatory site (Figure 1; [17··]).
In vitro analysis The enzyme

description of crystallographic studies, in vitro assays, the cell culture adapted replicon system, and SELEX screening. We detail a model for HCV transcription and compare this to the structurally similar 6 polymerase in an effort to highlight present and potential targets of the HCV polymerase. Finally, we describe two major classes of polymerase inhibitors and survey novel inhibitors of each class.

Tools for HCV antiviral drug discovery
The urgent need for an efficacious and tolerable HCV treatment has encouraged the rapid development of several in vitro and in vivo assays to aid in the identification and evaluation of lead compounds that target the HCV NS5B polymerase. Early drug discovery efforts focused on in vitro transcription systems, using recombinant NS5B purified from bacterial or insect cells with heteropolymeric or homopolymeric templates [10­12]; however, progress was slow because of the insoluble and inactive nature of the full-length protein. A key advance was made through deletion of the highly hydrophobic C-terminal tail, which increases the solubility and in vitro activity of NS5B. These in vitro assays were useful in studying structurebased activity relationships and in identification of residues and motifs critical for replication, through construction of NS5B mutants. However, there were limitations. The contributions made by the remainder of the

Although data focused on the NS5B polymerase has rapidly expanded, a reconciliation of certain results is central to the description of a reliable model of HCV replication. The use of various purified NS5Bs and in vitro assay conditions has led to some inconsistencies. The full-length protein has poor solubility and requires high concentrations of salts, glycerol and detergent to remain in solution [11,12,18]. As a result, this protein contains a high proportion of inactive enzyme [18­20]. Hydropathy profiling revealed

HCV RNA-dependent RNA polymerase as a target for antiviral development Walker and Hong

3

a highly conserved and hydrophobic C terminus that is dispensable for in vitro enzymatic activities [11,12]. This C-terminal domain is now known to anchor HCV NS5B to the cytoplasmic face of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane [21]. A 21-amino-acid deletion of this domain results in a truncated NS5B, NS5BCT21, which is highly soluble, easily purified, and free of high molecular weight aggregates [12]. However, a dilemma arises around whether this C-terminal domain should be included for many of the enzymatic characterization studies. On the surface, it makes sense that the full-length protein is more `native' than the truncated version. But, upon closer examination, in the absence of the cellular membrane this hydrophobic anchor domain will almost certainly cause aggregation or interfere with the stability of the remainder of the NS5B protein [18,21]. Further deletions of the C terminus (up to 63 amino acids) produce proteins with greater activity still, presumably by relieving occlusion of the active site by removing additional amino acids from the C terminus between amino acids 22 and 62 [8,11,12,16]. Whether this C-terminal occlusion of the active site plays a functional role in vivo or is simply a result of crystal packing requires further clarification. Additional variation in enzyme activity can stem from sequence variation. The activity of NS5B can vary by up to one order of magnitude, depending on the viral genotype/subtype the enzyme is derived from [22]. Analysis of the surface variability of the active site and binding sites of NS5B derived from less related subtypes will provide much needed insight for designing broad-spectrum inhibitors and selecting drug resistance.
The conditions

provide much improved efficiency and specificity for dissecting the early steps of RNA synthesis [30·,31··].
Initiation

Variability aside, the NS5B polymerase has been shown to initiate RNA synthesis by primer-dependent, copy-back [10,11] and de novo mechanisms [32­34]. De novo synthesis of RNA presumably represents the mechanism in vivo. Construction of a model for de novo initiation is aided by the complex structure of the structurally similar bacteriophage 6 polymerase [9··]. In this model, the single-stranded 3 end of the RNA template enters the polymerase active site for terminal initiation. The terminal cytidine base provides the specificity, as steric hindrance within the binding pocket would prevent the larger adenine or guanine base from entering and electrostatic interaction would not favor the uracil base [9··]. Upon binding of a nucleotide, which basepairs with the penultimate template base, the RNA strand is ratcheted back by one nucleotide and positions the terminal cytidine for initiation [9··]. This model further proposes three NTP binding sites: an initiation site, an elongation site and a novel interrogation site (Figure 1), which is supported by the recent elucidation of the complex structure of HCV NS5B [17··]. Inhibitors that target the initiation site can effectively inhibit viral replication. The tyrosine residue in the 6 polymerase required for initiation is absent from the HCV NS5B. Instead, a water-filled cavity exists in this region of the HCV NS5B [9··,17··]. Filling this cavity with a small molecule might be a feasible strategy to inhibit initiation (Figure 1).
Elongation

Finally, some caution should be exercised in interpreting mechanistic data obtained in different studies of this enzyme. Some conflicting results have been obtained depending on the template/primer selected for in vitro studies [11,23­27]. Again, the use of HCV full-length genome RNA or 3-UTR as a template seems to be the logical choice for characterizing activities of NS5B. However, in the absence of a replication complex which consists of many viral and host factors, including an essential helicase activity, the results from these studies are highly variable and in some cases lead to conflicting conclusions [25,27,28]. More importantly, characterization of the resulting RNA product is a `mission impossible' with, at best, a gross estimation of size. Extensive secondary structures in both the 5-UTR and 3-UTR regions of the HCV genome are difficult to fully denature. In addition, the nearly 10 kb full-length genome is too large to precisely size. The selection of homopolymeric template is equally problematic. Poly(G) and poly(U) are inactive, whereas poly(A) and poly(C) produce variable activities dependent on the assay conditions and choice of NS5B construct [11,12,18,29]. Born out of frustration, several investigators resolved to design synthetic RNA templates with defined sequences and secondary structures [23,24]. These RNA templates, although unnatural,

Once initiation has commenced, elongation occurs. Although elongation is a very rapid process, it repeats itself thousands of times during the replication of a viral genome. This provides the needed temporal exposure for targeted inhibition. Traditional chain terminators such as AZT and 3TC for HIV are effective elongation inhibitors. Recent proposals that ribavirin acts as an RNA virus mutagen mediated by the viral polymerase have shed light on new strategies for designing self-limiting universal nucleobases as elongation inhibitors [30·,35··,36]. Rather than halting elongation, this new class of inhibitor can be directly incorporated into the nascent viral genome, leading to lethal mutations. A significant loss in infectivity can result after a single round of replication [35··]. Elongation also requires movement of the template and exit of nascent RNA product through the active site. Steric hindrance within the exit tunnels of the RNA product could block further elongation by walling the template or nascent RNA in position [9··]. Studies looking for characters unique to NS5B have revealed a -hairpin that protrudes toward the catalytic centre of the enzyme from the thumb subdomain and provides another enticing target (Figure 1). Studies on -hairpin deletion mutants revealed that the

4

Anit-infectives

Figure 2 Sequence and predicted structure of NS5Bspecific inhibitory RNA aptamer. (a) 5-core stem loop (CSL), the core sequence, and 3-CSL correspond to fixed sequences of the combinatorial RNA library (SSL25/10) screened to identify NS5B-specific aptamers. SLII (stem loop II) represents the position of the sequence specific to NS5B. The singlestranded 3-tail was used for oligonucleotide binding used during reverse transcription and PCR. (b) Predicted structure of the NS5Bspecific aptamer with characteristic SLII. The Kd value for the aptamer is 1.5 ± 0.2 nM [40·]. (a) (b)

5-CSL UC U G C-G G-C U-A A-U G-C G-C G-C SLII

3-CSL UC U G C-G G-C C-G C-G A-U U-A G-CGTAAGCTTGGG-3 3-tail

AC G C G A U-G A-U U-G G C C-G G-C C-G C-G G-C A-U A-U G-C G A C C 5-CSL 5-CSL C-G G C-G C-G AG U G

3-CSL

3-tail

SLII
Current Opinion in Pharmacology

-loop might act as a gate to ensure terminal initiation from the HCV genome [37··]. Decreasing the size of the -loop enabled the mutant enzyme to initiate RNA synthesis internally, whereas the wild-type enzyme prefers to initiate synthesis at the 3 terminus (terminal initiation) [37··]. These observations indicate that the -loop may help to position the single-stranded 3 terminus of the HCV genome in the active site and restrict initiation to the terminal base, a function analogous to the C-terminal domains of bacteriophage 6 polymerase and the N-terminal domain of T7 RNA polymerase [9··,38]. Affecting the -loop conformation in a closed or open state might lead to errant binding of viral RNA and/or nascent RNA product, resulting in generation of defective progeny genomes in vivo. Indeed, the -loop deletion mutants are unable to replicate in vivo to form neomycin-selectable replicon colonies [39], suggesting that any -loop-modifying agents could effectively interfere with HCV replication and provide a highly specific HCV inhibitor.
Allosteric sites

thus effectively hindering initiation. Additional allosteric sites may be identified through characterization of novel inhibitors selected during high-throughput screening efforts mounted by numerous pharmaceutical companies. Information on novel drug binding sites is likely to emerge as more inhibitors of HCV NS5B polymerase are revealed.
Other approaches

Other approaches are being used to identify novel classes of HCV NS5B polymerase inhibitors. An RNA aptamer was recently disclosed (B.2 SLII.2; Figure 2) with low nanomolar in vitro efficacy [40·]. It was identified through SELEX screening (systematic evolution of ligands by exponential amplification) of a structurally constrained RNA library using NS5BCT55. The aptamer was found to efficiently compete with GTP for binding to the activation site. Although the in vivo significance of the GTP binding site has not been elucidated at present, combining structural informatics with biological activity will clearly lead to improved inhibitors.

Aside from the binding sites described above, remote allosteric sites can also be targeted for developing antivirals. Such strategies have been fully exploited for anti-HIV development. Recent co-crystallization of HCV NS5B with an activating GTP revealed a binding site located 30Å from the catalytic site, suggesting that such allosteric sites exist [17··]. Six contacts of the nucleotide moiety with NS5B were identified, which provide the specificity of the interaction: four within the thumb (Pro495, Pro496, Val499, and Arg503) and two within the fingertips (Arg32 and Ser29) [17··]. Compounds that interact with this specific GTP-binding pocket could theoretically interdict the putative conformational change,

Survey of novel inhibitors
The absence of a reliably efficacious cure for HCV infection has enticed numerous pharmaceutical companies to enter the frenzied sprint for compounds with superior efficacy and nominal toxicity. The result has been the identification of several compounds with the potential to inhibit various targets encoded by HCV, including the metalloprotease (NS2/3), the serine protease (NS3), the helicase (NS3) and a novel, highly conserved IRES [41·] that mediates capindependent initiation of translation of viral proteins. However, a primary focus is currently on finding inhibitors of the NS5B polymerase, as is apparent from reviewing the numerous patents filed within the past year laying claims

HCV RNA-dependent RNA polymerase as a target for antiviral development Walker and Hong

5

Figure 3

Figure 4

(a)

NH2 N HO O N O

(b)
N HO O

O NH2 N N

(a)
N

OH OH N O NH OH

(b)
Cl

H O S N S HN O S O

OH

OH

OH Cl

IC50 <0.04 µm (c)
N HO O H3C OH OH OH OH N N

O S O Cl

O NH NH2 HO O N

H2N O N N

Cl

Merck/IRBM IC50 <100 µm (c)
O F N O N Cl

Tularik Inc. IC50 <30 µm

Novirio Pharmaceuticals

Ribavirin
Current Opinion in Pharmacology

HO

N

OH

Nucleoside inhibitors of NS5B. (a) 3-deoxycytidine, patented by Ismaili et al. [42]; IC50 <0.04mM. (b) Ribavirin; 1--D-ribofuranosyl1,2,4-triazole-3-carboxamide. (c) 2--methyl guanosine, a nucleoside inhibitor disclosed by Novirio Pharmaceuticals. (d)

O

Japanese Tobacco IC50 <10 µm
O O N O N N H N H OH

both to new compound entities and to new therapeutic utilities related to HCV treatment. These patents describe compounds that can logically be subdivided into the nucleoside and non-nucleoside inhibitors. These two classes generally differ in specificity, according to their mode of action. Nucleoside inhibitors directly compete with nucleotide substrates for binding to highly conserved active sites. Thus, these inhibitors generally exhibit broader spectrum activity against a class of polymerases. Greater specificity may be achieved by a non-nucleoside inhibitor, which may interact outside of the highly conserved active site at a unique allosteric site common only to structurally related polymerases.
Nucleoside inhibitors

Boehringer Ingelheim IC50 <1 µm
Current Opinion in Pharmacology

For nucleoside inhibitors, chain terminators have historically proven especially effective against viral DNA polymerases. Design of analogous RNA polymerase inhibitors is being actively pursued. A patent by Ismaili et al. [42] claims a class of 3-deoxynucleoside analogs (Figure 3a) with submicromolar in vitro activity using a heteropolymeric template. These results agree with the work of others, which shows that the enzyme is more selective for nucleotides lacking the 3-OH group than nucleotides lacking a 2-OH group [19]. Non-chain-terminating nucleoside analogs are also feasible, especially those with mutation-inducing abilities.

Non-nucleoside inhibitors of NS5B. IC50 values for each compound are shown. (a) 5,6-Dihydroxy-2-[2-(2,4,6-trichloro-benzenesulfonylamino)phenyl]-pyrimidine-4-carboxylic acid. (b) N-[5-(4-Chloro-benzylidene)4-oxo-2-thioxo-thiazolidin-3-yl]-benzenesulfonamide. (c) 2-{4-[4-Chloro-4-(4-hydroxy-piperidine-1-carbonyl)-biphenyl2-ylmethoxy]-2-fluoro-phenyl}-1-cyclohexyl-1H-benzoimidazole5-carboxylic acid. (d) 2-[(1-Cyclohexyl-2-furan-3-yl-1H-benzoimidazole5-carbonyl)-amino]-3-(1H-indol-3-yl)-propionic acid.

Recent studies suggest that some analogs may possess promiscuous base-pairing properties. Once mis-incorporated, they cause errors in viral RNA replication [43]. As a proof of concept, a portion of the antiviral activity of ribavirin (Figure 3b) is believed to result from the ability of NS5B to utilize ribavirin triphosphate and to misincorporate this nucleotide into the viral genome, thereby mutagenizing the genome and decreasing the viability of progeny virus [30·].

6

Anit-infectives

Novirio Pharmaceuticals (now Idenix Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA) has also disclosed a broad series of nucleosides with extensive sugar modifications (Figure 3c; [44]). However, detailed biological information is not yet available, making it difficult to evaluate the mechanism of action of these nucleosides.
Non-nucleoside inhibitors

the importance of this structural element in maintaining the integrity of the ends of viral genomes, and provide insight to the strategy that the -loop can be an additional target within the RdRp for HCV inhibitor development.

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge Todd Appleby for three-dimensional structure drawing, Ilia Korboukh for chemical structure drawings, Nanhua Yao, Weidong Zhong, Jim Z Wu and Weijian Zhang for critical discussion and Johnson YN Lau for support.

Merck & Co., Inc. (Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA) and IRBM (Instituto di Ricerche di Biologia Molecolare, P Angeletti SPA, Rome, Italy) disclosed a narrow class of 2-aryl-4,5-dihydroxypyrimidine-6-carboxylate inhibitors of viral polymerases, especially for HCV polymerase (Figure 4a). Similar effectiveness is retained when the 2-aryl group was substituted to a thienyl group, in a homopolymeric in vitro assay [poly(A)/oligo(U)] [45]. The mode of action of these inhibitors is currently unknown. Tularik Inc., (San Francisco, CA, USA) described a class of rhodanine derivatives, many with IC50 <1 µM using NS5BCT21 with the HCV 3-UTR RNA (567 nucleotides) as the template (Figure 4b). These compounds are similar to those disclosed previously by Viropharma [41·] and are believed to be cysteine modifiers that target the motif E cysteine at amino acid 366 [46]. Japan Tobacco Inc. (Tokyo, Japan) has identified a series of benzimidazole derivatives, many of which exhibit potent anti-NS5B activity (IC50 approaching 10 nM) (Figure 4c). The assay conditions were similar to those used in the studies from Tularik [47]. Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH (Germany) followed with another series of small-molecule inhibitors centred on a benzimidazole scaffold (Figure 4d). The full-length NS5B was used with poly(A)/oligo(U) as the template in their in vitro polymerase assay [48]. To date, information has not yet been disclosed on how these benzimidazole derivatives work against NS5B at the molecular level.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

· of special interest ·· of outstanding interest
1. World Health Organization: Hepatitis C. Seroprevalence of hepatitis C virus (HCV) in a population sample. Wkly Epidemiol Rec 1996, 71:346-349. Monto A, Wright TL: The epidemiology and prevention of hepatocellular carcinoma. Semin Oncol 2001, 28:441-449. Ahmed A, Keeffe EB: Hepatitis C virus and liver transplantation. Clin Liver Dis 2001, 5:1073-1090. Forman LM, Lewis JD, Berlin JA, Feldman HI, Lucey MR: The association between hepatitis C infection and survival after orthotopic liver transplantation. Gastroenterology 2002, 122:889-896. Lindsay KL, Trepo C, Heintges T, Shiffman ML, Gordon SC, Hoefs JC, Schiff ER, Goodman ZD, Laughlin M, Yao R et al.: A randomized, double-blind trial comparing pegylated interferon -2b to interferon -2b as initial treatment for chronic hepatitis C. Hepatol 2001, 34:395-403. Manns MP, McHutchison JG, Gordon SC, Rustgi VK, Shiffman M, Reindollar R, Goodman ZD, Koury K, Ling M, Albrecht JK: Peg-interferon -2b plus ribavirin compared with interferon -2b plus ribavirin for initial treatment of chronic hepatitis C: a randomised trial. Lancet 2001, 358:958-965. Di Bisceglie AM, McHutchison J, Rice CM: New therapeutic strategies for hepatitis C. Hepatol 2002, 35:224-231. Lesburg CA, Cable MB, Ferrari E, Hong Z, Mannarino AF, Weber PC: Crystal structure of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase from hepatitis C virus reveals a fully encircled active site. Nat Struct Biol 1999, 6:937-943.

2. 3. 4.

5.

6.

7. 8.

Conclusions
Clearly, effort to develop potent inhibitors of the HCV NS5B polymerase is a preeminent activity in the search to find novel therapies for treating HCV infection. In addition to the growing body of information on this important target, recent advances in structural elucidation of other key HCV nonstructural proteins will greatly influence the course of antiviral development [7]. In the absence of a true HCV replication model, the wide availability of a subgenomic replicon system will undoubtedly move novel drug candidates forward more rapidly than ever. In spite of the considerable progress made to date, better understanding of various HCV targets at the molecular level will help redefine new strategies for better and safer therapies. Recent work on the structurally related 6 RdRp has confirmed the importance of the -loop structure in HCV polymerase for de novo initiation. When a similar loop in 6 RdRp was deleted, internal initiation and copy-back synthesis by the 6 polymerase was allowed, supporting the notion that both polymerases initiate RNA replication from the termini of viral genomes [49]. These results underscore
9. ··

Butcher SJ, Grimes JM, Makeyev EV, Bamford DH, Stuart DI: A mechanism for initiating RNA-dependent RNA polymerization. Nature 2001, 410:235-240. This paper describes and correlates a model of initiation for 6 polymerase and HCV NS5B. 10. Behrens S-E, Tomei L, De Francesco R: Identification and properties of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase of hepatitis C virus. EMBO J 1996, 15:12-22. 11. Lohmann V, Korner F, Herian U, Bartenschlager R: Biochemical properties of hepatitis C virus NS5B RNA-dependent RNA polymerase and identification of amino acid sequence motifs essential for enzymatic activity. J Virol 1997, 71:8416-8428. 12. Ferrari E, Wright-Minogue J, Fang JW, Baroudy BM, Lau JY, Hong Z: Characterization of soluble hepatitis C virus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase expressed in Escherichia coli. J Virol 1999, 73:1649-1654. 13. Lohmann V, Korner F, Koch J, Herian U, Theilmann L, Bartenschlager R: Replication of subgenomic hepatitis C virus RNAs in a hepatoma cell line. Science 1999, 285:110-113. 14. Blight KJ, Kolykhalov AA, Rice CM: Efficient initiation of HCV RNA replication in cell culture. Science 2000, 290:1972-1974. 15. Ago H, Adachi T, Yoshida A, Yamamoto M, Habuka N, Yatsunami K, Miyano M: Crystal structure of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase of hepatitis C virus. Struct Fold Des 1999, 7:1417-1426.

Update

HCV RNA-dependent RNA polymerase as a target for antiviral development Walker and Hong

7

16. Bressanelli S, Tomei L, Roussel A, Incitti I, Vitale RL, Mathieu M, De Francesco R, Rey FA: Crystal structure of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase of hepatitis C virus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:13034-13039. Bressanelli S, Tomei L, Rey FA, De Francesco R: Structural analysis of the hepatitis C virus RNA polymerase in complex with ribonucleotides. J Virol 2002, 76:3482-3492. This paper describes the first co-crystallization of HCV NS5B with ribonucleotides and identifies a specific and unique GTP-binding pocket outside the active site. 18. Tomei L, Vitale RL, Incitti I, Serafini S, Altamura S, Vitelli A, De Francesco R: Biochemical characterization of a hepatitis C virus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase mutant lacking the C-terminal hydrophobic sequence. J Gen Virol 2000, 81:759-767. 19. Lohmann V, Roos A, Korner F, Koch JO, Bartenschlager R: Biochemical and structural analysis of the NS5B RNA-dependent RNA polymerase of the hepatitis C virus. J Viral Hepat 2000, 7:167-174. 20. Carroll SS, Sardana V, Yang Z, Jacobs AR, Mizenko C, Hall D, Hill L, Zugay-Murphy J, Kuo LC: Only a small fraction of purified hepatitis C RNA-dependent RNA polymerase is catalytically competent: implications for viral replication and in vitro assays. Biochemistry 2000, 39:8243-8249. 21. Schmidt-Mende J, Bieck E, Hugle T, Penin F, Rice CM, Blum HE, Moradpour D: Determinants for membrane association of the hepatitis C virus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:44052-44063. 22. Hong Z, Ferrari E, Skelton A, Wright-Minogue J, Zhong W, Lesburg CA: Effects of genotype variations on hepatitis C nonstructural protein 5B structure and activity. In Therapies for Viral Hepatitis. Edited by Schinazi R, Rice CM, Sommadossi JP. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science; 2002, in press. 23. Kao CC, Yang X, Kline A, Wang QM, Barket D, Heinz BA: Template requirements for RNA synthesis by a recombinant hepatitis C virus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. J Virol 2000, 74:11121-11128. 24. Zhong W, Ferrari E, Lesburg CA, Maag D, Ghosh SK, Cameron CE, Lau JYN, Hong Z: Template/primer requirements and single nucleotide incorporation by hepatitis C virus nonstructural protein 5B polymerase. J Virol 2000, 74:9134-9143. 25. Oh JW, Sheu GT, Lai MM: Template requirement and initiation site selection by hepatitis C virus polymerase on a minimal viral RNA template. J Biol Chem 2000, 275:17710-17717. 26. Lohmann V, Roos A, Korner F, Koch JO, Bartenschlager R: Biochemical and kinetic analyses of NS5B RNA-dependent RNA polymerase of the hepatitis C virus. Virology 1998, 249:108-118. 27. Reigadas S, Ventura M, Sarih-Cottin L, Castroviejo M, Litvak S, AstierGin T: HCV RNA-dependent RNA polymerase replicates in vitro the 3' terminal region of the minus-strand viral RNA more efficiently than the 3' terminal region of the plus RNA. Eur J Biochem 2001, 268:5857-5867. 17. ··

32. Luo G, Hamatake RK, Mathis DM, Racela J, Rigat KL, Lemm J, Colonno RJ: De novo initiation of RNA synthesis by the RNAdependent RNA polymerase (NS5B) of hepatitis C virus. J Virol 2000, 74:851-863. 33. Oh JW, Ito T, Lai MM: A recombinant hepatitis C virus RNAdependent RNA polymerase capable of copying the full-length viral RNA. J Virol 1999, 73:7694-7702. 34. Zhong W, Uss AS, Ferrari E, Lau JY, Hong Z: De novo initiation of RNA synthesis by hepatitis C virus nonstructural protein 5B polymerase. J Virol 2000, 74:2017-2022. 35. Crotty S, Cameron CE, Andino R: RNA virus error catastrophe: ·· direct molecular test by using ribavirin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:6895-6900. This paper provides sequencing data showing that ribavirin induces mutations in the RNA viral genome, which consequently lead to error catastrophe. 36. Crotty S, Maag D, Arnold JJ, Zhong W, Lau JYN, Hong Z, Andino R, Cameron CE: The broad-spectrum antiviral ribonucleoside ribavirin is an RNA virus mutagen. Nat Med 2000, 6:1375-1379. Hong Z, Cameron CE, Walker MP, Castro C, Yao N, Lau JY, Zhong W: A novel mechanism to ensure terminal initiation by hepatitis C virus NS5B polymerase. Virology 2001, 285:6-11. This paper describes a mechanism by which HCV initiates RNA replication from the terminal bases of viral genome RNAs. 38. Cheetham GM, Jeruzalmi D, Steitz TA: Structural basis for initiation of transcription from an RNA polymerase­promoter complex. Nature 1999, 399:80-83. 39. Cheney IW, Naim S, Lai VCH, Dempsey S, Bellows D, Walker MP, Shim J-H, Horscroft N, Hong Z, Zhong W: Mutations in NS5B polymerase of hepatitis C virus: impacts on in vivo enzymatic activity and viral RNA replication in the subgenomic replicon cell culture. Virol 2002, 297:298-306. 40. Biroccio A, Hamm J, Incitti I, De Francesco R, Tomei L: Selection of · RNA aptamers that are specific and high-affinity ligands of the hepatitis C virus bRNA-dependent RNA polymerase. J Virol 2002, 76:3688-3696. This paper describes the use of SELEX screening (systematic evolution of ligands by exponential amplification) to identify the first RNA aptamer inhibitors of HCV NS5B. 41. Myles DC: Recent advances in the discovery of small molecule · therapies for HCV. Curr Opin Drug Discov Dev 2001, 4:411-416. An excellent review of inhibitory compounds for the IRES and for each of the non-structural proteins of HCV. 42. Ismaili HMA, Cheng Y, Lavallee J, Siddiqui A, Storer R: Method for the treatment or prevention of flavivirus infections using nucleoside analogues. 2002, US 02/0019363 A1. 43. Loeb LA, Mullins JI: Induction of viral mutation by incorporation of miscoding ribonucleoside analogs into viral RNA. 2000, US 6,063,628. 44. Sommadossi JP, Lacolla P: Methods and compositions for treating hepatitis C virus. 2001, WO 01/90121 A2. 45. Gardelli C, Giuliano C, Harper S, Koch U, Narjes F, Ontoria J, Poma M, Ponzi S, Stansfield I, Summa V: Dihydroxypyrimidine carboxylic acids as viral polymerase inhibitors. 2002, WO 02/06246. 46. Jaen J, Peper DE, Powers JP, Walker NP, Li Y: NS5B HCV polymerase inhibitors. 2001, WO 01/77091 A2. 47. Hiromasa H, Kenji M, Hitoshi Y: Fused ring compound and its pharmaceutical application. 2001, JP 01/247550A. 37. ··

28. Pellerin C, Kukolj G: Internal de novo initiation sites of the HCV NS5B polymerase and use thereof. 2001, WO 01/83736 A2. 29. Alaoui-Lsmaili MH, Hamel M, L'Heureux L, Nicolas O, Bilimoria D, Labonte P, Mounir S, Rando RF: The hepatitis C virus NS5B RNA-dependent RNA polymerase activity and susceptibility to inhibitors is modulated by metal cations. J Hum Virol 2000, 3:306-316. 30. Maag D, Castro C, Hong Z, Cameron CE: Hepatitis C virus RNA dependent RNA polymerase (NS5B) as a mediator of the antiviral · activity of ribavirin. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:46094-46098. The first paper to show that HCV polymerase can catalyze mis-incorporation of ribavirin monophosphate into an RNA product. 31. Shim J-H, Larson G, Wu JZ, Hong Z: Selection of 3' terminal bases ·· for de novo initiation by HCV RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. J Virol 2002, 76:7030-7039. This study identified additional requirements at the 3 end of viral genomes needed to ensure terminal initiation by HCV.

48. Beaulieu PL, Fazal G, Gillard J, Kukolj G: Viral polymerase inhibitors. 2002, WO 02/04425 A2. 49. Laurila MRL, Makeyev EV, Bamford DH: Bacteriophage 6 RNAdependent RNA polymerase. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:17117-17124.

