Current Biology, Vol. 14, 782­786, May 4, 2004, 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI 10.1016/j .c ub . 20 04 . 04 .0 3 6

The Drosophila Carbonyl Reductase Sniffer Prevents Oxidative Stress-Induced Neurodegeneration
Jose A. Botella,1 Julia K. Ulschmid,2 Christoph Gruenewald,1 Christoph Moehle,1 Doris Kretzschmar,1,3 Katja Becker,2 and Stephan Schneuwly1,* 1 Institute of Zoology University of Regensburg Universitaetsstrasse 31 D-93040 Regensburg Germany 2 Interdisciplinary Research Center University of Giessen Heinrich-Buff-Ring 26-32 D-35392 Giessen Germany 3 Center for Research on Occupational and Environmental Toxicology Oregon Health and Science University Portland, Oregon 97239 neurodegeneration, and a sluggish walking phenotype that deteriorates with age. Examination of mutant fly brains by light and electron microscopy (Figure 1) reveals significant cortex and neuropil vacuolization that increases with age. This phenotype is not apparent in the parental strain or in young mutant flies, revealing an age dependency of the neuropathological phenotype. TUNEL analysis experiments show that the vacuolization of the neuropils correlates with apoptosis of neurons in the corresponding cortex areas (Figures 1G­1I). The occurrence of cell death is more evident in the cortex of the first optic ganglion, the lamina, where the number of apoptotic cells increases with age. Ultrastructural analysis of the lamina cortex showed that young mutant flies still have the complete set of five monopolar neurons that are part of each optic cartridge in the Drosophila lamina; these five neurons are surrounded by satellite glia that can be distinguished by their characteristic electrodense appearance and membranous processes [6]. Fifteen-day-old sniffer flies show the typical morphology of apoptosis in both neurons and glial cells. At an age of 25 days, few groups of monopolar neurons are still intact, and an increased number of apoptotic bodies can be found (Figures 1J­ 1L). The panneuronal expression of sniffer rescued both neuronal and glial cell death in the lamina, but the expression of sniffer in glial cells did not rescue any of the phenotypes. This suggests that glial cell death is a consequence of neuronal apoptosis (Figures 1C and 1F). Molecular analysis of the P element insertion from sniffer flies localized the transposon within the first intron of the gene CG10964 (sniffer), as predicted by the Drosophila genome project (Figure 2A). The transposon is also inserted in an exon of one of the two 5 UTRs of the gene thioredoxin reductase 1 (TrxR-1) [7, 8]; however, the insertion does not affect the expression of the latter (Figure 2B). In addition, the ectopic expression of TrxR-1A in mutant flies does not rescue any of the sniffer phenotypes (data not shown). In contrast, the transposon insertion severely reduces the expression of sniffer but does not completely abolish it (Figure 2B), which suggests that sni1 is a strong hypomorph. The precise excision of the P element from the mutant chromosome fully rescued the sniffer phenotype, as did the panneural expression of the sniffer cDNA via the GAL4/UAS system. Both results show that the lack of sniffer function is responsible for the neuropathological effects observed in the mutant. We have generated a null allele of sniffer (sni2) by the imprecise excision of the transposon (Figure 2A). sni2 is lethal because of the lack of TrxR activity; lethality could be rescued by the coexpression of TrxR-1A and TrxR-1B with an actin-GAL4 driver but not by overexpression of sniffer. This result indicates that sniffer is not essential for viability during development. sniffer is expressed in all stages of development and in both bodies and heads of adult flies. In situ hybridization analysis shows that the gene is expressed within the entire cortex of the fly brain (data not shown), where all neuronal cell bodies are localized. This result sup-

Summary A growing body of evidence suggests that oxidative stress is a common underlying mechanism in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's, Huntington's, Creutzfeld-Jakob and Parkinson's diseases [1­4]. Despite the increasing number of reports finding a causal relation between oxidative stress and neurodegeneration, little is known about the genetic elements that confer protection against the deleterious effects of oxidation in neurons. We have isolated and characterized the Drosophila melanogaster gene sniffer, whose function is essential for preventing age-related neurodegeneration. In addition, we demonstrate that oxidative stress is a direct cause of neurodegeneration in the Drosophila central nervous system and that reduction of sniffer activity leads to neuronal cell death. The overexpression of the gene confers neuronal protection against oxygeninduced apoptosis, increases resistance of flies to experimental normobaric hyperoxia, and improves general locomotor fitness. Sniffer belongs to the family of short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) enzymes and exhibits carbonyl reductase activity. This is the first in vivo evidence of the direct and important implication of this enzyme as a neuroprotective agent in the cellular defense mechanisms against oxidative stress. Results and Discussion Mutations in the sniffer Gene Lead to Age-Dependent Neurodegeneration Caused by Neuronal Apoptosis We have screened a collection of viable P element insertions [5] and isolated the X-chromosomal mutant sniffer (sni1). Sniffer flies show a reduced lifespan, age-related
*Correspondence: stephan.schneuwly@biologie.uni-regensburg.de

Oxidative Stress-Induced Neurodegeneration 783

Figure 1. Age-Related Degeneration in sniffer Brains (A and D) Twenty-five-day-old wild-type. (B and E) Twenty-five-day-old sni1. Neurodegenerative effects can be seen in the form of vacuoles in the neuropil region. The presence of apoptotic cells is denoted with arrows in (E). (C and F) The phenotype can be rescued by the panneural expression of a sniffer cDNA in mutant flies (25 days old; sni1/Y;UAS-sni/ ; elav-GAl4/ ). (D­F) Lamina structure of the same strains as those in (A)­(C). (G­I) Tunel stainings. (G) Twenty-day-old wild-type. (H) Five-day-old sni1. (I) Twenty-day-old sni1. The arrow indicates Tunel-positive cells. The scale bar represents 50 m (A­C) and 25 m (D­I). (J­L) Ultrastructural examination of the lamina cortex in sni1. (J) In 5-day-old-flies, the sets of lamina monopolar neurons are intact and are surrounded by glial cells (asterisks). (K) Fifteen-day-old flies show glial (arrow) and neuronal cells (arrowhead) with the characteristic apoptotic morphology. (L) The lamina of 25-day-old flies is largely disrupted, and only isolated cells can be detected, together with an increasing number of apoptotic bodies (arrows). The scale bar represents 2.5 m.

ports the results from the rescue experiments, which also show a neuronal requirement. Sniffer Encodes a Carbonyl Reductase, a Member of the Short-Chain Dehydrogenase/ Reductase Superfamily In order to further characterize the function of Sniffer, we purified the recombinant protein. Analysis of the Sniffer primary structure clearly places the enzyme into the SDR superfamily [9]. The overall identity between members of the family ranges from 15% to 30%, suggesting early evolutionary divergence. In particular, Sniffer shows similarity with human carbonyl reductases CR-1 (27.4% identity), CR-2 (22.5%), and CR-3 (24.9%) (Figure 2C), and it has all the essential motifs, such as an NADP(H) binding site, NNAGI motif, active site, and PG-motif, for this class of enzymes. Carbonyl reductases are responsible for the reduction of a large number of biological and xenobiotic carbonyl compounds, and their expression has been found to be upregulated in brains suffering from Alzheimers disease, suggesting a role in the oxida´ tive stress-induced detoxification of highly reactive carbonyl groups [10, 11]. The Sniffer protein showed activity in the insulin assay, a test for general redox activity. Sniffer was less active than thioredoxin-1 from D. melanogaster but acted dose dependently (Figure 2D). With a KM-value of 7 M, Sniffer was found to be NADPH dependent, and it accepted a variety of substrates previously reported for carbonyl reductases [12] (Table S1 in the Supplemental Data available with this article online). Sniffer is, so

far, the only known functional carbonyl reductase in Drosophila melanogaster. To investigate whether Sniffer has carbonyl reductase activity in vivo, we expressed the sniffer cDNA by using the actin-GAL4 driver in the wild-type and thereby driving the expression of the gene in supposedly every cell of the fly. The amount of total carbonyl groups [13] in 12- and 25-day-old flies compared to control flies was reduced by 50% and 20%, respectively (Figure 3C). The level of protein carbonylation during aging (Figure 3C) was not significantly different between sniffer and wild-type flies, nor did we detect an accumulation of specific carbonylated substrates in sniffer flies by Western blotting analysis with total protein extracts and carbonyl-specific antibodies (data not shown). However, we found a 50% reduction of general carbonyl reductase activity in sniffer flies when we used two different substrates (121.3 13.6 [wild-type] versus 61.8 7.0 [sniffer] when 9,10-Phenantrenequinone was used and 58.4 1.3 [wild type] versus 30.5 1.0 [sniffer] when p-Nitrobenzaldehyde was used). A possible explanation for the discrepancy found between the lack of increase in protein carbonylation and the significant reduction in carbonyl reductase activity in mutant flies is that the 50% of carbonyl reductase activity left in mutant flies could be enough to prevent a significant increase of total carbonyl protein content. Alternatively, given the broad spectrum of substrates found for carbonyl reductases, Sniffer could be involved in the reduction of other reactive carbonyl groups apart from those found as protein carbonyl adducts. Altogether, these results show that Sniffer is indeed a carbonyl reductase and that the

Current Biology 784

Figure 2. Molecular Analysis of sniffer (A) The sniffer locus. Arrows represent the direction of transcription. Sni2 is a null allele generated by imprecise excision of the P element. The thioredoxin reductase gene encodes at least two different transcripts18, TrxR-1A and TrxR-1B, both transcribed in the opposite direction of sni. (B) Transcription of sniffer but not of TrxR-1A is severely reduced in the mutant fly. (wt parental strain). (C) Alignment of Sniffer with human carbonyl reductases 1 and 3. (D) Sniffer exhibits concentration-dependent reductase activity in the insuline assay. Sniffer protein was used in the assay at two different concentrations (5 M [triangles] and 20 M [circles]). 1 mM DTT (rhomboids) and 5 M of Drosophila thioredoxin-1 (squares) were used, respectively, as negative and positive controls.

level of enzymatic activity is drastically reduced in the mutant. Sniffer Mutants Are Highly Sensitive to HyperoxiaInduced Oxidative Stress In order to assess the function of Sniffer in the context of neuronal protection from oxidative stress, we have exposed control flies, mutant flies, and flies overexpressing sniffer to hyperoxia (99.5% oxygen) as an oxidative paradigm (Figure 3B). The mean and maximum lifespan of sniffer flies was reduced by 76.6% (2.1 days) and 33% (6 days), respectively, suggesting a hypersensitive response to hyperoxia. This phenotype could be rescued by expression of a wild-type sniffer cDNA with the actin-GAL4 driver. Strikingly, the overexpression of sniffer in the wild-type background resulted in a significant extension of the mean and maximum lifespan (43% and 44.4%, respectively) compared to the control. Our results show that the function of Sniffer is required for protecting flies from the deleterious effects of oxygen; mutant flies are hypersensitive to hyperoxia, and overexpression of sniffer confers protection and a substantial extension of the lifespan under oxidative stress. Overexpression of sniffer did not extend the lifespan of wildtype flies under normal oxygen conditions (Figure 3A).

This indicates that the endogenous expression of sniffer might be sufficient to exert the maximum protection possible in natural oxygen conditions. With increased levels of O2, the amount of Sniffer might become limited, and ectopic expression of the gene could then prevent the deleterious effects of such a highly oxidative atmosphere. Sniffer Protects Flies from Hyperoxia-Induced Neurodegeneration Hyperoxia not only affects the lifespan of wild-type flies but also induces neurodegeneration. Flies exposed to hyperoxia developed a brain degeneration phenotype similar to that seen in sniffer flies under normoxia (normal atmospheric oxygen levels; Figure 4). Wild-type flies maintained for 7 days under hyperoxia show neuropil vacuolization as well as high levels of apoptosis within the entire brain (Figure 4C). Interestingly, a high number of apoptotic cells could be detected in the lamina cortex, a feature also found in sniffer flies. This suggests that monopolar neurons are especially sensitive to oxidative stress. sniffer flies exposed to hyperoxia showed very strong degeneration already after 4 days when they were compared to wild-type flies under the same conditions or to sniffer flies that were of the same age but were

Oxidative Stress-Induced Neurodegeneration 785

Figure 3. Overexpression of sniffer Protects Against Oxidative Stress, Reduces the Total Amount of Protein Carbonyl Groups, and Improves Walking Fitness in Drosophila. (A) Lifespan under normoxia. sni1/Y (solid circles), sni1/Y;UAS-sni/ ;actin-GAL4/ (open circles), parental line W1118/Y (open squares), and W1118/Y;UAS-sni/ ;actin-GAL4/ (solid squares). (B) Lifespan under hyperoxia (99.5% oxygen). sni1/Y (solid circles), control lines: W1118/Y (open squares) W1118/Y; /CyO; actin-GAL4/ (open rhomboids). Overexpression of sniffer rescues the mutant phenotype and extends the lifespan of wild-type flies (sni1/Y;UAS-sni/ ;actin-GAL4/ , open circles and W1118/Y;UAS-sni/ ;actin-GAL4/ , solid squares). (C) Total carbonyl content. W1118/Y (open bar), sni1/Y (striped bar), and W1118/Y;UAS-sni/ ;actin-GAL4/ (solid bar). (D) Overexpression of sniffer improves the performance of flies in negative geotaxis experiments. W1118/Y (open bar), sni1/Y (striped bar), sni1/Y;UAS-sni/ ;actin-GAL4/ (gray bar), and W1118/Y;UASsni/ ;actin-GAL4/ (solid bar).

maintained in normoxia conditions (Figures 4A and 4B). Moreover, overexpression of sniffer via actin-GAL4 in 7-day-old wild-type flies substantially protected the flies from brain degeneration induced by oxygen (Figure 4D). Flies overexpressing sniffer showed weak degeneration exclusively in the olfactory lobes, which might be due to a low expression level of actin-GAL4 in that region of the brain. These results show that Sniffer exerts an important protective role against oxidative stress in neurons. Age-Dependent Defects in Locomotor Activity Can Be Prevented by Sniffer Overexpression Aging has a deleterious effect on the locomotor activity of wild-type flies in negative geotaxis experiments. Hyperoxia also affects the flies' walking performance, suggesting that the age-related walking phenotype might be due to an accumulation of defects induced by oxygen during the lifetime of the individual [14]. Because sniffer flies show a significant walking defect that increases with age, we asked whether this effect was due to the lack of Sniffer function. Additionally, we tested whether the overexpression of sniffer in wild-type flies could improve the individuals' locomotor activity during aging. As can be seen in Figure 3D, 1-day-old sniffer flies already show an impaired ability to perform in the negative geotaxis paradigm. This phenotype can be rescued by restoration of the wild-type function of sniffer in mutant flies. In addition, the expression of sniffer in the wild-type background counteracts the effect of age on walking speed, and it improves the performance of 20- and 30-

Figure 4. Sniffer Protects against Oxidative Stress-Induced Neurodegeneration in Flies (A) Hyperoxia treatment for 4 days enhances the brain degeneration phenotype of 7-day-old mutant flies (compare with Figure 1B, showing a 25-day-old sni fly). (B) Wild-type flies maintained under hyperoxia for 4 days show neither apoptotic cells nor vacuolization of the neuropils. (C) After 7 days of treatment, wild-type flies develop a phenotype similar to sniffer mutants and widespread apoptosis can be detected in the lamina (arrows). (D) Ectopic expression of sniffer (W1118/Y;UAS-sni/ ;actin-GAL4/ ) protects the brain from the neurodegeneration observed in wildtype and mutant flies, showing that the function of this gene is directly involved in conferring neuronal protection against free-radical oxidative stress.

Current Biology 786

day-old wild-type flies by 63% and 78.8%, respectively. These results indicate that the age-dependent decrease in locomotor performance might be caused by the accumulation of O2-induced defects and that sniffer can slow down this symptom of aging. Conclusions Reactive oxygen species generated by intracellular reactions to oxygen are considered to be the major source of oxidative stress in organisms [15]. Aerobic organisms have succeeded in developing cellular mechanisms of defence against O2 toxicity, and typical enzymes involved in these mechanisms are superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase, and thioredoxin and glutathione reductases [16, 17]. Although a possible link between the superoxide dismutase and neurodegeneration has been suggested [18], no clear causal relation between SOD activity and protection against oxidative stress in Drosophila neurons has been shown. Combining studies on neurodegeneration and oxidative stress in Drosophila, we show in this work that oxygen-induced stress is a direct cause of brain degeneration, and we report the isolation and characterization of a new gene, sniffer, a short-chain dehydrogenase/ reductase (SDR) family member whose function is essential for protecting neurons from oxidative stress-induced neurodegeneration. Not only is sniffer required for neuronal cell survival and essential to protect the individual fly against the toxic effects of oxygen under normal oxygen conditions, but it also exhibits a strong neuroprotective effect on neurons under hyperoxic conditions if it is overexpressed in wild-type flies. The Drosophila sniffer gene therefore not only indicates a direct link between oxidative stress and neurodegeneration but also opens new avenues for studying neuroprotective agents enabling us to further understand mechanisms of oxidative stress-induced brain dysfunction.
Supplemental Data Supplemental Data including Supplemental Experimental Procedures and Table S1 are available with this article online at http:// www.current-biology.com/cgi/content/full/14/9/782/DC1. Acknowledgments The authors wish to thank K. Fizia, U. Roth, and M. Fischer for technical assistance, U. Schafer and H. Jackle for fly strains, and ¨ ¨ R. Stanewsky, S. Fischer, and A. Hofbauer for useful comments on the manuscript. Part of this work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SPP 1087, Be 1540/6-2, SCHN 558/4) and by the Thyssen-Stiftung. Received: January 23, 2004 Revised: March 8, 2004 Accepted: March 9, 2004 Published: May 4, 2004 References 1. Sayre, L.M., Smith, M.A., and Perry, G. (2001). Chemistry and biochemistry of oxidative stress in neurodegenerative disease. Curr. Med. Chem. 8, 721­738. 2. Dawson, T.M., and Dawson, V.L. (2003). Molecular pathways of neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease. Science 302, 819­822. 3. Butterfield, D.A., Howard, B.J., and LaFontaine, M.A. (2001).

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10. 11.

12.

13.

14.

15. 16.

17.

18.

Brain oxidative stress in animal models of accelerated aging and the age-related neurodegenerative disorders, Alzheimer's disease and Huntington's disease. Curr. Med. Chem. 8, 815­828. Butterfield, D.A., and Kanski, J. (2001). Brain protein oxidation in age-related neurodegenerative disorders that are associated with aggregated proteins. Mech. Ageing Dev. 122, 945­962. Melzig, J., Rein, K.H., Schafer, U., Pfister, H., Jackle, H., Heisenberg, M., and Raabe, T. (1998). A protein related to p21-activated kinase (PAK) that is involved in neurogenesis in the Drosophila adult central nervous system. Curr. Biol. 22, 1223­1226. Saint Marie, R.L., and Carlson, S.D. (1983). Glial membrane specializations and the compartmentalization of the lamina ganglionaris of the housefly compound eye. J. Neurocytol. 2, 243­275. Kanzok, S.M., Fechner, A., Bauer, H., Ulschmid, J.K., Muller, H.M., Botella-Munoz, J., Schneuwly, S., Schirmer, R., and Becker, K. (2001). Substitution of the thioredoxin system for glutathione reductase in Drosophila melanogaster. Science 291, 643­646. Adams, M.D., Celniker, S.E., Holt, R.A., Evans, C.A., Gocayne, J.D., Amanatides, P.G., Scherer, S.E., Li, P.W., Hoskins, R.A., Galle, R.F., et al. (2000). The genome sequence of Drosophila melanogaster. Science 287, 2185­2195. Jornvall, H., Persson, B., Krook, M., Atrian, S., Gonzalez-Duarte, R., Jeffery, J., and Ghosh, D. (1995). Short-chain dehydrogenases/reductases (SDR). Biochemistry 34, 6003­6013. Forrest, G., and L.and Gonzalez, B. (2000). Carbonyl reductase. Chem. Biol. Interact. 129, 21­40. Blacz, B., Kirchner, L., Cairns, N., Fountoulakis, M., and Lubec, G. (2001). Increased brain protein levels of carbonyl reductase ´ and alcohol dehydrogenase in Down syndrome and Alzheimers disease. J. Neural Transm. Suppl. 61, 193­201. Terada, T., Sugihara, Y., Nakamura, K., Sato, R., Inazu, N., and Maeda, M. (2000). Cloning and bacterial expression of monomeric short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (carbonyl reductase) from CHO-K1 cells. Eur. J. Biochem. 267, 6849­6857. Levine, R.L., Garland, D., Oliver, C.N., Amici, A., Climent, I., Lenz, A.G., Ahn, B.W., Shaltiel, S., and Stadtman, E.R. (1990). Determination of carbonyl content in oxidatively modified proteins. Methods Enzymol. 186, 464­478. Mockett, R.J., Sohal, R.S., and Orr, W.C. (1999). Overexpression of glutathione reductase extends survival in transgenic Drosophila melanogaster under hyperoxia but not normoxia. FASEB J. 13, 1733­1742. Imlay, J.A. (2003). Pathways of oxidative damage. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 57, 395­418. Sohal, R.S., Agarwal, A., Agarwal, S., and Orr, W.C. (1995). Simultaneous overexpression of copper- and zinc-containing superoxide dismutase and catalase retards age-related oxidative damage and increases metabolic potential in Drosophila melanogaster. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 15671­15674. Missirlis, F., Phillips, J.P., and Jackle, H. (2001). Cooperative action of antioxidant defense systems in Drosophila. Curr. Biol. 11, 1272­1277. Phillips, J.P., Tainer, J.A., Getzoff, E.D., Boulianne, G.L., Kirby, K., and Hilliker, A.J. (1995). Subunit-destabilizing mutations in Drosophila copper/zinc superoxide dismutase: neuropathology and a model of dimer dysequilibrium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 19, 8574­8578.

