Molecular Cell 22, 611­621, June 9, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.

DOI 10.1016/j.molcel.2006.04.022

Mechanochemistry of Transcription Termination Factor Rho
Joshua L. Adelman,1,5 Yong-Joo Jeong,4,5,6 Jung-Chi Liao,2,3,7 Gayatri Patel,4 Dong-Eun Kim,4,8 George Oster,2,3 and Smita S. Patel4,* 1 Biophysics Graduate Group 2 Department of Molecular and Cell Biology 3 Department of Environmental Science, Policy and Management University of California, Berkeley Berkeley, California 94720 4 Department of Biochemistry Robert Wood Johnson Medical School 675 Hoes Lane Piscataway, New Jersey 08854 a cytosine-rich rut (Rho utilization) site, Rho loads the polynucleotide into its central channel before adopting a conformation competent to processively translocate along the strand (Burgess and Richardson, 2001). Rho has two nucleic acid binding sites: a primary site that binds RNA or DNA at multiple subunits (Figure 1A) and a secondary site that is specific for RNA and functionally coupled to ATP binding and hydrolysis (Richardson, 1982). Two motifs on each subunit are essential for secondary RNA binding and to Rho's catalytic activity (Figure 1B). The Q and R loops line the central channel of the protein and make contacts with RNA through specific positive residues (Wei and Richardson, 2001a, 2001b; Xu et al., 2002). The R loop makes additional contacts with the P loop of the ATP binding domain and is thought to act allosterically to couple ATP hydrolysis and the translational motion of RNA through the central pore of the ring (Skordalakes and Berger, 2003). To understand the functional mechanism by which Rho couples the hydrolysis of ATP to translocation requires knowledge of its kinetic pathway during active translocation. Several groups have proposed models for this (Geiselmann et al., 1993; Kim and Patel, 1999; Stitt and Xu, 1998), but the exact mechanism remains controversial. Even the number and type of ATP binding sites is widely disputed in the literature. One group claims that Rho contains a single class of ATP binding sites and that only three of the subunits are competent to participate in fast hydrolysis of ATP (Browne et al., 2005; Browne and Stitt, 2005; Stitt, 2001; Stitt and Xu, 1998). Another group suggests that Rho contains two persistent classes of sites: one class turns over ATP slowly, and the other class turns ATP over rapidly and is responsible for its main catalytic activity (Kim and Patel, 1999, 2001; Kim et al., 1999). Still, others have suggested that sites may interconvert between weak and tight binding through a conformational change in the individual subunits (Geiselmann and von Hippel, 1992; Xu et al., 2003; Xu et al., 2002). In this paper, we present presteady-state experiments that clarify and further elucidate the translocation mechanism. We find evidence that more than three sites hydrolyze ATP at a fast rate and that all six of the subunits hydrolyze ATP in the presence of RNA. At high ATP concentrations, Pi release is rate limiting, and we deduce that it is controlled by mechanical stresses generated by tight binding of nucleotide and propagated around the ring. Using a modified version of the computational algorithm developed by Liao et al. (2005) for the study of multimeric, multistate enzymes, we propose a model for the kinetic pathways of Rho that fits all of the data presented here and provides a simple physical explanation for the behavior of Rho mutants deficient in the ability to bind RNA. Results and Discussion Nucleotide Binding To determine the number of nucleotides that bind to the hexameric Rho protein in the presence of polyC, we have

Summary Rho is a ring-shaped hexameric motor protein that translocates along nascent mRNA transcript and terminates transcription of select genes in bacteria. Using a numerical optimization algorithm that simultaneously fits all of the presteady-state ATPase kinetic data, we determine how Rho utilizes the chemical energy of ATP hydrolysis to translocate RNA. A random hydrolysis mechanism is ruled out by the observed inhibition of ATPase in a mixed hexamer containing wt and an inactive Rho mutant. We propose a mechanism in which (1) all six subunits are catalytically competent and hydrolyze ATP sequentially, (2) translocation of RNA is driven by the weak to tight binding transition of nucleotide in the catalytic site, (3) hydrolysis is coordinated between adjacent subunits by the transmission of stress via the catalytic arginine finger, (4) hydrolysis weakens the affinity of a subunit for RNA, and (5) the slow release of inorganic phosphate is controlled by changes in circumferential stress around the ring. Introduction The Escherichia coli transcription termination factor Rho is a homohexameric protein that utilizes ATP to translocate along mRNA and dislodges the nascent nucleicacid chain from the transcription holoenzyme. Its six identical subunits are arranged in a torus with six canonical ATP binding sites located at the interfaces of the C-terminal domains of adjacent subunits (see Figure 1A). Each ATP binding site is composed of adjacent Walker-A/Walker-B motifs typical of RecA-like proteins that utilize NTP to perform mechanical work in the cell (Ye et al., 2004). After binding to a transcript at
*Correspondence: patelss@umdnj.edu 5 These authors contributed equally to this work. 6 Present address: Department of Bio and Nanochemistry, Kookmin University, 861-1, Chongnung-dong, Songbuk-gu, Seoul, 136-702, Korea. 7 Present address: National Center for Biomedical Computing, Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305. 8 Present address: Department of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Dong-Eui University, 995 Eomgwangno, Busanjin-gu, Busan, 614-714, Korea.

Molecular Cell 612

Figure 1. The Rho Hexamer (A) Open structure of Rho (PDB 1PVO) with a modeled RNA strand bound to the primary binding sites courtesy of Emmanuel Skordalakes and James Berger. Alternating subunits of the hexamer are shown in blue and yellow, and the hypothetical configuration of the RNA strand is shown in red. This structure most likely represents an initiation conformation, which is not competent to undergo ATP-driven translocation. (B) Structural detail showing the secondary site RNA binding Q loop, the nucleotide binding Walker A (P loop) and B motifs, and the arginine finger from the adjacent subunit. The R loop in this persepective is obscured by the Q loop. The RNA in the secondary site is shown as a cartoon circle because the exact interactions with the secondary binding site are unknown. (C) Cartoon showing the two stress loops that coordinate the progression of ATP hydrolysis cycles in each subunit.

used the ATP analog [BeFx]$ADP. A slow hydrolyzing analog is required for these studies because Rho hydrolyzes ATP at a rapid rate in the presence of RNA. An ideal ATP analog is one that binds as tightly as ATP and causes the same conformational changes as ATP. AMPPNP binding experiments in the presence of RNA showed either four nucleotides or six nucleotides bound with negative cooperativity (Stitt, 1988; Xu et al., 2003). Our studies and those of others have indicated, however, that AMPPNP is not a good ATP analog and does not induce the same conformational changes as ATP in the presence of RNA (Browne et al., 2005; Jeong et al., 2004). Therefore, we searched for better ATP analogs to measure nucleotide binding in the presence of RNA. Metal fluoride-ADP complexes have been used as ATP

analogs and for structural studies, and [BeFx]$ADP is considered an analog of ATP (Fisher et al., 1995; Ponomarev et al., 1995). We find as shown in Figure 2A that [BeFx]$ADP is a potent inhibitor of polyC-stimulated ATPase activity of Rho. The RNA-stimulated ATPase activity at 1 mM ATP decreased with increasing [BeFx] concentration with a K1/2 of 15 mM (data not shown). These experiments indicate that [BeFx]$ADP is a tight binding ATPase inhibitor that might mimic the ATP state and, hence, a suitable ATP analog to measure nucleotide binding. Direct binding of [BeFx]$ADP to Rho hexamer was measured by using a nitrocellulose filter binding assay and radiolabeled ADP. Titration of Rho-polyC complex with increasing [BeFx]$ADP concentrations produces

Mechanochemistry of Hexameric Rho Protein 613

Figure 2. Rho ATPase Inhibition and ADP$BeFx Binding (A) Rho (100 nM) was incubated with polyC (136 nM) in the Rho buffer, and ATP (1 mM) spiked with [a-32P]ATP was added to initiate the reaction. After 15­60 s time intervals at 18ºC, reactions were stopped with 2 M formic acid and analyzed by PEI-cellulose TLC. The inhibitors were added at 0.5 mM concentrations with the ATP, except for NaF that was present at 2.5 mM concentration. (B) Steady-state binding of [BeFx]$ADP to transcription terminator Rho in the presence (circles) and absence (crosses) of polyC RNA. Solid lines represent least-squares fit by hyperbolic equation.

a hyperbolic increase in the amount of nucleotide bound to the Rho hexamer (Figure 2B). The hyperbolic fit indicates that w4.8 [BeFx]$ADP bind per Rho hexamer at saturating nucleotide concentrations, with an equilibrium dissociation constant (KD) equal to 11 mM, which is close to the Km of ATP. In the absence of RNA, Rho binds 2.5 [BeFx]$ADP with a KD of nearly 70 mM. The stoichiometry of [BeFx]$ADP binding in the absence of RNA is less than the three sites/hexamer observed for ATP binding(Kim et al., 1999; Stitt, 1988). This might be due to some differences in the mode of analog versus ATP binding. In the absence of beryllium fluoride, no binding of ADP was observed (data not shown). The results with RNA indicate that the Rho hexamer is capable of binding more than three, but less than six, nucleotides. That less than six nucleotides bind suggests that there is negative cooperativity among the nucleotide binding sites of Rho. Chase-Time Kinetics Chase-time kinetic experiments quantify the number of ATP molecules tightly bound to the hexamer that are competent to undergo hydrolysis starting from an initial binding configuration. Initially, Rho is incubated with [a-32P] ATP, then it is rapidly mixed with polyC and excess unlabeled ATP. The reaction is halted after a range of chase times (milliseconds to seconds) with formic acid and the amount of ADP bound to the protein and in solution is quantified (Jeong et al., 2002; Liao et al., 2005). The chase-time kinetics of ATP hydrolysis is shown in Figure 3A. The solid lines in the plot are fits to a single exponential and the asymptotic amplitudes of these trajectories provided the ensemble average number of ATPs tightly bound to the Rho hexamer that are hydrolyzed. Weakly bound ATP dissociates into the solution and is diluted by unlabeled ATP before being hydrolyzed and so is not detected by this assay. Likewise, labeled ATP that does not initially bind to the hexamer is diluted after rapid mixing, and so this makes a negligible contribution to the measured quantities. Although the total amplitude of ATP hydrolysis is very similar, biphasic

kinetics were not observed in the chase-time experiments that have been reported in the literature (Stitt, 2001; Stitt and Xu, 1998). The occupancy of bound ATP reaches a maximum of w3.5 ATP per hexamer (Figure 3B). This number should not be confused with the number of catalytically competent subunits in the hexamer. A plausible explanation for observing less than six ATP hydrolyzed is that mechanical stresses in the ring during ATP binding limits the number of molecules that can be simultaneously bound tightly, creating an effective negative cooperativity. Such negative cooperativity has been observed in the nucleotide binding of other hexameric helicases such as DnaB, RepA, and gp4 T7 (Bujalowski and Jezewska, 2000; Jezewska et al., 2005a, 2005b; Liao et al., 2005). These data, along with evidence from other groups (Xu et al., 2003), lead us to conclude that, in saturating conditions Rho can only accommodate w3.5 ATP per hexameric ring or 5 [BeFx]$ADP per hexameric ring. Presteady-State Kinetics Show Biphasic ATP Hydrolysis Acid-quench presteady-state kinetic assays were carried out to elucidate the dynamics of ATP hydrolysis. The Rho protein was incubated with polyC RNA and then rapidly mixed with [a-32P] ATP. This reaction was quenched with formic acid at various times (milliseconds to seconds), and formation of ADP was measured. The resulting time trajectories for initial ATP concentrations ranging from 20 mM to 1 mM are shown in Figure 4A. The same kinetics were observed when Rho was incubated with [a-32P] ATP, and the reactions were initiated by rapidly mixing with the RNA (data not shown). For each ATP concentration, the dynamics of ADP showed a characteristic biphasic behavior. The initial burst phase results from the fast hydrolysis step in the catalytic cycle. This is followed by a linear phase of steady-state growth that is controlled by a subsequent step in the cycle. The acid-quench burst amplitude increased hyperbolically with increasing ATP and reached

Molecular Cell 614

Figure 3. Time Trajectories of Chase-Time ATP Binding Experiments and Steady-State Amplitudes (A) The total [ADP] in solution and bound to Rho after initiation of ATPase activity. Time trajectories are shown for 1, 6, 50, 100, and 200 mM ATP. The data points are least-squares fit by equation 5. (B) Steady-state values of ADP production obtained from fitting the burst amplitude in equation 5. This quantity gives a lower bound on the number of ATPs initially bound to each hexamer.

a maximum value around 2.5 ATP/hexamer. The burst amplitude and the burst rate constant do not provide directly the number of ATPs hydrolyzing/hexamer, as both values are composite numbers and influenced by the

intrinsic rate constants of a number of steps from ATP binding to product release. The only way to extract meaningful information from the kinetic experiments is to globally fit the data at various [ATP] to a kinetic model.

Figure 4. [ADP] Production and [Pi] Release (A) Time trajectories of acid-quench experiments tracking [ADP] production. Simulated trajectories are shown as solid lines and match the experimental data in both transient and steady-state phases. (B) PBP-MDCC monitored Pi release trajectory. Measurements are made for the same initial [ATP] as in the acid-quench experiments. The solid lines are fits to the kinetic model. (C) Comparison of Pi release and ADP production for a representative initial [ATP] (300 mM). Solid lines are the same simulation fittings as in (A) and (B). (D) Delay between ATP hydrolysis and Pi release for several initial conditions. The solid line is the mean delay over all concentrations.

Mechanochemistry of Hexameric Rho Protein 615

The solid lines in the plot are fits to the kinetic model discussed below. Pi Release Is Biphasic with an Initial Lag Next, we examined the time course for release of inorganic phosphate from the ATP binding site by using a coupled fluorescent assay (Brune et al., 1994) that was used previously in studies of T7 DNA helicase (Jeong et al., 2002; Liao et al., 2005). Rho incubated with polyC RNA is reacted with ATP and PBP-MDCC in a stopped-flow apparatus. The fluorescent change of the PBP-MDCC was measured as a time series and its magnitude converted into Pi concentration by using a standard curve. This trajectory is shown in Figure 4B for the same range of initial ATP concentrations as in the acid-quench assay. As in the acid-quench experiments, Pi release is biphasic; however, instead of an initial burst of product, the increase in fluorescence is delayed. This delay is followed by a linear phase in Pi production with a slope similar to that observed in the acid-quench experiments. This implies that the rate-limiting step is the same for both ADP and Pi production. Comparison of the acid-quench and Pi release experiments in Figure 4C shows the delay between hydrolysis and inorganic phosphate release for an initial concentration of 300 mM ATP. Direct comparisons of these experiments over the full range of initial conditions show that the lag in Pi release relative to hydrolysis fluctuates about a mean of w3.5 subunits (Figure 4D). In other words, on average, a subunit does not release Pi until w3.5 other subunits have hydrolyzed ATP. This indicates that the ATP hydrolysis rate is faster than Pi release. Furthermore, these results allow us to distinguish between 3-site and 6-site ATPase models as discussed below. The Occupancy State of Subunits Defines Their Affinity for RNA The lag between ATP hydrolysis and Pi release provides a method for measuring the affinity of a Rho hexamer subunit for RNA in the secondary site in the ADP-Pi state. The data shown in Figures 4C and 4D suggest that when ATP is hydrolyzed to product, Pi is not released while hydrolysis is taking place at neighboring sites. A model in which the ADP$Pi state has a high affinity for RNA and a relatively long lifetime before Pi is released would result in the RNA binding to three to four subunits simultaneously. Although no direct evidence exists for the number of subunits that concurrently bind RNA during translocation, comparison with other hexameric helicases suggests that ssNAs only interacts with one or two subunits at a time (Yu et al., 1996). Mechanical considerations also dictate that three to four subunits should not bind RNA simultaneously, for binding of that many subunits to the RNA within the central channel should necessitate a significant and energetically unfavorable deformation of the RNA strand, inconsistent with processive translocation. Therefore, we conclude that a subunit in the ADP-Pi bound state has a low affinity for RNA in the secondary site. Of course, translocation of RNA requires specific, high-affinity interactions with motifs lining the protein's central channel (Chen and Stitt, 2004), and this affinity must be modulated via conformational changes in order

for Rho to processively move along the mRNA transcript. Because both the empty (Richardson, 1982) and product states have a low affinity for RNA, the ATP bound state of the subunit must have a high affinity relative to these and is responsible for the translocation step. Constructing a Minimal Kinetic Cycle for ATP Hydrolysis and RNA Translocation We begin by defining a minimal cycle for a single subunit with the following steps:

(1)

The top row is the catalytic state of a single subunit, and the bottom row denotes the subunit in RNA bound states. The abbreviations are as follows: CS, subunit catalytic site; CS$N, subunit bound to RNA; E, empty state; T*, weakly bound ATP; T, tightly bound ATP; DP, products; ADP$Pi, hydrolysis products; D, ADP; and N$T* and N$T denote the weak and tight binding nucleotide states, respectively. The shaded reaction sequence shows the ``principle pathway'' for an individual subunit (see Discussion). We stipulate that a subunit is unable to adopt a conformation optimal for hydrolysis (tightly bound nucleotide state) in the absence of RNA and that the low-affinity states described in the previous section are short lived. Therefore these states are neglected, leading to a reduction of equation 1 to the following minimal cycle for a single subunit: E4T*4 N$T* 4 N$T 4 DP4D4E: (2)
Weakly Power Tightly Hydrolysis Bound Stroke Bound

As in other AAA proteins, we assume that an individual subunit applies force to the RNA strand to drive the translocation step during the weak-to-tight binding transition when the nucleotide progressively anneals its hydrogen bonds to the catalytic site (Liao et al., 2005; Oster and Wang, 2000). Structural data and mutational studies suggest that RNA interactions with motifs lining the inner channel contribute directly to its helicase and ATPase activity (Skordalakes and Berger, 2003; Wei and Richardson, 2001a, 2001b). We imagine this assemblage of loops lining the inner channel of the protein as a set of mobile ``lever arms'' whose motions are driven by, and tightly coupled to, the nucleotide binding state of the individual subunits. The crystallographic structures of other hexameric motors suggest a generally applicable paradigm of loop-mediated translocation. For example, each subunit of the bacteriophage f12 RNA packaging motor has an RNA binding loop facing in toward the interior of its central channel whose position is coupled to the occupancy state of its ATP binding domain (Mancini et al., 2004). A change in the chemical state of the ATP binding site propagates a large conformational change to the translocating loop attached to the RNA and exerts enough force to move the substrate (or the enzyme relative to the substrate). Recent evidence indicates that the RecA-like motors, such as

Molecular Cell 616

HSP100 chaperone ClpA, SV40 large T antigen, and p97/ VCP, all act similarly (DeLaBarre and Brunger, 2005; Gai et al., 2004; Hinnerwisch et al., 2005). Cooperativity in ATP Hydrolysis by the Individual Subunits of Hexameric Rho Previous studies indicate that the hydrolysis cycles of individual subunits do not proceed independently (Stitt and Xu, 1998). One way to distinguish between random and sequential power strokes is to study the activity of mixed hexamers made with wt and a RNA binding deficient mutant of Rho (Richardson and Ruteshouser, 1986). The choice of mutant Rho is very important; we chose an RNA binding-deficient mutant instead of an ATPase-defective mutant because the interpretation of the results is more straightforward (Liao et al., 2005). Most ATPase defective mutants retain the ability to bind RNA (Miwa et al., 1995), and if these mutants release RNA more slowly, then the presence of a mutant subunit in the mixed hexamer can block the rest of the wt subunits from binding or translocating on RNA. In such a case, a decrease in activity will be observed, but it does not allow one to distinguish between random and sequential mechanisms. It has been shown that mutations in the Q loop affect the ability of the Rho protein to interact with the l cro RNA (Wei and Richardson, 2001a, 2001b). The RNA binding defect was specific to the secondary site that has been proposed to lie in the central channel of the Rho hexamer. The ATPase activity of the Q loop mutants is therefore not stimulated by the l cro RNA (Wei and Richardson, 2001b). The Q loop mutant T286A Rho has been shown to be defective in secondary site RNA binding interactions and, hence, is ideal for this experiment. T286A Rho was mixed with the wt Rho in different ratios in the absence of ligands where they are expected to be dissociated (Geiselmann et al., 1992a) and under conditions of fast subunit exchange (Richardson and Ruteshouser, 1986). After 30 min of preincubation, ligands were added to stabilize the hexamer and to assemble Rho around the RNA. Figure 5 shows the ATPase activity of the mixed hexamers. A steep decrease was observed in the ATPase activity with increasing ratio of mutant protein in the mixture. To test whether the power strokes of individual subunits are random or proceed in sequence around the ring, we conducted simulations for both cases and compared them with the experimental results (see below). Figure 5 shows that when all subunits are made by the À ½T286A Á T286A mutant species ½T286A + ½wt = 1 , hydrolysis was greatly reduced. If RNA translocation is carried out by hexamer subunits at random, then after a power stroke the probability that the next power stroke is performed by a wt or mutant subunit depends on the ratio of the two species in solution. This mechanism would therefore predict that the overall hydrolysis rate will be proportional to the average of the wt fast rate and the mutant slow rate weighted by corresponding species amounts. Varying the ratios of the two species linearly would result in the hydrolysis rates changing linearly, as shown by the dashed line in Figure 5. This assumes that both species form hexamers equivalently, which we believe is reasonable given that the mutation is far

Figure 5. ATPase Activity of Mixed Mutant Hexamers Deficient in RNA Binding The steady-state ATPase activity was measured for a mixture of T286A and wild-type Rho. ATPase activity decreases as a function of increasing mutant subunits in solution. The solid line shows the predicted behavior for the sequential power stroke mechanism, whereas the dashed line shows the predicted behavior of a random power stroke model.

from the intersubunit interfaces. The experimental observation is that as [T286A] increases in the protein mixture, the l cro RNA-stimulated ATP hydrolysis rate decreases sharply. Thus, the nonlinear decrease in ATP hydrolysis rate rules out the random power stroke mechanism. We confirmed this observation by carrying out simulations for a sequential power stroke mechanism. The solid line in Figure 5 shows a nonlinear decrease in ATP hydrolysis rate in good agreement with the data. The details of how the simulations were conducted are described below after we introduce the algorithm of the kinetic model. Mechanical Stress and Cooperativity The mixed mutant-wt experiments shown above strongly support a sequential translocation mechanism and eliminate the possibility that the hydrolysis cycles of individual subunits proceed independently of each other. Liao et al. used arguments about the stress distribution in the T7 gp4 helicase to develop a minimal set of rules to enforce sequential hydrolysis and processive nucleic acid translocation (Liao et al., 2005). These same arguments can be applied, with some modification, to the hydrolysis cycle described above for Rho. Using the notation in equation 2 for each of the kinetic states, we propose the following assignments. (1) The power stroke transition N$T* (weak) / N$T (tight) occurs when RNA is bound to a single subunit. (2) The hydrolysis step N$T / NDP requires the next subunit to be in the RNA bound state N$T*. (3) The nucleotide binding transition T*/ N$T* cannot proceed until the previous subunit has completed its power stroke and is in the N$T state. However, these assignments alone are not sufficient to describe the observed kinetics. In particular, Pi release is delayed after initiation of the ATPase reaction, and this delay relative to hydrolysis is constant over a wide range of initial ATP concentrations. Therefore, it

Mechanochemistry of Hexameric Rho Protein 617

appears that Pi is tightly bound in the catalytic site after hydrolysis and does not release spontaneously. Structurally, this indicates that the catalytic site remains in the tightly bound configuration. Our chase-time experiments reveal that, in the absence of RNA, the Rho hexamer can only accommodate w3.5 ATP molecules in the tight binding state at one time. Additionally, the hexamer cannot bind the [BeFx]$ADP nonhydrolysable analog at all of its sites simultaneously. Assuming that these tightly bound states are structurally similar, we propose that a similar mechanical constraint is imposed upon the number of sites that can remain in the ADP$Pi product state. In our kinetic scheme, the N$T* / N$T transition is the only force-generating step and the only one that confers stress onto the ring. This stress radiates asymmetrically from the site to adjacent subunits due to the asymmetric interactions of the two subunits that comprise the catalytic site with the bound ATP molecule (see Figure 1D). We propose that the power stroke at the hydrolyzing subunit induces stress asymmetrically in the ring that assists in releasing Pi at bound sites. This stress must have a negligible effect on the preceding subunits because, on average, 3.5 subunits remain in the ADP$Pi state before releasing inorganic phosphate (the DP / D transition). Therefore, we add the following cooperativity enhancement to the scheme described above: (4) the DP / D transition is enhanced by preceding subunits in the N$T state.These cooperative transitions are implemented as a set of four rate enhancement factors and a cofactor defining the spatial dispersion of stress caused by tight ATP binding. For all other transitions, the rate constants are independent of the state of other subunits in the ring. An analysis of the experiments above provides a general scheme for the catalytic cycle of Rho. The ATP bound state has a high affinity for RNA, whereas the ADP$Pi, ADP, and empty states have low affinity for RNA. Because translocation requires the RNA binding domain to have a high affinity for its substrate, we are able to isolate the mechanochemical coupling step that transduces ATP binding energy to mechanical motion. Docking of ATP to a subunit's nucleotide binding site facilitates RNA binding; the power stroke that drives RNA translocation must occur as the ATP anneals into a tight binding configuration in the catalytic site. The power stroke brings the RNA strand within reach of the next subunit in the ring, and fast ATP hydrolysis dissociates the RNA from product bound subunit such that translocation may continue sequentially around the hexamer. Kinetic Pathways The state of the hexamer can be described by the individual ligation states of the subunits described in the kinetic scheme (2). The evolution of these states in time can be described as a set of pseudo first order rate equations: dc = K$c dt (3)

is an N 3 N rate matrix constructed from the six forward and eight backward rate constants: ! kE/T* kT*/NT* kNT*/NT kNT/DP kDP/D kD/E : (4) kE)T* kT*)NT* kNT*)NT kNT)DP kDP)D kD)E The rate constants are scaled by the enhancement factors such that transitions satisfy the four cooperativity rules while maintaining detailed balance. Transitions are restricted to those in which a single subunit state changes. We determine a set of rate constants and enhancement factors by using a modified version of the algorithm developed by Liao et al. (2005). An initial trial set of fitting parameters (11 rate constants and four enhancement factors) is systematically refined to obtain the best-fit rate constants, which minimize the least square error between the experimental data and the theoretical fit determined by our simulations. The results obtained by this computation are superimposed on the presteady-state kinetic data, and the best-fit rate constants are compiled in Table 1. The fit to the data captures both the transient and steady-state behavior for both the acid-quench and PBP$Pi release experiments. To determine the sensitivity of our fit to the value of each rate constant, we varied that constant while keeping all others fixed. We then computed the time trajectories and the corresponding residual error of the new parameter set as compared to the best-fit parameters. We chose a tolerance residual error w10% of the prediction error. The upper and lower bounds of each rate constant reported in Table 1 are identified when the corresponding residual error equals the tolerance residual error. The bold-faced values in Table 1 are of the same order of magnitude as the best-fit constants. Some of the parameters can be varied over several orders of magnitude without affecting the goodness of fit. Although we optimized many parameters, the relationship between the values of some of these--such as the binding and unbinding of ATP--is constrained by experimentally determined bulk dissociation constants. This constrains the search in parameter space for six out of the 11 fitted parameters. Simulations were also performed for a model in which only three of the six sites were catalytically competent to undergo hydrolysis and translocate ssRNA. This model was unable to capture the lag in Pi release observed in the presteady-state fluorescent measurements (data not shown). Because only three sites are able to turn over product, and assuming that hydrolysis is sequential, the maximum possible lag between hydrolysis and Pi release is two subunits. This result is not consistent with the experimental data presented in this study. The least-squares best-fit rate constants tabulated in Table 1 show that the initial nucleotide concentration [ATP]0 determines the rate limiting step in the kinetic cycle. When [ATP]0 is low, the ATP docking step (E / T*) is rate limiting. Increasing [ATP]0 changes the rate-limiting step. At intermediate concentrations (w100 mM), both the E / T* and DP / D are of the same order; at higher [ATP]0, Pi release (DP / D) dominates as the rate-limiting step. The slow DP / D step is consistent with the observed delay between hydrolysis and Pi release. The fast rate of the mechanical power stroke transition N$T* / N$T confirms the validity of approximating this

where c(t) is the concentration vector of all possible kinetic states. Given our simplified kinetic scheme, c(t) is a vector containing N = 66 = 46,656 elements, and K

Molecular Cell 618

Table 1. Best-Fit Rate Constants for the Hydrolysis Cycle of Transcription Termination factor Rho Step E / T* T* / N$T* N$T* / N$T N$T / DP DP / D D/E T* / E N$T* / T* N$T / N$T* DP / N$T D / DP E/D Reaction ATP docking RNA binding Power stroke ATP hydrolysis Pi release ADP release ATP release RNA release Recoil power stroke ATP synthesis Pi binding ADP binding Rate Constant 5.69 3 105 M21s21 326 s21 2045 s21 150 s21 50 s21 350 s21 6.3 s21 87 s21 4.3 s21 0.08 s21 2.27 3 103 M21s21 1.04 3 107 M21s21 Lower Bound 5.3 3 105 M21s21 310 s21 1200 s21 144 s21 48 s21 171 s21 4.0 s21 61 s21 <0.043 s21 <0.008 s21 N/A N/A Upper Bound 6.5 3 105 M21s21 378 s21 7410 s21 160 s21 54 s21 >1.0 3 107 s21 12.5 s21 109 s21 357 s21 31.8 s21 N/A N/A

step as a distribution of waiting times in a source state with an instantaneous kinetic jump between states. Calculated values for the KD of Pi (22 mM), ATP (11 mM), and ADP (32 mM) are in good agreement with the experimentally determined values of these quantities (Stitt, 1988; Xu et al., 2003). Modeling Mutant Poisoning Results The same framework used to construct a model of the presteady-state kinetics can be used to simulate the behavior of the RNA binding-deficient mutant. We assume the mutant and wild-type subunits form hexamers equivalently. Therefore, subunit association remains random, and the distribution of mutant subunits is not biased. Different proportions of wild-type versus mutant species give different distributions of mixed hexamers, e.g., WWWWWW, MWWWWW, etc., where W represents the wt subunit and M represents the mutant subunit. For a given mixture of wt and mutant subunits, there are a total of 64 kinds of mixed hexamers. Their initial distributions can be computed from the ratio of [T286A] versus [wt]. For each species, the kinetic equations are formulated and the steady-state hydrolysis rate computed. For a mutant subunit unable to bind RNA, the states N$T* and N$T are not reachable. However, this subunit is still able to hydrolyze ATP at the basal rate observed in the all mutant hexamers. Thus, we have the following catalytic cycle for mutant subunits: E 4 T* 4 T 4 DP 4 D 4 E. We also make a preliminary assumption that all rate constants, except the hydrolysis step, are the same as those for the wild-type subunits. The power stroke here, T* / T, has the same rate constants as N$T* / N$T. The hydrolysis step T / DP, however, becomes the rate-limiting step because of the lack of subunit coordination described above. The basal hydrolysis rate can be found by fitting to the data of all mutant species (MMMMMM). With this rate constant and all others known, we construct the rate matrix for each species and obtain its corresponding steady-state hydrolysis rate. From the distributions of all species for a particular [T286A] versus [wild-type] ratio, we then weight them accordingly and obtain the average steady-state hydrolysis rate for each case. The simulated results for this sequential power stroke mechanism are shown as the solid line in Figure 5. In this scenario, the substitution of a single mutant subunit into the hexamer completely abolishes sequential hydrolysis. The RNA, unable to bind to the

mutant subunit, cannot continue translocation around the ring, promoting fast hydrolysis at the wt subunits. Conclusions Based on our experimental observations and computational modeling, we present a consistent mechanochemical model for ssRNA translocation by Escherichia coli transcription termination factor Rho (Figure 6). We conclude that all six ATP binding sites are equivalent and participate in the hydrolysis of ATP and that sites undergo a transition between loose and tight binding of nucleotide during translocation (Geiselmann and von Hippel, 1992; Geiselmann et al., 1993; Xu et al., 2003). Although our data show that less than six protomers bind ATP tightly simultaneously, we believe this is a consequence of negative cooperativity induced by circumferential stress in the ring rather than several persistent classes of ATP binding sites (Kim and Patel, 1999; Kim et al., 1999). Similar negative cooperativity in nucleotide binding has been observed in other hexameric helicases (Hingorani and Patel, 1996; Jezewska et al., 2005a, 2005b; Liao et al., 2005; Rajendran et al., 2000). In particular, recent careful nucleotide binding experiments performed by Bujalowski and colleagues have definitively shown for the RepA helicase that the heterogeneity in macroscopic affinity constants of homomeric rings can result from negative cooperativity between subunits and are not the result two distinct classes of binding sites that arise after assembly of the protein (Jezewska et al., 2005a, 2005b). Here, we have shown that Rho displays negative cooperativity in the binding of both ATP and nonhydrolyzable analogs, both with and without RNA present. We have shown how dynamic stresses in a ring-shaped motor protein can regulate and coordinate the hydrolysis cycle of neighboring subunits. This occurs both via interfacial interactions between subunits of the protein and via the RNA substrate during translocation. Although most of the communication occurs between adjacent subunits, stress can propagate around the ring producing weaker--but still important--effects on nonnearest neighbor subunits. That is, stress mediates both local and long-range regulation of the catalytic cycle.
Experimental Procedures Protein, RNA, and Buffer Rho protein was overexpressed in E. coli strain HB101 carrying the Rho overexpression plasmid pKS26 kindly provided by Dr. Katsuya

Mechanochemistry of Hexameric Rho Protein 619

cytosine base. The RNA was dissolved in TE buffer (40 mM TrisHCl [pH 7.0], 0.5 mM EDTA) and used without further purification. l cro RNA was prepared by in vitro transcription (Ambion MEGAscript) using the TaqI-digested pIF2 plasmid (kindly provided by John Richardson) (Faus and Richardson, 1989). The l cro RNA was purified by using the MEGAclear kit (Ambion). The l cro RNA concentration was determined by UV absorption at 260 nm using an extinction coefficient of 3,764,500 L/mol.cm. Rho buffer contains 40 mM TrisHCl (pH 7.7), 100 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM dithiothreitol, and 10% (v/v) glycerol. Nucleotide Binding Experiments Nitrocellulose membranes (Schleicher & Schuell) were treated as previously described (Hingorani and Patel, 1996) and equilibrated in the Rho buffer prior to use. Rho (2 mM hexamer), polyC (12 mM molecules), and [a-32P]ATP were incubated in the Rho buffer for 30 min at 20ºC, resulting in complete hydrolysis of ATP. ADP (1­200 mM) was added, and the mixture was further incubated for 15 min followed by the addition of [BeFx] (0.5 mM) prepared by mixing 0.5 mM BeCl2 with 2.5 mM NaF. After incubating the mixture for 15 min, the solution was filtered through a prewetted nitrocellulose membrane followed by immediate washing with 400 ml of the Rho buffer. Control experiments were carried out at each [ADP] in the absence of added Rho. The washed and unwashed nitrocellulose membranes were dried and exposed to a phosphor screen. Nonspecific binding of radioactive ADP to nitrocellulose in the absence of Rho was less than 1%. The amount of [BeFx]$ADP bound per Rho hexamer was calculated from the fraction of counts on the washed membrane relative to the counts on the unwashed membrane times the total concentration of ADP in the reaction mixture. Presteady-State Chase-Time Kinetics of ATP Hydrolysis The experiment was conducted on a rapid quench-flow instrument at 18ºC. Rho protein (2 mM hexamer) was mixed with [a-32P]ATP + ATP (2­400 mM), and the mixture was loaded into the quench-flow instrument. Reactions were initiated by rapidly mixing an equal volume of the mixture containing polyC (2.68 mM) and unlabeled ATP (10 mM). After various times, the reactions were quenched with 4 M formic acid and the products were analyzed as above. The ATP hydrolysis kinetic data were corrected for inefficient chase by subtracting the slow linear increase following the exponential phase. The resulting chase-time kinetics were fit to a single exponential D(t) = A(1 2 e 2 k1 t ) (5)

Figure 6. The Sequential Mechanism of ATPase Powered Translocation Rho is shown ``unwrapped'' and viewed from inside the ring. (A) RNA is bound to subunit 1 in the NT* state, indicated by the black circle. Other subunits in the hexamer can be in different states, but at steady-state conditions, neighboring subunits are likely to be in the product, DP state because Pi release is rate limiting. (B) Binding of ATP at the RNA bound subunit drives a power stroke during the NT* / NT transition. The stress caused by tight binding of ATP radiates out from the binding site asymmetrically (indicated by the shading gradient) and is felt strongly by the adjacent subunit, 2. This stress helps the release of Pi and ADP at 2. RNA is only weakly bound by the subunit 2 Q-loop, indicated by the open circle. (C) Upon docking ATP into the now empty site in subunit 2, that site becomes competent to bind RNA (solid circle). The power stroke at the preceding subunit has brought the RNA into close proximity with B's secondary RNA binding site, allowing thermal fluctuations of the strand to allow attachment (T* / NT*). When both subunits are attached to the RNA, a stress loop forms (dashed triangle), prompting a conformational change in the subunit 2 ATP binding site that optimally aligns the catalytic arginine finger permitting hydrolysis. (D) The hydrolysis of ATP in subunit 1 decreases its affinity for RNA (open circle). Release of RNA at 2 leaves the hexamer in the same conformation as (A) with the RNA shifted one subunit to the right. From this position, the cycle repeats, allowing Rho to sequentially translocate RNA through its central channel. Shigesada (Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan) and purified according to Finger and Richardson (1981) with slight modifications. Rho protein concentration was determined by UV absorption at 280 nm using an extinction coefficient of 0.325 (mg/ml)21 cm21 (Geiselmann et al., 1992b). T286A Rho protein was a kind gift from John Richardson (Indiana U., Bloomington) (Wei and Richardson, 2001b). Indicated Rho protein concentration is in hexamer hereafter. ATP and RNA homopolymer, polyC, were purchased from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech. PolyC RNA had a reported S20,w value of 7.1 in 0.015 M NaCl, 0.0015 M sodium citrate buffer, pH 7.0 with an average length of 420 bases, and its concentration was determined by UV absorption at 269 nm using an extinction coefficient of 6200 M21 cm21 for the

where D(t) is the ATP concentration at time t, A is the burst amplitude, and k1 is the exponential rate constant. Presteady-State Acid-Quenched Kinetics of ATP Hydrolysis The kinetic experiments were conducted on a rapid chemical quench-flow instrument at 18ºC (KinTek RQF3 software, State College, PA). Rho protein (2 mM hexamer) was incubated with polyC (2.68 mM RNA), and the mixture was loaded into the quench-flow instrument. Reactions were initiated by rapidly mixing equal volumes of Rho-RNA complex with a mixture containing [a-32P]ATP + ATP (2­ 400 mM). After various times, the reactions were quenched with 4 M formic acid. An aliquot of the quenched reactions was spotted on PEI-cellulose TLC and developed in 0.4 M potassium phosphate (pH 3.4) solution. Unreacted ATP and product ADP were quantitated by using a PhosphorImager and ImageQuant (Molecular Dynamics). The molar concentration ADP was plotted versus the time of reaction. These kinetics were fit to the burst equation D(t) = A(1 2 e 2 k1 t ) + mt (6)

where D(t) is the ATP concentration at time t, A is the burst amplitude, k1 is the exponential rate constant, and m is the slope of the linear phase. Presteady-State Kinetics of Inorganic Phosphate Release The single cysteine mutant (A197C) phosphate binding protein (PBP) was expressed and purified as described(Brune et al., 1994; Jeong et al., 2002). Labeling of the A197C PBP protein with MDCC and further purification of the labeled protein (PBP-MDCC) were performed as described (Brune et al., 1994; Jeong et al., 2002). Fluorescence

Molecular Cell 620

stopped-flow kinetic experiments were performed with an instrument manufactured by KinTek Corp. (State College, PA). Inorganic phosphate release reactions were performed in the Rho buffer at 18ºC. The fluorescence signal of PBP-MDCC was calibrated by using Pi standard on the stopped-flow apparatus as described (Jeong et al., 2002). A 40 ml solution containing Rho (200 nM hexamer), polyC RNA (400 nM), and Pi-mop (0.5 U/ml PNPase with 300 mM 7-MEG) was rapidly mixed with 40 ml of ATP (40­2000 mM), Pi-mop, and 10 mM PBP-MDCC in the stopped-flow instrument at 18ºC. The fluorescence changes of PBP-MDCC were monitored by using an excitation wavelength of 425 nm and monitoring the emission above 450 nm using a cut-off filter (Corion LL-450 F). For each experiment, at least four fluorescence traces were averaged. The fluorescence changes were converted to the concentration of released phosphate by using the standard curve. The concentration of released phosphate per Rho hexamer was plotted versus time of reaction. ATPase Activity of Mixed RNA Binding-Deficient Mutant Hexamers Mixing of wild-type Rho and T268A mutant proteins was carried out as described previously (Richardson and Ruteshouser, 1986) to assure maximum subunit exchange. The two proteins (total concentration 20 nM) were incubated on ice in Rho buffer without Mg2+ for 30 min. Subsequently, MgCl2 and 50 nM l cro RNA were added and the mixture was incubated at 37ºC for an additional 5 min. ATP hydrolysis was initiated by addition of 0.5 mM ATP + [a-32P]ATP, and the reaction was terminated after 5 min with 4 M formic acid. ATP and ADP were resolved on a PEI-cellulose TLC and quantitated on a Phosphoimager. Cooperative Kinetics in a Hexameric Ring Cooperative kinetics are modeled by applying a multiplicative enhancement factor to both the forward and backward elementary reactions to ensure detailed balance. The T7 helicase model enforced sequential hydrolysis and processive translocation because the underlying physical mechanism allowed communication only between adjacent subunits (Liao et al., 2005). The data for Rho required relaxing this constraint so that the release of inorganic phosphate involves ``next-nearest-neighbor'' subunits. That is, the closing of the subunit interfaces in response to tight binding of ATP enhances the circumferential stress around the ring so that the asymmetry of the ATP binding site propagates stress preferentially to subunits ahead of the hydrolyzing subunit. We model this effect as an enhancement factor exp(2a$Dx), where a determines the rate of stress attenuation, and Dx is the circumferential distance from the site that is in the tightly bound ATP state N$T. To maintain detailed balance, the modified rate for the forward reaction is k(DP / D)$exp(2a$Dx) and that of the reverse rate, k(D / DP)$exp(a$Dx). Of course, the ring is not an isotropic elastic body, so the exact form of the stress is not easy to compute; thus, the functional form we have used is a rough approximation to the actual physics. Acknowledgments J.L.A is supported by a Department of Energy Computational Science Graduate Fellowship, DE-FG02-97ER25308. S.S.P, Y.-J.J., G.P., and D.-E.K. are supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant GM55310. J.-C.L. and G.O. are supported by NIH grant GM59875-02. The authors thank John Richardson and Ronnie Wei for mutant Rho proteins. The authors thank Emmanuel Skordalakes and James Berger for providing the model structure used in Figure 1A and for valuable discussions. Received: January 3, 2006 Revised: March 17, 2006 Accepted: April 20, 2006 Published: June 8, 2006 References Browne, R.J., and Stitt, B.L. (2005). Active site occupancy required for catalytic cooperativity by Escherichia coli transcription termination factor Rho. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 13300­13303.

Browne, R.J., Barr, E.W., and Stitt, B.L. (2005). Catalytic cooperativity among subunits of Escherichia coli transcription termination factor Rho. Kinetics and substrate structural requirements. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 13292­13299. Brune, M., Hunter, J.L., Corrie, J.E., and Webb, M.R. (1994). Direct, real-time measurement of rapid inorganic phosphate release using a novel fluorescent probe and its application to actomyosin subfragment 1 ATPase. Biochemistry 33, 8262­8271. Bujalowski, W., and Jezewska, M.J. (2000). Kinetic mechanism of nucleotide cofactor binding to Escherichia coli replicative helicase DnaB protein. stopped-flow kinetic studies using fluorescent, ribose-, and base-modified nucleotide analogues. Biochemistry 39, 2106­2122. Burgess, B.R., and Richardson, J.P. (2001). RNA passes through the hole of the protein hexamer in the complex with the Escherichia coli Rho factor. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 4182­4189. Chen, X., and Stitt, B.L. (2004). The binding of C10 oligomers to Escherichia coli transcription termination factor Rho. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 16301­16310. DeLaBarre, B., and Brunger, A.T. (2005). Nucleotide dependent motion and mechanism of action of p97/VCP. J. Mol. Biol. 347, 437­452. Faus, I., and Richardson, J.P. (1989). Thermodynamic and enzymological characterization of the interaction between transcription termination factor rho and lambda cro mRNA. Biochemistry 28, 3510­ 3517. Finger, L.R., and Richardson, J.P. (1981). Procedure for purification of Escherichia coli ribonucleic acid synthesis termination protein rho. Biochemistry 20, 1640­1645. Fisher, A.J., Smith, C.A., Thoden, J.B., Smith, R., Sutoh, K., Holden, H.M., and Rayment, I. (1995). X-ray structures of the myosin motor domain of Dictyostelium discoideum complexed with MgADP.BeFx and MgADP.AlF4. Biochemistry 34, 8960­8972. Gai, D., Zhao, R., Li, D., Finkielstein, C.V., and Chen, X.S. (2004). Mechanisms of conformational change for a replicative hexameric helicase of SV40 large tumor antigen. Cell 119, 47­60. Geiselmann, J., and von Hippel, P.H. (1992). Functional interactions of ligand cofactors with Escherichia coli transcription termination factor rho. I. Binding of ATP. Protein Sci. 1, 850­860. Geiselmann, J., Seifried, S.E., Yager, T.D., Liang, C., and von Hippel, P.H. (1992a). Physical properties of the Escherichia coli transcription termination factor rho. 2. Quaternary structure of the rho hexamer. Biochemistry 31, 121­132. Geiselmann, J., Yager, T.D., Gill, S.C., Calmettes, P., and von Hippel, P.H. (1992b). Physical properties of the Escherichia coli transcription termination factor rho. 1. Association states and geometry of the rho hexamer. Biochemistry 31, 111­121. Geiselmann, J., Wang, Y., Seifried, S.E., and von Hippel, P.H. (1993). A physical model for the translocation and helicase activities of Escherichia coli transcription termination protein Rho. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90, 7754­7758. Hingorani, M.M., and Patel, S.S. (1996). Cooperative interactions of nucleotide ligands are linked to oligomerization and DNA binding in bacteriophage T7 gene 4 helicases. Biochemistry 35, 2218­2228. Hinnerwisch, J., Fenton, W.A., Furtak, K.J., Farr, G.W., and Horwich, A.L. (2005). Loops in the central channel of ClpA chaperone mediate protein binding, unfolding, and translocation. Cell 121, 1029­1041. Jeong, Y.J., Kim, D.E., and Patel, S.S. (2002). Kinetic pathway of dTTP hydrolysis by hexameric T7 helicase-primase in the absence of DNA. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 43778­43784. Jeong, Y.J., Kim, D.E., and Patel, S.S. (2004). Nucleotide binding induces conformational changes in Escherichia coli transcription termination factor Rho. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 18370­18376. Jezewska, M.J., Lucius, A.L., and Bujalowski, W. (2005a). Binding of six nucleotide cofactors to the hexameric helicase RepA protein of plasmid RSF1010. 1. Direct evidence of cooperative interactions between the nucleotide-binding sites of a hexameric helicase. Biochemistry 44, 3865­3876. Jezewska, M.J., Lucius, A.L., and Bujalowski, W. (2005b). Binding of six nucleotide cofactors to the hexameric helicase RepA protein of plasmid RSF1010. 2. Base specificity, nucleotide structure,

Mechanochemistry of Hexameric Rho Protein 621

magnesium, and salt effect on the cooperative binding of the cofactors. Biochemistry 44, 3877­3890. Kim, D.E., and Patel, S.S. (1999). The mechanism of ATP hydrolysis at the noncatalytic sites of the transcription termination factor Rho. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 32667­32671. Kim, D.E., and Patel, S.S. (2001). The kinetic pathway of RNA binding to the Escherichia coli transcription termination factor Rho. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 13902­13910. Kim, D.E., Shigesada, K., and Patel, S.S. (1999). Transcription termination factor Rho contains three noncatalytic nucleotide binding sites. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 11623­11628. Liao, J.C., Jeong, Y.J., Kim, D.E., Patel, S.S., and Oster, G. (2005). Mechanochemistry of t7 DNA helicase. J. Mol. Biol. 350, 452­475. Mancini, E.J., Kainov, D.E., Grimes, J.M., Tuma, R., Bamford, D.H., and Stuart, D.I. (2004). Atomic snapshots of an RNA packaging motor reveal conformational changes linking ATP hydrolysis to RNA translocation. Cell 118, 743­755. Miwa, Y., Horiguchi, T., and Shigesada, K. (1995). Structural and functional dissections of transcription termination factor rho by random mutagenesis. J. Mol. Biol. 254, 815­837. Oster, G., and Wang, H. (2000). Reverse engineering a protein: the mechanochemistry of ATP synthase. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1458, 482­510. Ponomarev, M.A., Timofeev, V.P., and Levitsky, D.I. (1995). The difference between ADP-beryllium fluoride and ADP-aluminium fluoride complexes of the spin-labeled myosin subfragment 1. FEBS Lett. 371, 261­263. Rajendran, S., Jezewska, M.J., and Bujalowski, W. (2000). Multiplestep kinetic mechanism of DNA-independent ATP binding and hydrolysis by Escherichia coli replicative helicase DnaB protein: quantitative analysis using the rapid quench-flow method. J. Mol. Biol. 303, 773­795. Richardson, J.P. (1982). Activation of rho protein ATPase requires simultaneous interaction at two kinds of nucleic acid-binding sites. J. Biol. Chem. 257, 5760­5766. Richardson, J.P., and Ruteshouser, E.C. (1986). rho factor-dependent transcription termination. Interference by a mutant rho. J. Mol. Biol. 189, 413­419. Skordalakes, E., and Berger, J.M. (2003). Structure of the Rho transcription terminator: mechanism of mRNA recognition and helicase loading. Cell 114, 135­146. Stitt, B.L. (1988). Escherichia coli transcription termination protein rho has three hydrolytic sites for ATP. J. Biol. Chem. 263, 11130­ 11137. Stitt, B.L. (2001). Escherichia coli transcription termination factor Rho binds and hydrolyzes ATP using a single class of three sites. Biochemistry 40, 2276­2281. Stitt, B.L., and Xu, Y. (1998). Sequential hydrolysis of ATP molecules bound in interacting catalytic sites of Escherichia coli transcription termination protein Rho. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 26477­26486. Wei, R.R., and Richardson, J.P. (2001a). Identification of an RNAbinding Site in the ATP binding domain of Escherichia coli Rho by H2O2/Fe-EDTA cleavage protection studies. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 28380­28387. Wei, R.R., and Richardson, J.P. (2001b). Mutational changes of conserved residues in the Q-loop region of transcription factor Rho greatly reduce secondary site RNA-binding. J. Mol. Biol. 314, 1007­1015. Xu, Y., Kohn, H., and Widger, W.R. (2002). Mutations in the rho transcription termination factor that affect RNA tracking. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 30023­30030. Xu, Y., Johnson, J., Kohn, H., and Widger, W.R. (2003). ATP binding to Rho transcription termination factor. Mutant F355W ATP-induced fluorescence quenching reveals dynamic ATP binding. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 13719­13727. Ye, J., Osborne, A.R., Groll, M., and Rapoport, T.A. (2004). RecA-like motor ATPases­lessons from structures. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1659, 1­18.

Yu, X., Hingorani, M.M., Patel, S.S., and Egelman, E.H. (1996). DNA is bound within the central hole to one or two of the six subunits of the T7 DNA helicase. Nat. Struct. Biol. 3, 740­743.

