Neuron 370

fully functional. This led to the conclusion that Sec5 is not required for exocytosis of synaptic vesicles. The authors attribute the differences in exocytosis to the generation and maturation of vesicles for membrane addition versus those for synaptic transmission. Vesicles carrying synaptic proteins, after being generated from TGN and fusing with the PM, are internalized and sorted in endosomes to become mature synaptic vesicles. The authors argue that these recycled vesicles may need alternative docking mechanisms that are different from those mediated by the exocyst. It is noted that in MDCK cells, Sec10 overexpression affects protein synthesis and delivery to the PM but does not affect the recycling pathway (Lipschutz et al., 2000). As transmitter release is a specific form of exocytosis that demands extreme accuracy and efficiency, what regulates synaptic transmission so tightly in time and space? So far, a large number of proteins have been found to be important for neural transmission (Lin and Scheller, 2000). Many of these proteins, including the SNAREs (syntaxin SNAP-25 and VAMP), nSec1, Rab, and NSF, have homologs in yeast and other eukaryotes. While the core fusion machinery is conserved, homologs for proteins such as Munc-13, synaphin/complexin, and RIM are not found in yeast. In addition, regulatory mechanisms such as Ca2 dependence in neurotransmitter release do not seem to be crucial in yeast exocytosis. As neurons have very different life styles from yeast or even other mammalian cells, specialized machinery and mechanisms were adapted during evolution. The synapse-specific proteins have been shown to play important roles in regulating neurotransmission. Furthermore, even the "conserved" proteins such as the SNAREs, nSec1, and Rabs may have evolved in protein structures and molecular interactions for neurotransmission. Finally, the actin cytoskeleton may be arranged in a different way at the synapses. While the role of the exocyst complex in neurons is becoming clear, many questions remain to be answered. For example, how does the exocyst complex interact physically and functionally with other membrane traffic proteins such as Rabs, SNAREs, and nSec1 in the neuron? Neuron development is often referred to as an extreme example of cell polarization. Regulated exocytosis, coupled with cytoskeleton organization, ensures protein and membrane addition occurs at the right time and place during neuron outgrowth. What is the connection between the actin cytoskeleton and the exocyst, and which proteins coordinate the functions of the two groups of proteins? In yeast, the exocyst has been found to interact with Rho family proteins (for review, see Novick and Guo, 2002; Lipschutz and Mostov, 2002). And these interactions are essential for polarized yeast growth. As Rho family proteins have also been shown to play important roles in neuronal morphogenesis and structural plasticity (Luo, 2002), it will be interesting to know if and how the Rho proteins communicate with the exocyst in neurons. It was recently found that the exocyst colocalizes with microtubules in PC12 cells (S.C. Hsu, personal communication) and that the disruption of microtubules affects exocyst localization (Vega and Hsu, 2001). It will be interesting to see how the exocyst is linked to the microtubules along the axons. In epithelial cells, the exocyst exists in the cytosol, TGN,

and PM. Translocation of the exocyst to the PM takes place upon the establishment of cell polarity. The immunostaining of the exocyst in neurons, as shown in this paper and in another study (Hazuka et al., 1999), suggests that the exocyst is abundant in the cytoplasm. One wonders if a translocation process similar to that observed in epithelial cells exists in neurons in response to certain signals. It is not the first time that the exocyst is found to not be involved in certain types of exocytosis. In epithelial cells, it was shown that antibodies against an exocyst component had no effect on exocytosis at the apical domain of MDCK cells (Grindstaff et al., 1998). It is plausible that a different set of proteins takes over the role of the exocyst for vesicle targeting and tethering at the apical membrane. The work by Murthy and coworkers not only provides important information about the exocyst to neurobiologists, it may also be of interest to the cell biologists studying the exocyst in general. Steven EauClaire and Wei Guo Department of Biology University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104
Selected Reading Grindstaff, K.K., Yeaman, C., Anandasabapathy, N., Hsu, S.C., Rodriguez-Boulan, E., Scheller, R.H., and Nelson, W.J. (1998). Cell 93, 731­740. Guo, W., Roth, D., Walch-Solimena, C., and Novick, P. (1999). EMBO J. 18, 1071­1080. Hazuka, C.D., Foletti, D.L., Hsu, S.C., Kee, Y., Hopf, F.W., and Scheller, R.H. (1999). J. Neurosci. 19, 1324­1334. Hsu, S.C., Ting, A.E., Hazuka, C.D., Davanger, S., Kenny, J.W., Kee, Y., and Scheller, R.H. (1996). Neuron 17, 1209­1219. Lin, R.C., and Scheller, R.H. (2000). Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 16, 19­49. Lipschutz, J.H., and Mostov, K.E. (2002). Curr. Biol. 12, R212­R214. Lipschutz, J.H., Guo, W., O'Brien, L.E., Nguyen, Y.H., Novick, P., and Mostov, K.E. (2000). Mol. Biol. Cell 11, 4259­4275. Luo, L. (2002). Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 18, 601­635. Murthy, M., Garza, D., Scheller, R.H., and Schwarz, T.L. (2003). Neuron 37, this issue, 433­447. Novick, P., and Guo, W. (2002). Trends Cell Biol. 12, 247­249. Novick, P., Field, C., and Schekman, R. (1980). Cell 21, 205­215. TerBush, D.R., Maurice, T., Roth, D., and Novick, P. (1996). EMBO J. 15, 6483­6494. Vega, I.E., and Hsu, S.C. (2001). J. Neurosci. 21, 3839­3848. Yeaman, C., Grindstaff, K.K., Wright, J.R., and Nelson, W.J. (2001). J. Cell Biol. 155, 593­604.

It Takes Two to Tango, but Three to ISA
Rapidly inactivating A-type potassium channels are important determinants of firing frequency in many excitable cells. Nadal et al. (in this issue of Neuron) purified A-type potassium (ISA) channels from rat cere-

Previews 371

bellum and identified a novel subunit. This protein, DPPX, associates with the pore-forming subunits and endows previously elusive kinetic properties on A-type channels formed from cloned subunits. Voltage-dependent K (Kv) channels regulate many aspects of the electrical properties of neurons, influencing the resting membrane potential, spike repolarization, repetitive firing patterns, and integration of subthreshold synaptic inputs. To fulfill these diverse roles, most neurons express multiple types of voltage-dependent K currents with distinct biophysical fingerprints, such as activation and inactivation kinetics and voltage dependence. The wide range of cloned Kv subunits reflects this functional diversity, with more than 50 different subunits that fall into up to ten subfamilies (Jan and Jan, 1997). Kv channels are tetramers of pore-forming subunits that may be the same or that may be heteromeric assemblies of subunits from the same Kv subfamily. The cloning and characterization of these many Kv poreforming subunits has made it possible to begin to correlate cloned subunits with native voltage-dependent K currents observed in mammalian neurons. One type of Kv channel produces transient A-type K currents (ISA), fundamental determinants of neuronal firing activity and synaptic integration. The activation threshold for ISA is negative to the membrane potentials required for action potential generation, and once activated, ISA inactivates rapidly. These properties make ISA uniquely suited for regulating membrane excitability that will affect subthreshold synaptic excitatory integration, as well as affecting the interspike interval during a train of action potentials. Normalizing the neuronal firing patterns in basal ganglia characteristic of psychomotor disorders such as epilepsy and Parkinson's disease make ISA a potential therapeutic target. Five of the cloned pore-forming subunits, Kv1.4, Kv3.4, Kv4.1, 4.2, and 4.3, demonstrate many of the properties of native A-type currents when heterologously expressed. Recently, the use of single-cell PCR has correlated the expression of Kv4.2 and/or Kv4.3 with the amplitude of ISA current, and along with previous immunohistochemistry data, has led to the conclusion that, in mammalian brain, Kv4.2 and/or Kv4.3 subunits are responsible for somatodendritic ISA (for review, see Song, 2002). However, it is clear that expression of Kv4.2 or Kv4.3 alone does not reconstitute all of the central features of native A-type currents. In particular, the voltage dependence of activation is more depolarized, and the kinetics of inactivation and recovery from inactivation are slower than for native A-type currents. The inability of the cloned Kv4.2 or Kv4.3 subunits to faithfully recapitulate native A-type currents was predicted by results obtained prior to the cloning of the subunits. Injection of whole-brain mRNA into Xenopus oocytes resulted in expression of A-type currents that reflected native A-type currents. However, using fractionated mRNA, coinjection of high and low molecular weight fractions was required to reconstitute this activity (Rudy et al., 1988). Taken together, the data indicated that native A-type channels must be formed by the coassembly of pore-forming subunits with subunits that influence the biophysical characteristics of the channels.

The cloning of the K channel interacting protein (KChIPs) provided the first confirmation that ISA is a multiprotein complex (An et al., 2000). Isolated from a twohybrid screen using the N terminus of Kv4.3 as bait, the KChIPs are calcium binding proteins of the recoverin family, previously found in the ER. An et al. found that when KChIPs are coexpressed with Kv4.2 or 4.3, they facilitate channel trafficking to the membrane, increasing current density, and that they shift the voltage dependence of activation toward more physiological values. However, KChIPs also slowed the rate of inactivation even further away from that seen for native A-type currents. Clearly, Kv4.2 or Kv4.3 alone or coexpressed with KChIP does not faithfully recapitulate all the properties of the native ISA; other components were still missing. Interestingly, at least one of the KchIPs has other functions; KchIP3, also called "calsenilin," interacts with the presenilins that are implicated in 40% of early-onset familial Alzheimer's disease. In this issue of Neuron, Nadal et al. (2003) identify the missing component and present a heterologously expressed Kv4.2 channel complex that has the kinetic profile of native ISA. To search for the missing component, they performed immunoprecipitations of native Kv4.2 from rat cerebellar membranes. Biochemical analysis of the immunoprecipitates revealed the presence of two additional proteins. One of these auxiliary proteins was the previously identified KChIP (An et al., 2000). In addition, a novel dipeptidyl aminopeptidaselike protein, DPPX, was identified. DPPX is a single transmembrane glycoprotein for which a function had not been previously determined (Kin et al., 2001). DPPX is widely expressed in rat brain and is particularly abundant in areas where Kv4 channels are most highly expressed. Immunohistochemistry was used to demonstrate overlapping expression patterns for DPPX and Kv4 subunits in rat brain. These data suggest that, in at least some neurons in the rat brain, the ISA channel complex contains all three proteins. Coexpression of DPPX (and KChIP) with either Kv4.2 or Kv4.3 revealed that DPPX is the missing component required to reconstitute the ISA complex in heterologous expression systems. Nadal et al. found that DPPX had dramatic effects on the kinetics and voltage dependence of Kv4 currents when coexpressed in either CHO cells or Xenopus oocytes. DPPX shifted the conductance-voltage relation and the voltage dependence of inactivation to more negative values for both Kv4.2 and Kv4.3 currents. DPPX also increased the rate of recovery from inactivation. Remarkably, the biophysical properties observed in the presence of DPPX correlated well with the native ISA. Nadal et al. provide compelling evidence that native ISA is made up of three proteins: Kv4 subunits, KChIP, and DPPX. This study elegantly demonstrates the multiprotein complex that reconstitutes the ISA current but also poses interesting questions that will require further investigation. For example, by what mechanism does DPPX alter Kv4 channel function? Does DPPX enzymatically modify either the Kv4 or KChIP components? Are Kv4 channels always associated with DPPX, or might the interactions be regulated? Is the functional variation observed for native ISA currents in different cell types affected by different combinations or stoichiometries

Neuron 372

of the molecular components KChIPs and DPPX? The discovery that DPPX interacts with Kv4 channels to form a critical component of ISA is striking, but it also raises the possibility that, like KChIPs, DPPX has additional cellular functions. Paco S. Herson and John P. Adelman Vollum Institute Oregon Health and Sciences University 3181 S.W. Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239
Selected Reading An, F.W., Bowldy, M.R., Betty, M., Cao, J., Ling, H.-P., Mendoza, G., Hinson, J.W., Mattsson, K.I., Strassle, B.W., Trimmer, J.S., and Rhodes, K.J. (2000). Nature 403, 553­556. Jan, L.Y., and Jan, Y.N. (1997). J. Physiol. 505, 267­282. Kin, Y., Miksumi, Y., and Ikehara, Y. (2001). J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 129, 289­295. Nadal, M.S., Ozaita, A., Amarillo, Y., Vega-Saenz de Miera, E., Ma, Y., Mo, W., Goldberg, E.M., Misumi, Y., Ikehara, Y., Neubert, T.A., and Rudy, B. (2003). Neuron 37, this issue, 449­461. Rudy, B., Hoger, J.H., Lester, H.A., and Davidson, N. (1988). Neuron 1, 649­658. Song, W.-J. (2002). Neurosci. Res. 42, 7­14.

Hippocampus and Memory: Can We Have Our Place and Fear It Too?
Theories of hippocampal function are often split into cognitive map theories and relational/episodic memory theories. In this issue of Neuron, Moita et al. (2003) show that hippocampal cells respond to the combination of spatial location and conditioned stimuli in a nonspatial fear conditioning task, suggesting a potential bridge between the competing theories of hippocampal function. In 1978, John O'Keefe and Lynn Nadel proposed a theory that the hippocampus was the neural substrate of a cognitive map (O'Keefe and Nadel, 1978). Building on a long history of philosophical and psychological study on the concept of space, they argued that the hippocampus was the brain structure that constructed and mediated our perception of allocentric space (i.e., absolute space represented in world-based coordinates rather than body-centered, or egocentric, coordinates). This argument was based on two main lines of evidence: (1) animals with hippocampal damage had severe deficits in navigation tasks that appeared to require the use of a mental map of the environment (as opposed to tasks that can be solved using simple guidance or response strategies); and (2) recordings from hippocampal pyramidal cells in freely moving rats showed that these cells fired selectively in restricted locations in the environment. Although spatial mapping formed the core of the theory, O'Keefe and Nadel were well aware of the mne-

monic functions of the hippocampus, demonstrated most dramatically by the amnesic syndrome of patients with damage to the hippocampus and related areas in the medial temporal lobe. Thus, their theory was much richer than simply spatial mapping and navigation; they proposed that "the hippocampus is the core of a neural memory system providing an objective spatial framework within which the items and events of an organism's experience are located and interrelated" (O'Keefe and Nadel, 1978, p. 1; emphasis added). O'Keefe and Nadel explicitly had in mind a theory of episodic memory and flexible, context-dependent learning, with the spatial representation of the hippocampus acting as the essential, organizing framework of these types of memory. In the years since the publication of their theory, much effort has been expended by many research groups to validate the essential spatial nature of hippocampal processing that was central to the theory (Best et al., 2001; Muller, 1996). Concurrently, other investigators emphasized the nonspatial aspects of hippocampal processing that were reflected in the global amnesia of hippocampal patients, and they described the function of the hippocampus in terms of declarative memory (in humans) or relational learning (in nonhumans) (Cohen and Eichenbaum, 1993; Eichenbaum et al., 1999; Squire, 1987). In recent years, episodic memory (a component of declarative memory) has received great attention as the function of the hippocampus. Overall, it appears that the field can be divided into two primary camps. The cognitive map proponents state that the hippocampus is essentially a spatial mapping system that is used to organize and remember the items and events of experience. In contrast, the relational learning/declarative memory/episodic memory proponents state that the hippocampus is a more general learning system important for encoding relationships between environmental stimuli and creating episodic memories; spatial representations naturally fall out of such a system but are not an essential part of it. The field is at somewhat of an impasse, because these theories make predictions that are very similar to each other, and therefore difficult to interpret objectively in favor of one view over the other. One's interpretation of the data tends to reflect one's preconceived notions, and many results interpreted in favor of one theory can easily and validly be reinterpreted in terms of the other theory. A study by Moita and colleagues in this issue of Neuron provides a potential route out of this impasse. Moita et al. (2003) recorded the activity of CA1 pyramidal cells in the dorsal hippocampus of rats trained in an auditory fear conditioning task. Before training, they recorded the spatial firing fields (place fields) of the neurons as the rats explored the environment. The rats then underwent a number of trials in which a series of white-noise pips (the conditioned stimulus, or CS) was played, followed by periorbital shocks (the unconditioned stimulus, or US). A control group received the same number of white noise pips and shocks, but these stimuli were unpaired, such that the pips did not predict the delivery of the shock. The rats that received the paired CS-US training learned to freeze when they heard the pips, a classic measure of fear learning; rats that received the unpaired CS-US training did not learn to freeze to the pips. Pyramidal cell firing was recorded during all train-

