Molecular Cell, Vol. 9, 1263­1272, June, 2002, Copyright 2002 by Cell Press

Elongation Factor G Participates in Ribosome Disassembly by Interacting with Ribosome Recycling Factor at Their tRNA-Mimicry Domains
Koichi Ito, Toshinobu Fujiwara, Tomohiko Toyoda, and Yoshikazu Nakamura1 Department of Basic Medical Sciences Institute of Medical Science University of Tokyo 4-6-1 Shirokanedai Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639 Japan tRNA from the A site to the P site on the translating ribosome during the elongation step in protein synthesis (Wilson and Noller, 1998). Following translation termination, the posttermination complex is disassembled into a free 70S ribosome, a deacylated tRNA, and the mRNA transcript (Hirashima and Kaji, 1972), or it generates a free 50S subunit, the mRNA complexed with the 30S subunit, and a deacylated tRNA (Karimi et al., 1999). The crystal structure of RRF has recently been solved ° at 2.55, 2.3, and 2.6 A resolution by three groups using RRF proteins from Thermotoga maritima (Selmer et al., 1999), E. coli (Kim et al., 2000), and T. thermophilus (Toyoda et al., 2000). Each of these RRFs is composed of two domains, a three-layer / / sandwich (domain 2) and a long three-helix bundle (domain 1), which can be superimposed on the anticodon arm of tRNA. Selmer et al. (1999) have proposed that RRF mimics tRNA during the mechanistic disassembly of the posttermination ribosomal complex. They speculate that RRF binds to the A site of the ribosome, like a tRNA. Then EF-G translocates RRF from the A to the P site and moves the deacylated tRNA from the P to the E site, from which it dissociates rapidly. However, the biochemical findings of Karimi et al. (1999) show, first, that RRF and EF-G separate the ribosomal subunits in a reaction that requires GTP hydrolysis and, second, that the initiation factor IF3 then removes the deacylated tRNA from the P site of the 30S particle. In addition, the structural similarity between tRNA and RRF may not be more apparent than true, since all three structures of T. maritima, E. coli, and T. thermophilus RRF crystals possess markedly different interdomain angles. Therefore, the significance of the apparent tRNA mimicry of RRF remains to be validated. Although the structure of RRF is known, there is little understanding of RRF's structural features that are responsible for its mechanism of action. RRF is an L-shaped molecule consisting of two domains that are bridged by two loops. These loops function as a hinge; hinge flexibility is believed to be vital for RRF function (the gooseneck model) (Toyoda et al., 2000). Wild-type T. thermophilus RRF (referred to as ttRRF) is inactive in E. coli; it fails to complement an E. coli frr-defective mutant (frr is the genetic designation for the RRF locus; E. coli RRF is referred to as ecRRF). However, ttRRF becomes fully active upon removal of its five C-terminal residues (this protein is referred to as ttRRF C5) (Fujiwara et al., 1999). These residues are in direct contact with the hinge. ttRRF is also activated upon substitution of its interdomain residues. These alterations were interpreted as increasing hinge flexibility, rendering the ttRRF active in E. coli, although the molecular mechanism of activation was not established. EF-G and RRF presumably interact with one another and initiate disassembly of the mRNA-ribosome-tRNA complex. Recently, Rao and Varshney (2001) have reported that Mycobacterium tuberculosis RRF is inactive in E. coli, but it regains activity upon coexpression of M. tuberculosis EF-G. This observation suggests the necessity for specific interaction between homologous

Summary Elongation factor G (EF-G) is a G protein with motor function that drives two target molecules, a tRNA in the translating ribosome and the ribosome recycling factor (RRF) in the posttermination complex. How G protein motor action is transmitted to RRF is unknown. Thermus thermophilus RRF is nonfunctional in Escherichia coli. It became functional upon introducing a plasmid expressing E. coli EF-G with surface changes in its tRNA-mimic domain or by replacing the E. coli EF-G tRNA-mimic domain by the Thermus domain. Thermus RRF could also be activated by introducing surface substitutions in its anticodon arm-mimic region. These gain-of-function phenotypes depend on the combination of heterologous EF-G and RRF alleles. These mutational studies suggest that EF-G motor action is transmitted to RRF by specific surface contacts between the domains that mimic the anticodon arm. Introduction How a ribosome terminates protein synthesis and recycles translation components for the next round of protein synthesis is a very basic, poorly understood, process. In bacteria, the polypeptide release factors RF1 and RF2 are responsible for stop codon recognition (Ito et al., 2000) and for triggering peptidyl-tRNA hydrolysis in the translating ribosome (for a review, see Nakamura et al., 2000). After the nascent polypeptide is released, the ribosomal P site and A site remain occupied by deacylated tRNA and RF1/RF2, respectively. Next, the G protein release factor, RF3, accelerates the dissociation of RF1 and RF2 from the ribosomal A site in a GTPdependent manner, thereby participating in the RF1/ RF2-recycling step (Freistroffer et al., 1997). Upon GTP hydrolysis, RF3 also dissociates from the ribosome, leaving behind the posttermination complex consisting of mRNA, deacylated tRNA in the P site, and an empty A site. The empty A site is believed to be recognized by the ribosome recycling factor, RRF (for a review, see Janosi et al., 1996). RRF is essential for bacterial growth (Janosi et al., 1998; Fujiwara et al., 1999) and, in concert with the elongation factor EF-G, triggers dissociation of the posttermination ribosomal complex. EF-G is a translocase protein--a G protein motor--that translocates peptidyl
1

Correspondence: nak@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Molecular Cell 1264

Figure 1. Domain IV Mutations of E. coli EF-G that Restore Functionality of T. thermophilus RRF (A) Restoration of heterologous ttRRF function by ecEF-G domain IV mutants. Plasmid pSTV29-ecEF-G variants carrying the indicated suppressor mutations were transformed into the Ts lethal ecRRF strain YN3576 (frr-3) containing ttRRF, and the transformants' growth was monitored at 42 C. Test ecEF-G variants: (a) wild-type, (b) H504Y, (c) Q695am, (d) H504Y-Q695am, (e) H504Y-S508F. (B) Complementation of ecEF-G mutant by domain IV mutants. The growth of the PEM100 strain was examined at 42 C in the presence of the same set of ecEF-G variants. (C) The similarity alignments of EF-G domains IV/V and suppressor mutations. Altered amino acids are marked by white letters on red background, and the substitutions are shown by arrows. Amino acids identical to ecEF-G are shown by white on black. Numbers refer to the amino acid position counted from the N-terminal Met of ecEF-G. ecEF-G, E. coli EF-G (Swissprot EFG_ECOLI); hiEF-G, Haemophilus influenzae EF-G (Swissprot EFG_HAEIN); ttEF-G, T. thermophilus EF-G (Swissprot EFG_THETH); tmEF-G, Thermotoga maritima EF-G (Swissprot EFG_THEMA); mpEF-G, Mycoplasma pneumoniae EF-G (Swissprot EFG_MYCPN); mtEF-G, Mycobacterium tuberculosis EF-G (Swissprot EFG_MYCTU). (D) 3D structure of ttEF-G (Protein Data Bank accession code 1ELO) and the mutated residues (shown by red). The known translocationdefective alleles at residues 502 and 583 are also shown.

EF-G and RRF. It is therefore of great importance to clarify how these two proteins, each of which has a domain that structurally mimics the anticodon arm of tRNA, interact with one another. It is also important to explain how the EF-G motor action is transmitted during the final step of ribosome disassembly. In this study, we identify the presumed contact sites on EF-G and RRF by mutation and selection. We also examine the characterization of gain-of-function mutations in ecEF-G and ttRRF that restored the functional interaction between the heterologous combination of EF-G and RRF. We have determined that EF-G and RRF interact with each other via different sites of their proposed tRNA-mimic domains. Results EF-G Mutants that Restore Heterologous RRF Activity Intact ttRRF is unable to complement a conditionally temperature sensitive ( 39 C) lethal RRF mutant of E. coli (YN3576 frr-3) (Fujiwara et al., 1999). We determined whether or not the activity of nonfunctional ttRRF in E.

coli can be restored by introducing structural changes in the heterologous ecEF-G protein. Plasmid pSTV29 containing the ecEF-G sequence (referred to as pSTV29ecEF-G; chloramphenicol-resistant) was mutagenized by passage through the mutator strain XL1-Red. The plasmid pool obtained was transformed into strain YN3576 containing the ttRRF-bearing plasmid pBR322ttRRF (ampicillin resistant), and ampicillin- and chloramphenicol-resistant transformants were selected at 42 C. Over 40 survivors were characterized by DNA sequencing. Two groups of mutants were identified, each of which had a single base pair change in the sequence encoding ecEF-G. One group had a change of His504 to Tyr (referred to as H504Y), while the second group had the Gln695 codon replaced by an amber codon (referred to as Q695am). This change eliminated the C-terminal 9 amino acids of EF-G (Figure 1C). Both ecEF-G variants restored moderate growth of the ttRRFcontaining E. coli strain at 42 C (Figures 1Aa­1Ac). These ecEF-G variants conferred viability not only on mutant YN3576 (frr-3) but also on an RRF-knockout E. coli mutant that expresses ttRRF from a plasmid (data

EF-G Motor Transmission to RRF 1265

not shown). These findings confirm that the heterologous ttRRF could be activated in E. coli. Further genetic selections were carried out using the single mutants H504Y and Q695am as parental strains. This allowed us to recover secondary ecEF-G variants that rendered ttRRF fully active (i.e., leading to the wildtype level of growth). The H504Y and Q695am mutant plasmids were passed through the mutator strain XL1Red again, and the mutagenized plasmids were transformed into the ttRRF-containing strain, YN3576 (frr-3). A few large colony transformants were selected from the Q695am variant at 42 C. These double mutants had the secondary change, H504Y (Figure 1Ad). Large colonies selected from the H504Y variant possessed secondary mutations at two distinct sites. In one there was the amber mutation Q695am (Figure 1Ad), while in the second there was a substitution, Ser508Phe (S508F) (Figure 1Ae; see Figure 1C). These results suggest that the selection for suppressors was nearly saturated and that RRF interacts with EF-G at these sites (i.e., His504, Ser508, and the C-terminal 9 residue tail of EF-G) or that its contact is disturbed sterically by these non-Thermustype residues. Complementation of a Translocation-Deficient EF-G Mutant We monitored the activity of the ecEF-G variant proteins mentioned above carrying single and double alterations by attempting complementation of an E. coli strain (PEM100) with a temperature-sensitive EF-G. This EF-G protein contains the G502D substitution and is temperature sensitive for the translocation step (Hou et al., 1994; see Figure 1D). As shown in Figure 1B, any single- or double-mutant ecEF-G variant protein expressed from the plasmid allowed PEM100 to grow normally at 42 C. This finding led us to conclude that the mutations associated with the H504Y, S508F, and Q695am changes are gain-of-function alterations specific to ttRRF; that is, they do not affect the translocation function of EF-G. Moreover, of particular interest, the amino acid residues affected by these three mutations are located on the same face in the tertiary structure of the anticodon arm-mimic domain of EF-G (Figure 1D). Furthermore, three known translocation-defective EF-G changes at two amino acid positions, G502D and H583K or H583R (Savelsbergh et al., 2000), are also located on the same face of the tip region of EF-G (discussed below). Construction of Active Chimeric EF-G Variants Three gain-of-function changes in ecEF-G are located in two distinct regions of domain IV. We therefore examined whether swapping domains IV and/or V between ecEF-G and T. thermophilus EF-G (ttEF-G) would generate a chimeric EF-G construct that is active with ttRRF. The three-dimensional (3D) structure of EF-G reveals that domain IV is separated from domains III and V by two hinges (Figure 2B, marked in red and blue in the right panel, respectively) that are composed of highly conserved amino acids (Figure 2A). Domain swapping was carried out using artificial (NruI) and/or authentic (XhoI) restriction enzyme sites located in the conserved junction sequences (Figure 2A). Thus, the resulting chi-

Figure 2. Strategy of Domain Swapping between ecEF-G and ttEF-G (A) Conservative amino acid sequences at the junctions of domains III-IV and IV-V. Positions of suppressor mutations are shown by arrows (top). The C terminus is structurally allocated to domain IV. Identical amino acids are red on black background, and restriction enzyme sites used for domain swapping are shown by the reverse triangles (bottom). "Ec" and "Tt" denote E. coli and T. thermophilus EF-Gs, respectively. (B) 3D structure of EF-G. Domain junctions marked by the box (left) grow larger as one looks down the arrow (right). The conserved peptide sequences underlined in (A) are shown by red (III-IV junction) and blue (IV-V junction).

meric constructs do not suffer from any sequence disorder. The constructs with domain swaps between ecEF-G and ttEF-G were examined for complementation activity using the Ts EF-G strain PEM100 as recipient. As summarized in Table 1, ecEF-G complementation activity was affected only slightly by substituting domain IV from ttEF-G (Figure 3A2), while complementation activity was significantly reduced by substituting domain V of ttEF-G (Figure 3A3), and it was completely eliminated by substituting both domains (Figure 3A4). Reciprocal swap experiments were performed with ttEF-G, which, unlike M. tuberculosis EF-G (Rao and Varshney, 2001; as discussed below), is unable to complement the growth defect of PEM100 (Figure 3A8). Consistent with the ecEF-G chimera analyses, the ttEF-G chimeras containing E. coli domains IV and V restored nearly full growth of PEM100 at 42 C (Figure 3A5). Constructs containing only domain V of ecEF-G restored significant growth (Figure 3A6); however, those with the single domain IV of ecEF-G did not exhibit complementation activity (Figure 3A7). These data suggest that domains IV and V determine the species-specific activity of EF-G in E. coli and T. thermophilus.

Molecular Cell 1266

Table 1. Complementation and Suppression of Functional Defects in E. coli EF-G and T. thermophilus RRF by Chimeric EF-G Variants Chimera No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Domains I­III Eco Eco Eco Eco Tth Tth Tth Tth Domain IV Eco Tth Eco Tth Eco Tth Eco Tth Domain V Eco Eco Tth Tth Eco Eco Tth Tth Complementation of ecEF-G Mutant Functionality of ttRRF

/ /

Domains of EF-G were swapped between E. coli and T. thermophilus EF-G proteins, and the resulting chimeric variants were transformed into PEM100 (ts EF-G) and ttRRF-containing YN3576 (ts RRF) cells as described in Experimental Procedures. Eco and Tth represent E. coli and T. thermophilus domains, respectively. Complementation and suppression activity was monitored by growth at 42 C: , normal growth; , fair growth; , slow growth; / , sick growth; , no growth.

Chimeric EF-G Variants of Gain-of-Function with Heterologous RRF The Ts lethal E. coli strain (YN3576 frr-3) harboring ttRRF (expressed from plasmid pBR322-ttRRF) was transformed with pSTV29 derivatives encoding the chimeric EF-G variants, and the growth of transformants was monitored at 42 C (Table 1). As predicted above, replacing domain IV or V of ecEF-G from ttEF-G restored significant growth of ttRRF-containing YN3576 cells (Figures 3B2 and 3B3); swapping both domains restored full growth (Figure 3B4). It is noteworthy that this EF-G chimera consisting of E. coli domains I­III and T. thermophilus domains IV and V [referred to as ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G] seemed to be more efficient than the authentic ttEF-G in activating ttRRF in the heterologous E. coli strain. In fact, the suppressing activity of ttEF-G was eliminated by substituting only domain IV of ecEF-G (Figures 3B5 and 3B7), while the single domain V swap reduced its activity, but it was still capable of yielding viable transformants (Figure 3B6). These domain swapping data are consistent with those of the suppression studies of the ttRRF activity by the H504Y, S508F, and Q695am mutations in ecEF-G and lead us to conclude that domains IV and V, and primarily domain IV, of EF-G are responsible for the species-specific function of EF-G in tRNA translocation and in RRF action. RRF is known to trigger dissociation of the polysome complex into monosomes in vitro (Hirashima and Kaji, 1972). Our chimeric EF-G variant proteins as well as wild-type EF-G and RRF proteins were overproduced and purified to homogeneity to test their activity in the conventional polysome-breakdown assay. The polysome fraction was prepared from exponentially growing E. coli cells (MRE600) incubated with wild-type or chimeric EF-G and RRF proteins. Dissociation was analyzed by sucrose density gradient centrifugation. As shown in Figure 3C, the homologous pairs of EF-G and RRF catalyzed a polysome to monosome conversion, although the T. thermophilus pair was less active in E. coli than the E. coli pair (Figures 3Cb and 3Cc). As predicted, ecEF-G, in combination with ttRRF, failed to catalyze polysome breakdown (Figure 3Cd). However, it acquired this activity upon substituting either domain IV or V of ecEF-G with the ttEF-G domain (Figures 3Ce and 3Cf). The variant proteins in which both domains were swapped, i.e., ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G, showed enhanced

activity compared to wild-type ttEF-G (compare Figures 3Cc and 3Cg), which is consistent with the above finding that ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G, rather than ttEF-G, restored full growth of ttRRF-containing YN3576 (ts RRF) cells (see Table 1). Selection of Mutational Changes that Activate T. thermophilus RRF in E. coli We interpreted the above findings as indicating that direct interaction between domains IV/V of EF-G and RRF is a prerequisite for ribosome disassembly; that is, heterologous proteins lack these proper contacts. Since specific mutations in domain IV at His504, Ser508, and Gln695 of ecEF-G (these residues are assumed to serve as the contact site with RRF, but they probably are not accessible to ttRRF because of local steric disturbance) rendered ecEF-G interactive with ttRRF, we set out to isolate reciprocal compensatory mutations in the contact site of ttRRF with ecEF-G. We previously found that the heterologous ttRRF could be activated in E. coli by 30 distinct mutations in ttRRF (Toyoda et al., 2000). Most of these mutations altered residues at the hinge between L-shape domains 1 and 2, or in its neighborhood, and were believed to render the hinge more flexible. This might occur by reducing steric interactions between the hinge loop and domains 1 and 2 or by affecting the hydrophobic bridge between the two domains of RRF (Toyoda et al., 2000). However, there were some exceptions; some gain-of-function mutations could not be explained by hinge flexibility (see Toyoda et al., 2000). In the present study, we performed a more thorough selection for compensatory changes and included those that were moderate suppressors. Over 100 intragenic suppressors were selected by altering wild-type ttRRF. The new set included not only known suppressor alleles but also ten new substitutions at 9 residues (Table 2; note that the amber allele of Gln181 was known, but it was included here as a control for the efficiency of selection). Seven of the substitutions affected interior residues of the three-helical bundle of domain 1 or residues in the loops associated with the hinge (Figure 4, colored in blue), while alterations of residues 174, 181, and 182 affected the surface residues of helix 5 of domain 1 (Figure 4, colored in red and green). The seven interior domain 1 substitutions were interpreted as increasing hinge flexibility, rendering the

EF-G Motor Transmission to RRF 1267

Figure 3. Complementation and Suppression Activity of Chimeric EF-G Proteins (A) Growth of PEM100 strain transformed with chimeric EF-G variants at 42 C. Each panel number refers to the chimeric construct indicated in Table 1. (B) Growth of ttRRF-containing YN3576 strain transformed with chimeric EF-G variants at 42 C. (C) Polysome breakdown assay. 70S ribosomes were incubated in the presence or absence of RRF and EF-G variants and analyzed by 15%­30% sucrose density gradient centrifugation. Additions: (a) no RRF and no EF-G, (b) ecRRF and ecEF-G, (c) ttRRF and ttEF-G, (d) ttRRF and ecEF-G, (e) ttRRF and EF-G chimera 2, (f) ttRRF and EF-G chimera 3, (g) ttRRF and EF-G chimera 4.

ttRRF active in E. coli as shown previously (see Toyoda et al., 2000). However, the helix 5 substitutions cannot be explained in this way because Gln174, Gln181, and Glu182 are localized on the exterior surface of the helical bundle of domain 1 (see Figure 4B). One possible explanation is that these residues serve as sites for contact with EF-G or ribosomes and they render ttRRF accessible to the heterologous ecEF-G protein on the ribosome. Next, we carried out further analysis of C-terminal residues 177­182 (EKKEQE) of ttRRF by site-directed mutagenesis. This region is separated from the hinge and contains charged or large-mass residues such as Lys178, Gln181, and Glu182 that are exposed on the exterior surface of the helical bundle. Amino acid substitutions were designed to avoid the helical configuration or not to change the hydrophobic bridge between the two domains of RRF; three surface residues, Lys178,

Gln181, and Glu182, were substituted by Ser, while two interior residues, Lys179 and Glu180, were substituted by Ala. Serial amber mutations and bulky-to-small amino acid substitutions at residue positions 177 and 182 gave gain-of-function proteins (Table 2). These results are interpreted as indicating that exterior surface residues 174, 178, 181, and 182 of ttRRF are involved in the interaction with other components, such as the ribosome or EF-G, and that its contact is disturbed sterically by these non-Thermus-type residues. In view of the previous findings that the residues involved in the ribosome contact are localized in the tip of domain 1 and the upper surface of domain 2 of RRF (Fujiwara et al., 2001), we assume that residues 174, 178, 181, and 182 may participate in the interaction with EF-G. It should also be noted that we did not isolate any mutational change affecting residues at the tip of the RRF anticodon arm

Molecular Cell 1268

Table 2. Gain-of-Function Mutations of T. thermophilus RRF in Heterologous E. coli Condition Experiment 1 (Mutagenized Selection) Substitutions Nucleotide change Leu28  Phe Arg29  Cys Thr30  Ala Asp87  Gly Leu106  Phe Val115  Ala Ala117  Val Gln174  stop Gln181  stop Glu182  Gly Glu182  Lys CTC  TTC CGC  TGC ACC  GCC GAC  GGC CTC  TTC GTG  GCG GCG  GUG CAG  TAG CAG  TAG GAG  GGG GAG  AAG No. of Isolates 2 2 3 3 2 2 1 2 8 4 3 Suppression Activitya Suppression Activitya

Experiment 2 (Site-Directed Mutagenesis) Variants C-Terminal Peptide Sequenceb Wild-type Amber mutations AEKKEQEILK ······ ····· ···· ··· ·· · ······S··· ···AASS··· ··SAASS···

Substitutions

a Monitored by growth at 42 C of YN3576 cells transformed with pBR322-ttRRF variants carrying the indicated substitutions. Suppression activity was scored by colony size and growth: , normal growth (large colony); , fair growth (medium colony); , weak growth (small colony); , no growth. b · denotes the same residue as wild type.

mimic, unlike mutational studies with EF-G in which changes were detected at the tip of the anticodon arm mimic (Hou et al., 1994; Savelsbergh et al., 2000) (see Figure 1D). Allele Specificity in Interactions between Heterologous EF-G and RRF Proteins It would provide the best functional and genetic evidence for the predicted direct contacts between EF-G and RRF at tRNA-mimic domains if we could identify specific, wild-type or mutant, combinations between heterologous EF-G and RRF proteins. The change in the C5 allele results in removal of the C-terminal 5 amino acids of ttRRF, including Gln181 and Glu182. The C5 change restores the activity of ttRRF in E. coli expressing ecEF-G (Fujiwara et al., 1999; Toyoda et al., 2000) (see Figure 4B, upper panels). It was already shown in this study that ttRRF could be activated by ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G. However, the activity of ttRRF with the C5 change was eliminated by ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G (Figure 4B, lower panels). Therefore, the ttRRF protein lacking the C-terminal 5 amino acids responds properly to domains IV and V of ecEF-G, but does not respond to those of ttEF-G. This finding can be explained by assuming that Gln181 and Glu182 of ttRRF are in direct contact with domains IV/V of ttEF-G; the removal of these residues of ttRRF eliminates the functional interaction between homologous ttRRF and ttEF-G, while the same change produces the functional interaction between heterologous ttRRF and ecEF-G. We next investigated whether or not mutation in domain IV of EF-G shows allele specificity in tRNA translo-

cation and RRF function. The ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G chimera is defective in tRNA translocation since it is unable to complement the growth defect of PEM100 (see Figure 3A8; also Figure 5C, right panel). Plasmid pSTV29 containing the ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G sequence was mutagenized by passage through the mutator strain XL1-Red, and the mutagenized plasmid pool was transformed into the PEM100 strain. Over 30 actively growing colonies were selected at 42 C; these were characterized by DNA sequencing. Six groups were identified. Two groups formed large colonies (Figure 5C, left two panels) and were shown to possess substitutions of either Lys for Glu485 (E485K) or Arg for Gly553 (G553R) (Figure 5A, marked in red letters). The majority of the survivors belonged to these two groups. The other four groups formed relatively small colonies at 42 C and had single substitutions of Pro for Leu517 (L517P), Ser for Gly522 (G522S), Gly for Glu548 (E548G), or Pro for Ser522 (S552P) (Figure 5A, marked in blue letters). There was only one or two isolates of each type. Interestingly, all these amino acid changes are clustered at the neck region of domain IV. These mutant ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G alleles were expressed in ttRRF-containing E. coli strain YN3576, and growth was monitored at 42 C. The ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G E485K and ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G G553R proteins completely eliminated ttRRF functionality--there was no growth--while the other four mutant proteins had only a weak effect (Figure 5B). These results indicate that alterations in the neck region of domain IV can switch or change the ability of EF-G to catalyze tRNA translocation and ttRRF function. The two strong alleles, E485K and G553R, fully restored the tRNA translocation activity but

EF-G Motor Transmission to RRF 1269

in exclusive switching of both activities. Although other explanations cannot be excluded at present, these findings do provide evidence for a direct interaction between the anticodon arm-mimic domains of the two proteins. Discussion Interface of EF-G-RRF and -tRNA Interactions In this study, we confirmed the functional interplay between homologous, but not heterologous, EF-G and RRF, pointed out by Rao and Varshney (2001), using E. coli and T. thermophilus proteins. We further demonstrated that nonfunctional ttRRF can be activated in E. coli by swapping ecEF-G domains IV and V for those of ttEF-G. Most notably, the swap variant ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G restored the activity of ttRRF more efficiently than did wild-type ttEF-G (see Table 1; Figures 3B and 3C). This finding suggests that E. coli domains I­III have better access to the E. coli ribosome than do the Thermus domains. Unlike M. tuberculosis EF-G (Rao and Varshney, 2001), ttEF-G cannot complement the ecEF-G defect in the PEM100 strain, but it gains this activity upon swapping both domains IV and V for the E. coli domains. Weak effects are seen by swapping the single domain, V (see Table 1). Since domain V is known to interact with the ribosome and to be essential for the positioning of domain IV (Rodnina et al., 1997; Savelsbergh et al., 2000), this observation could be explained by assuming that M. tuberculosis domain V binds to E. coli ribosomes, whereas T. thermophilus domain V does not. These systematic domain swap analyses clearly point out that domain IV is primarily responsible for the species-specific activity of EF-G on the elongating ribosome as well as for RRF-dependent ribosome disassembly. The fact that ttEF-G can neither complement the E. coli EF-G mutant nor perform the ecRRF function provides us with the opportunity to study the functional interplay between these proteins. In addition to being activated by domain swapping, ttRRF became functional in E. coli when any of the following mutational changes were introduced in domain IV of ecEF-G: H504Y, S508F, and Q695am. Tyr504 and Phe508 are not present at these locations in ttRRF; therefore, the reason for suppression is not immediately obvious. The C terminus of ttEF-G is 2 amino acids shorter than that of ecEF-G. The Q695am protein tends toward a T. thermophilus type as it shortens the C terminus (see Figure 1C). His504 and Ser508 are located near the tip of the anticodon arm mimic of domain IV, and the C-terminal 9 residues truncated by Q695am are located within domain IV near the junction with domain V (see Figure 1D). All of these amino acids are located on the same face of domain IV. Therefore, we speculate that EF-G interacts with RRF at this surface of EF-G, and proper access of ttRRF to heterologous ecEF-G is inhibited at the His504­Ser508 tip region and at the C-terminal protruding tail region of domain IV. Functionality was also conferred on ttRRF by specific surface substitutions on RRF in the region that mimics the anticodon arm. These include Gln174, Gln181, and Glu182, which are localized on the exterior surface of the helical bundle of domain 1 of RRF (see Figure 4B),

Figure 4. Structural Distribution of Gain-of-Function Substitutions of T. thermophilus RRF and Allele-Specific Interaction (A) Altered residues in the molecular surface and hydrophobic core are marked by red and blue, respectively, and the intermediate position residue is marked by green in the topological diagram (top) and 3D structure (bottom) of ttRRF. Positions of suppressor alleles are indicated (see Table 2). Hinge loops 1 and 2 are marked with red numbers. The interloop bridging between residues 29 and 87, which mimics the conservative tertiary pair G19·C56 locking the D and T C loops of tRNA, is shown by the purple arrow. (B) Allele specificity in the ttRRF-EF-G interaction. YN3576 strain containing ecEF-G and the ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G chimera (expressed from pSTV29 plasmid) was transformed with pBR322 plasmids encoding wild-type ttRRF and the C5 variant, and the transformants' growth was monitored at 42 C. "ec" and "tt" denote E. coli and T. thermophilus, respectively.

completely eliminated the ribosome recycling function of ttRRF. It is interesting that single amino acid changes can exclusively switch activities for tRNA translocation and RRF disassembly, and these are localized at the neck of domain IV of EF-G. Taking these results into consideration, we assume that EF-G domain IV constitutes a direct interface between EF-G and tRNA as well as EF-G and RRF. Because of this, a small local alteration in the neck region of the EF-G protein can result

Molecular Cell 1270

Figure 5. Domain IV Mutations that Restore Functionality of the EF-G Chimera Plasmid pSTV29-ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G was mutagenized by passage through the mutator strain XL1-Red. The mutagenized plasmid pool was transformed into PEM100 strain, and survivors were selected at 42 C. Mutations in the survivors' EF-G sequences were identified and characterized. (A) 3D structure of ttEF-G and the mutated residues (shown by red). This is a view from different angle compared with that shown in Figure 1. Phenotypically strong (major) substitutions are shown in red letters, and weak (minor) substitutions are in black letters. (B) Functionality of ttRRF affected by domain IV variants. ttRRF-containing YN3576 cells were transformed with pSTV29-ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G plasmids containing the indicated substitutions, and the transformants' growth was monitored at 42 C. "wt" denotes wild-type. (C) Complementation activity of domain IV variants. The same plasmids were transformed into the PEM100 strain, and the transformants' growth was monitored at 42 C.

and it is speculated that they serve as sites for contact with EF-G. Two lines of functional and genetic evidence support the conclusion that EF-G and RRF interact directly through their domains that mimic the anticodon arm. First, the ttRRF C5 protein, which lacks five C-terminal residues including Gln181 and Glu182, affects functionality of ttRRF in an opposite way--i.e., positively or negatively--depending on whether domains IV/V were from ecEF-G or ttEF-G (i.e., allele specificity) (see Figure 4B). Second, the ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G chimeric proteins containing E485K and G553R mutations in the neck region of domain IV can activate tRNA translocation but completely eliminate ttRRF functionality (see Figure 5). Since similar but less profound gain-of-function changes are clustered around the neck of domain IV of ec(I-III)tt(IV-V)EF-G, it is likely that a small conformational or flexibility change in this restricted area has the potential to determine the accessibility to tRNA or RRF. This can be explained by assuming that domain IV of EF-G interacts directly not only with tRNA but also with RRF and that it uses similar, if not the same, interface of EF-G. Otherwise, the observed exclusive switching, by single amino acid changes in ec(I-III)tt(IVV)EF-G, of both activities for tRNA translocation and RRF disassembly cannot be easily accounted for, although other possibilities are not excluded. Wintermeyer and colleagues have reported that domains IV and V are essential for coupling of the conformational change of EF-G induced by GTP hydrolysis to structural rearrangements of the ribosome that result in tRNA translocation (Rodnina et al., 1997; Savelsbergh et al., 2000). The EF-G variant lacking domain IV failed to induce the structural rearrangements of the ribosome, thereby reducing the activity in tRNA translocation about

1000-fold. A single mutation of the conserved histidine residue at the tip of domain IV, His583 in ecEF-G, decreased the rate of translocation at least 100-fold (Savelsbergh et al., 2000). This suggests that interactions between the tip of domain IV around residue 583 and the ribosome (in the pretranslocation state), or the A site tRNA, are important for translocation. It is of particular interest that the putative RRF-contact surface on EF-G, consisting of His504, Ser508, and the C-terminal tail, seemingly includes His583 as well as Gly502 (see Figure 1D); the EF-G G502D, H583K, and H583R variant proteins are defective in tRNA translocation. Despite the shared localization of altered amino acid resides on the same face of domain IV of EF-G, the mutant phenotypes are distinct; the mutations altering residues 504, 508, and 695 of ecEF-G restored ttRRF functionality in E. coli (see Figure 1A) without affecting tRNA translocation or ecRRF function (see Figure 1B), whereas the mutations altering residues 502 and 583 abolished tRNA translocation. These results are interpreted as indicating that the same surface of domain IV of EF-G acts as an interface for contact with tRNA and RRF, but it uses distinct residues for each interaction. In both cases, as suggested by the structural similarity of domain IV of EF-G with the anticodon arm, the tip region of domain IV seems to play an important role both in tRNA translocation and in ribosome disassembly. It is tempting to speculate that EF-G interacts with tRNAs using residues 502 and 583 of EF-G, while it interacts with RRF using residues 504 and 508 of EF-G. Mechanistic and Architectural Insight into RRF The C-terminal protruding tail of EF-G, a structural part of domain IV, is presumed to be another contact site

EF-G Motor Transmission to RRF 1271

with RRF. Hence, two anticodon arm mimics, domain 1 of RRF and domain IV of EF-G, seem to interact with each other in different areas-- the mid-surface below the neck of domain 1 of RRF and the tip and neck of domain IV of EF-G. The recent cryoelectron microscopic reconstitution of 70S ribosomes associated with EF-G and tRNAs has revealed that domain IV of EF-G reaches into the decoding site of the ribosome and that the position of its tip overlaps substantially with the position of A site-bound tRNA. This would be around the anticodon-stem region, not at the tip region (Agrawal et al., 1998, 2000). These visualized contact sites of EF-G and tRNA seem to be equivalent to the predicted interface of RRF and EF-G. Therefore, it is tempting to speculate that RRF does not only mimic the shape of tRNA but mimics the contact site(s) with EF-G, as does tRNA in the ribosome. We assume that these sites should represent the points of a lever where force is applied from the EF-G motor driven by GTP hydrolysis energy to RRF and tRNA. Wintermeyer and colleagues have speculated that domains IV and V form a structural unit that may function as a lever. This lever translates the conformational change of domain I induced by GTP hydrolysis into a change of the overall conformation of EF-G through domain I-domain V interactions (Savelsbergh et al., 2000); then this conformational change of EF-G promotes the translocation of the tRNAs on the ribosome. RRF, however, is architecturally different from tRNA in that the hinge forms a flexible "gooseneck" elbow, while the elbow of tRNA is rigid, and this flexibility of RRF has been shown to be vital for its function (Toyoda et al., 2000). Therefore, one might speculate that tRNA and RRF should respond differently to the EF-G motor action even if EF-G interacts with both molecules at similar positions. We assume that if RRF functions to separate the 50S subunit from the posttermination ribosome complex (Karimi et al., 1999), it may not translocate on the ribosome, and the force transmitted from EF-G is used to disassemble 70S ribosomes. It is tempting to speculate that the gooseneck motion of RRF plays a role in converting this force to separate the 50S subunit from the posttermination ribosome complex. This speculation is favored by the recent findings of Rao and Varshney (2001) that the RRF-mediated ribosome recycling function is independent of the translocation function of EF-G. Moreover the 50S separation model is consistent with the recent kinetic (i.e., based on the surface plasmon resonance technique) and biochemical findings of a preferential binding of RRF to 50S subunit, rather than 70S ribosome (Karimi et al., 1999; Ishino et al., 2000). Domains 1 and 2 of RRF are bridged by joining two loops, loop 1 (residues 30­33) and loop 2 (residues 103­ 106). These loops are composed of conservative residues in different RRF proteins (see Figure 4) (Toyoda et al., 2000). Several lines of evidence support the functional importance of the flexibility of the hinge, although the mechanism(s) behind this functionality is unknown. Perhaps, a more rigid conformation of the hinge, compared to the protein of nonthermophilic bacteria, is required at the temperature encountered by T. thermophilus. In this case, the T. thermophilus hinge is probably less flexible than the E. coli hinge, and it does not function in E. coli around 37 C. Most of the newly isolated gain-of-function variants that were categorized probably increase hinge flexibility (see Toyoda et al., 2000).

Among these changes, two substitutions for Arg29 and Asp87 are of special interest. These residues are connected by electrostatic interaction in the crystal structure of T. thermophilus RRF (see Figure 4, marked by purple arrows) (Toyoda et al., 2000). This bridge seems to mimic topologically the conservative tertiary pair G19·C56 at the corner of the L-shape. This pair locks the D and T C interdomain loops of tRNA and gave the rigid structure of the tRNA elbow region (for a review, see Dirheimer et al., 1995). The equivalent residues of ecRRF, Lys28 and Asp86, however, are not physically associated, showing that the ecRRF elbow is less rigid. Perhaps T. thermophilus RRF mimicked the D-T C bridging of tRNA to be thermostable at high temperatures. The Arg29Cys and Asp87Gly mutational changes eliminated this interloop locking and increased the hinge flexibility. These gain-of-function alterations probably can be explained by assuming either that the hinge flexibility itself is important for the action of RRF or that the gain of hinge flexibility renders RRF accessible to the heterologous EF-G. Although these two possibilities are not necessarily mutually exclusive, we feel that the latter possibility is less likely because specific residues on the surface of RRF and EF-G disabled proper contact in the present study. We believe that further analyses of molecular, functional, and structural interactions between EF-G and RRF will provide a better understanding of how the cooperative interaction of RRF and EF-G leads to ribosome disassembly and recycling.
Experimental Procedures Strains, Plasmids, and Manipulations E. coli K-12 strains used were Ts lethal mutants YN3576 (Fujiwara et al., 1999) and PEM100 (Hou et al., 1994) affected in RRF and EF-G, respectively. An ecEF-G constitutive expression plasmid, pSTV29ecEF-G, was constructed by subcloning the KpnI fragment from plasmid pUC4G (Hou et al., 1994) into the same restriction site of pSTV29 (TaKaRa). To make an equivalent ttEF-G expression plasmid, the ttEF-G sequence was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using primers 5 -GGGAGATCTCATATGGCGGTCAAGG TAGAGTACG-3 and 5 -GGGAGATCTGAATTCTATTGACCCTTGAT GAGCTTC-3 from T. thermophilus DNA, and then the sequence was cloned into the EcoRI site of pET30a (Novagen). The resulting XbaI-EcoRI segment was recloned to the same restriction sites in pSTV29, giving rise to pSTV29-ttEF-G. For complementation of the E. coli EF-G defect, a PEM100 strain was transformed with these plasmids and their domain-swap or mutant derivatives, and the transformant growth was monitored at 42 C on LB agar medium (Miller, 1972). For intragenic suppression of the E. coli RRF defect, the YN3576 strain was transformed with plasmid pBR322 derivatives carrying the wild-type or mutant sequences of ttRRF (i.e., HindIIIBamHI segments recloned from pIQV-ttRRF derivatives) (Toyoda et al., 2000), and the growth of these transformants was monitored at 42 C as described previously (Fujiwara et al., 1999; Toyoda et al., 2000). For EF-G-mediated suppression of the E. coli RRF defect, pBR322-ttRRF-containing strain YN3576 was doubly transformed with pSTV29-ecEF-G derivatives, and their growth was examined. EF-G Domain Swapping Intervals of domains III­V of E. coli and T. thermophilus EF-G were marked with restriction enzyme sites, i.e., NruI (artificial) and XhoI (authentic) sites at the III/IV and IV/V junctions, respectively, using designed PCR primers (see Figure 2A). The artificial restriction sequence did not affect EF-G activity. Interdomain swapping was performed by amplification of appropriate DNAs from ecEF-G and ttEF-G and by substitution of their restriction fragments. Although the C-terminal region of EF-G is part of domain IV in the 3D structure (see Figure 2), the swapping at the XhoI site is conventionally referred to as a domain V swap.

Molecular Cell 1272

Mutant Selection In vivo mutagenesis of ecEF-G and ttRRF genes (cloned on pSTV29 and pBR322, respectively) was performed by passage through the mutator strain XL1-Red (endA1 gyrA96 thi-1 hsdR17 supE44 relA1 lac mutD5 mutS mutT tetracycline-resistant; Stratagene). The mutagenized ecEF-G and ttRRF plasmid pools were transformed into YN3576 cells in the presence and absence of plasmid pBR322ttRRF, respectively. Compensatory variants were selected as survivors at 42 C, and then plasmid DNAs were recovered and retransformed into the same parental strain. Those that gave a reproducible phenotype were further characterized. The entire coding part of ecEF-G and ttRRF was amplified from these suppressor variants by PCR and subjected to DNA sequencing and complementation or suppression tests. Polysome Breakdown Assay E. coli and T. thermophilus RRF and EF-G, as well as chimeric EF-G proteins, were purified following overexpression in E. coli (Ishino et al., 2000; Fujiwara et al., 2001). Protein concentrations were determined using the Advanced Protein Assay (Cytoskeleton). Polysome preparation and breakdown assays were carried out as described previously (Fujiwara et al., 2001). Acknowledgments We thank Charley Yanofsky and Don Court for critical reading of the manuscript and valuable comments and Masayo Urata for technical assistance. This work was supported in part by grants from The Ministry of Education, Sports, Culture, Science and Technology of Japan; the Human Frontier Science Program (awarded in 1997); the Basic Research for Innovation Biosciences Program of the Biooriented Technology Research Advancement Institution (BRAIN); the Organization for Pharmaceutical Safety and Research (OPSR); and the Mitsubishi Foundation. Received: October 24, 2001 Revised: April 5, 2002 References Agrawal, R.K., Penczek, P., Grassucci, R.A., and Frank, J. (1998). Visualization of elongation factor G on the Escherichia coli 70S ribosome: the mechanism of translocation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 6134­6138. Agrawal, R.K., Spahn, C.M.T., Penczek, P., Grassucci, R.A., Nierhaus, K.H., and Frank, J. (2000). Visualization of tRNA movements on the Escherichia coli 70S ribosome during the elongation cycle. J. Cell Biol. 150, 447­459. Dirheimer, G., Keith, G., Dumas, P., and Westhof, E. (1995). Primary, secondary, and tertiary structures of tRNAs. In tRNA: Structure, Biosynthesis, and Function, D. Soll and U.L. RajBhandary, eds. ¨ (Washington, D.C.: ASM Press), pp. 93­126. Freistroffer, D.V., Pavlov, M.Y., MacDougall, J., Buckingham, R.H., and Ehrenberg, M. (1997). Release factor RF3 in E. coli accelerates the dissociation of release factors RF1 and RF2 from the ribosome in a GTP-dependent manner. EMBO J. 16, 4126­4133. Fujiwara, T., Ito, K., Nakayashiki, T., and Nakamura, Y. (1999). Amber mutations in ribosome recycling factors of Escherichia coli and Thermus thermophilus: evidence for C-terminal modulator element. FEBS Lett. 447, 297­302. Fujiwara, T., Ito, K., and Nakamura, Y. (2001). Functional mapping of the ribosome contact site in the ribosome recycling factor. RNA 7, 64­70. Hirashima, A., and Kaji, A. (1972). Factor-dependent release of ribosomes from messenger RNA: requirement for two heat-stable factors. J. Mol. Biol. 65, 43­58. Hou, Y., Lin, Y., Sharer, J.D., and March, P.E. (1994). In vivo selection of conditionally-lethal mutations in the gene encoding elongation factor G of Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 176, 7038­7044. Ishino, T., Atarashi, K., Uchiyama, S., Yamami, T., Yoshida, T., Hara, H., Yokose, K., Kobayashi, Y., and Nakamura, Y. (2000). Interaction

of ribosome recycling factor and elongation factor EF-G with E. coli ribosomes studied by surface plasmon resonance technique. Genes Cells 5, 953­963. Ito, K., Uno, M., and Nakamura, Y. (2000). A tripeptide `anticodon' deciphers stop codons in messenger RNA. Nature 403, 680­684. Janosi, L., Hara, H., Zhang, S., and Kaji, A. (1996). Ribosome recycling by ribosome recycling factor (RRF)--an important but overlooked step of protein biosynthesis. Adv. Biophys. 32, 121­201. Janosi, L., Mottagui-Tabar, S., Isaksson, L.A., Sekine, Y., Ohtsubo, E., Zhang, S., Goon, S., Nelken, S., Shuda, M., and Kaji, A. (1998). Evidence for in vivo ribosome recycling, the fourth step in protein biosynthesis. EMBO J. 17, 1141­1151. Karimi, R., Pavlov, M., Buckingham, R., and Ehrenberg, M. (1999). Novel roles for classical factors at the interface between translation termination and initiation. Mol. Cell 3, 601­609. Kim, K.K., Min, K., and Suh, S.W. (2000). Crystal structure of the ribosome recycling factor from Escherichia coli. EMBO J. 19, 2362­ 2370. Miller, J. (1972). Experiments in Molecular Genetics. (Cold Spring Harbor: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press). Nakamura, Y., Ito, K., and Ehrenberg, M. (2000). Mimicry grasps reality in translation termination. Cell 101, 349­352. Rao, A.R., and Varshney, U. (2001). Specific interaction between the ribosome recycling factor and the elongation factor G from Mycobacterium tuberculosis mediates peptidyl-tRNA release and ribosome recycling in Escherichia coli. EMBO J. 20, 2977­2986. Rodnina, M.V., Savelsbergh, A., Katunin, V.I., and Wintermeyer, W. (1997). Hydrolysis of GTP by elongation factor G drives tRNA movement on the ribosome. Nature 385, 37­41. Savelsbergh, A., Matassova, N.B., Rodnina, M.V., and Wintermeyer, W. (2000). Role of domains 4 and 5 in elongation factor G functions on the ribosome. J. Mol. Biol. 300, 951­961. Selmer, M., Al-Karadaghi, S., Hirokawa, G., Kaji, A., and Liljas, A. (1999). Crystal structure of Thermotoga maritima ribosome recycling factor: a tRNA mimic. Science 286, 2349­2352. Toyoda, T., Tin, O.F., Ito, K., Fujiwara, T., Kumasaka, T., Yamamoto, M., Garber, M.B., and Nakamura, Y. (2000). Crystal structure combined with genetic analysis of the Thermus thermophilus ribosome recycling factor shows that a flexible hinge may act as a functional switch. RNA 6, 1432­1444. Wilson, K.S., and Noller, H.F. (1998). Molecular movement inside the translational engine. Cell 92, 337­349.

