doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2006.03.001

J. Mol. Biol. (2006) 358, 1286­1295

Crystal Structure of Yeast Peroxisomal Multifunctional Enzyme: Structural Basis for Substrate Specificity of (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Units
Mari S. Ylianttila1, Niko V. Pursiainen1, Antti M. Haapalainen1 ´ Andre H. Juffer1, Yves Poirier2, J. Kalervo Hiltunen1 and Tuomo Glumoff1*
Biocenter Oulu and Department of Biochemistry University of Oulu, PO Box 3000, FIN-90014, University of Oulu, Finland ´ ´ ´ Biophore, Moleculaire Vegetale Laboratoire de Biotechnologie ^ ´ ´ Vegetale, Batiment de Biologie ´ Universite de Lausanne CH-1015 Lausanne Switzerland
2 1

(3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase is part of multifunctional enzyme type 2 (MFE-2) of peroxisomal fatty acid b-oxidation. The MFE-2 protein from yeasts contains in the same polypeptide chain two dehydrogenases (A and B), which possess difference in substrate specificity. The crystal structure of Candida tropicalis (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase AB heterodimer, consisting of dehydrogenase A and B, determined at the ° resolution of 2.2 A , shows overall similarity with the prototypic counterpart from rat, but also important differences that explain the substrate specificity differences observed. Docking studies suggest that dehydrogenase A binds the hydrophobic fatty acyl chain of a mediumchain-length ((3R)-OH-C10) substrate as bent into the binding pocket, whereas the short-chain substrates are dislocated by two mechanisms: (i) a short-chain-length 3-hydroxyacyl group ((3R)-OH-C4) does not reach the hydrophobic contacts needed for anchoring the substrate into the active site; and (ii) Leu44 in the loop above the NADC cofactor attracts shortchain-length substrates away from the active site. Dehydrogenase B, which can use a (3R)-OH-C4 substrate, has a more shallow binding pocket and the substrate is correctly placed for catalysis. Based on the current structure, and together with the structure of the 2-enoyl-CoA hydratase 2 unit of yeast MFE-2 it becomes obvious that in yeast and mammalian MFE-2s, despite basically identical functional domains, the assembly of these domains into a mature, dimeric multifunctional enzyme is very different.
q 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

*Corresponding author

Keywords: SDR; b-oxidation; peroxisome; multifunctional enzyme type 2; (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase

Introduction
In living organisms, quantitatively the major pathway for degrading fatty acids is b-oxidation, which consists of a set of four reactions operating at carbon 2 and 3 of acyl-CoA esters. To allow the b-oxidation of acyl groups with different chain lengths to proceed, many enzymes of
Abbreviations used: MFE-2, multifunctional enzyme type 2; (3R)-OH-C4, (3R)-hydroxybutyryl-CoA; (3R)-OHC10, (3R)-hydroxydecanoyl-CoA; (3R)-OH-C16, (3R)hydroxyhexadecanoyl-CoA; SDR, short-chain alcohol dehydrogenase/reductase; PHA, polyhydroxyalkanoate. E-mail address of the corresponding author: tuomo.glumoff@oulu.fi

b-oxidation have evolved as paralogues, showing specificity with respect to variants of acyl groups.1,2 Yeasts and mammals possess a profound difference in completing the utilization of fatty acids. Mammals have two separate systems: peroxisomal and mitochondrial b-oxidation pathways, which use the same chemistry for sequential cleavage of the fatty acyl chains, but utilize different gene products for the purpose. Mammalian peroxisomal b-oxidation carries out partial chain-shortening of a wide variety of substrates, ranging from very long and long to medium straight-chain saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, as well as a-methyl-branched chain fatty acids and bile acid intermediates.3,4 In mitochondria, long-chain fatty acids are b-oxidized by membrane-

0022-2836/$ - see front matter q 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Crystal Structure of Dehydrogenases of Yeast MFE-2

1287

associated enzymes, whereas the short-chain fatty acids are oxidized by a set of soluble monofunctional enzymes, allowing the degradation offatty acids to go all the way to acetyl-CoA.5 The growth of yeasts on fatty acids as carbon source is accompanied by proliferation of peroxisomes, in which b-oxidation is exclusively housed in these organisms. Unlike in mammalian peroxisomes, the properties of peroxisomal enzymes in yeast allow b-oxidation to go to completion. Two out of the four enzymatic activities of b-oxidation reside in the same protein in one polypeptide chain. These are the 2-enoyl-CoA hydratase and the 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase activities of multifunctional enzymes type 1 and 2 (MFE-1 and MFE-2, respectively), the difference being that type 1 is specific for the (S)-isomeric substrates and type 2 for the (R)-isomers. Despite functional similarity, MFE-1 and -2 are structurally very different,6 as is MFE-2 from mammals and yeasts. The 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase domain in yeast MFE-2 has interesting features; namely it has undergone a duplication (Figure 1)7 and evolved into two (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenases in the same polypeptide with different chain-length specificities.8 The first dehydrogenase (dehydrogenase A; the amino-terminal region of the sequence in MFE2) can catalyze the reaction for medium- and long-chain substrates ((3R)-OH-C10­(3R)-OHC16), whereas the second dehydrogenase (dehydrogenase B; the region of the sequence between dehydrogenase A and hydratase 2 in MFE-2) shows the highest activity with short-chain substrates ((3R)-OH-C4). The substrate specificities of the dehydrogenase A and B domains have been exploited in yeast for the synthesis of polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA), a polyester with biodegradable plastic properties, made from the polymerization of 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA intermediates.9 Expression of variants of the dehydrogenase with inactivation of either the A or B domain along with a peroxisomal PHA synthase leads to the synthesis of PHA with a different monomer composition, which ultimately influences polymer properties. The mechanism of substrate preference by yeast dual dehydrogenases is unknown. Here, we have studied the substrate binding modes of Candida tropicalis dehydrogenase A and B, which are short-chain alcohol dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) superfamily members, by first determining the crystal structure of MFE-2 truncated for the hydratase 2 unit (MFE-2h2D), but containing the dehydrogenase AB heterodimer, followed by docking studies with two different chain-length substrates. Based on identification of the key structural determinants of substrate binding to dehydrogenases and the results from kinetic measurements, we propose the structural basis for the observed substrate specificity difference of the (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenases in C. tropicalis MFE-2.

Figure 1. A schematic picture showing the assembly of the three enzymatic units in C. tropicalis MFE-2. Left and right halves of the picture each represent one MFE-2 polypeptide with dehydrogenase A (DA or DA 0 ), dehydrogenase B (DB or DB 0 ) and hydratase 2 (H2 or H2 0 ) units. An MFE-2 monomer contains a dehydrogenase AB heterodimer and a hydratase 2 monomer, while an MFE-2 dimer contains a dehydrogenase (AB)2 heterotetramer and a hydratase 2 homodimer. Dehydrogenase units are color-coded for clarity. The termini of both polypeptides are indicated with N or N 0 and C or C 0 . The numbered arrows 1 to 6 indicate the continuum of the polypeptide chain from N terminus to C terminus (numbering for the left molecule only). Although dehydrogenase A is in the N terminus of MFE-2, it appears spatially closer to the hydratase 2 unit than dehydrogenase B.

Results
Structure determination Multiple amino acid sequence alignment (Figure 2) reveals that stretches of non-conserved amino acid residues separate (3R)-hydroxyacylCoA dehydrogenase A and B as well as the dehydrogenase B and 2-enoyl-CoA hydratase 2 units in C. tropicalis peroxisomal MFE-2. Using the second stretch as a guide to separate (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenases from 2-enoyl-CoA hydratase 2, and aiming to get a homogenous protein suited for structural studies, four different variants were tested, resulting in the N-terminal

1288

Crystal Structure of Dehydrogenases of Yeast MFE-2

Figure 2. Amino acid sequence alignment of (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenases A and B (C.t.A and C.t.B) of MFE-2 from C. tropicalis with the corresponding part of the rat MFE-2 and E. coli 7a-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. The SwissProt identifiers of the sequences are Q02207, P07896 and P25529, respectively. The alignment was performed with the program CLUSTAL_X.36 Residues with complete identity or similarity between the sequences are shaded black, while three or two matching residues within the sequences are marked with decreasing grayness. Secondary structural elements are drawn and named above each sequence with a-helices as bars and b-strands as arrows. Continuation of an element to the next line is indicated by three small squares. The Ser-Tyr-Lys catalytic triad of all the enzymes is marked with vertical arrows above the C.t.A sequence. The substrate binding loop of the E. coli 7a-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase is shown below the sequence. The residues at positions 506 and 508 of the C.t.B sequence were mutated to prevent degradation during expression and purification of the recombinant MFE-2(h2D)10 and are written above the sequence as S and M, respectively, between strand bFb and helix aGb. The boxed residue Ser540 in bGb of dehydrogenase B was found to be a phenylalanine in the crystal structure. The vertical arrow below the C.t.B sequence indicates the termination of the C. tropicalis MFE-2 construct (1­604) used for the purification and crystallization.

part of C. tropicalis MFE-2 with two (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenases (AB heterodimer in the same polypeptide chain). The most stable protein variant contained residues 1­604 with mutations of Thr506Ser and Phe508Met: its cloning, overexpression in Escherichia coli, purification and crystallization have been described.10 Details of structure determination and refinement are presented in Table 1 and Materials and Methods. Overall structure and comparison to rat enzyme The asymmetric unit of the crystals contained one molecule consisting of the (3R)-hydroxyacylCoA dehydrogenase AB heterodimer with residues 1­313 and 314­604 forming the dehydrogenase A and B units, respectively. Each dehydrogenase consists of an NAD-binding domain and a C-terminal domain (Figures 1 and 3), similar to the single dehydrogenase from the rat MFE-2,11 and contains the Ser-Tyr-

Lys catalytic triad of SDR family enzymes. The molecule could be built with the help of continuous electron density from Ser2 to Gly603, excluding two areas where electron density was fragmented. The first area extends from Gly41 to Ser51 between strand bBa and helix aCa. Multiple sequence alignment (Figure 2) shows that these residues can be found in both mammalian MFE-2 and fungal dehydrogenase A, but they are missing from fungal dehydrogenase B (Figure 4). The second area of missing electron density covers the residues from Thr504 to Asp512 between strand bFb and helix aGb. This region in the rat dehydrogenase forms a loop above the ligand NADC (Figures 2 and 4). The corresponding loop also contributes to substrate binding in E. coli 7a-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase12 and it is called the substrate binding loop. The variability of this loop, its flexibility and adaptability in SDR proteins, has been assumed to prepare the way for the wide

Crystal Structure of Dehydrogenases of Yeast MFE-2

1289

Table 1. Structure determination and refinement
° Resolution (A) Completeness of data (%) (last shell) Rmerge (%) (last shell) I/sI (last shell) Rfactor (%) Working set, number of reflections Test set, number of reflections Rfree (%) Protein atoms Water atoms ° rmsd (bond distance) (A) rmsd (bond angle) (deg.) rmsd B ° Main-chains bonded atoms (A2) ° Side-chain bonded atoms (A2) Average B-factor ° All atoms (A2) ° Main-chain atoms (A2) ° Side-chain atoms (A2) ° Water molecules (A2) Ramachandan plota Most favored regions (%) Additionally allowed regions (%) Generously allowed regions (%) Disallowed regions (%)
a

20­2.22 98.7 (96.4) 10.2 (29.7) 12.56 (4.74) 19.5 26,573 1355 25.2 4465 345 0.015 1.296 1.49 1.37 15 12 13 45 87.8 12.2 ­ ­

As defined by PROCHECK.

spectrum of substrates, ranging from small molecules to fatty acids and steroids, accepted in the family.13 The residues of the substrate binding loop are not conserved among species, or in the dehydrogenases A and B of C. tropicalis (Figure 2). This loop has different conformations in C. tropicalis dehydrogenase A and B as well as rat dehydrogenase (Figure 4). It is so flexible in C. tropicalis dehydrogenase B that nine residues cannot be seen in the electron density map. The loop was also flexible in the rat dehydrogenase structure in those monomers which were not rigidified by crystal contacts.11 The flexibility appears to be a common feature among the SDR family members: the substrate binding loop is disordered in the absence of bound cofactor or substrate, gets partially stabilized after binding a cofactor, and becomes stabilized and ordered only after substrate binding.12­14 When comparing the structures of rat dehydrogenase liganded with NADC and unliganded C. tropicalis dehydrogenases, it can be observed that in rat dehydrogenase the substrate binding loop forms an entrance of the pocket trapping NADC and is hydrogen-bonded with NADC, whereas in C. tropicalis dehydrogenases the loop is located further apart from the putative NAD-binding site. In addition to the variance of structures of the substrate binding loops, the C-terminal domains are also different in the yeast dehydrogenase A and B and rat dehydrogenase structures (Figures 3 and 4). The extremely open conformation of the substrate binding loop of dehydrogenase A (Figures 3(a), 4 and 5(a)) induces it to interact with helix aHb, which is thus positioned differently than the corresponding helix in dehydrogenase A and rat dehydrogenase. The C terminus of dehydrogenase

Figure 3. Structure of the N-terminal part of C. tropicalis MFE-2. MFE-2(h2D)) is shown with two (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenases in the same polypeptide, starting from dehydrogenase A (red) and continuing to dehydrogenase B (blue). (b) A view from 1808 around the vertical axis compared to (a). The dehydrogenase dimer is only a part of the mature MFE-2: the C-terminal hydratase 2 unit is omitted in this construct. Both dehydrogenases consist of an NAD-binding domain and a C-terminal domain, with the C-terminal domain of dehydrogenase A having extensive contacts with the NAD-binding domain of dehydrogenase B, and vice versa. The cofactor needed in the dehydrogenation reaction is NADC (violet): it is docked into the structure using its identical position in the rat enzyme11 as a guide, as discussed in Materials and Methods. The substrates bound to dehydrogenases A and B are (3R)-hydroxydecanoyl-CoA (yellow) and (3R)hydroxybutyryl-CoA (green), respectively, and appear as the result of docking calculations as discussed further in the text. The labels of the secondary structural elements are according to Figure 2, except that for clarity as and bs have been omitted, a-helices are indicated with capital letters and b-strands with small letters (strand bf is not labeled due to its position behind the docked substrate). The Figure was drawn using Swiss-PdbViewer29 and POV-Ray v3.5. (http://www.povray.org/povlegal.html) (a) A view towards the binding site of dehydrogenase A. The substrate is bound to the cleft between the two NAD-binding domains and the C-terminal domain of dehydrogenase B, which specifically binds the CoA-part of the substrate of dehydrogenase A. The substrate binding loop (pink) is in an open conformation. (b) A view towards the binding site of dehydrogenase B. Noteworthy is that the helix aHa in the C terminus of dehydrogenase A is shorter than aHb in dehydrogenase

1290

Crystal Structure of Dehydrogenases of Yeast MFE-2

Substrate binding to C. tropicalis dehydrogenase A In order to elucidate structural determinants for substrate specificities of the dehydrogenases of C. tropicalis MFE-2, (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA substrates of different chain lengths were docked into the structures. Docking of (3R)-hydroxybutyrylCoA ((3R)-OH-C4) and (3R)-hydroxydecanoylCoA ((3R)-OH-C10) to dehydrogenase A was straightforward and the mode of binding is shown in Figure 5(a) and (d), and (b) and (e). Docking results with dehydrogenase A immediately reveal a cooperative substrate binding mode between the two dehydrogenase units. In addition to the interactions with the Rossmann fold domain, the phosphopantetheine of both the medium-chain ((3R)-OH-C10) and the short-chain ((3R)-OH-C4) substrates interacts with the C-terminal domain of dehydrogenase B, forming hydrogen bonds with Ser589, Thr590 and Thr591. Dehydrogenase A will thus not bind the substrate properly without the C-terminal domain of dehydrogenase B, and consequently, it cannot alone catalyze the reaction. This may explain why attempts to produce the two dehydrogenases of C. tropicalis separately as recombinant proteins failed.10 Docking of (3R)-OH-C10 disclosed that the fatty acid tail is bound to dehydrogenase A as bent. The hydrophobic tail is housed in a tunnel, the roof of which is the substrate itself, and the walls are built by the helix aEFa as well as the loop between the strand bFa and the helix aFG1 (Figure 5(a) and (d)). Hydrophobic contacts with the fatty acid tail are formed by Pro151, Leu194, Ala195 and Leu102, as well as by the methyl groups of CoA. However, concerning the short-chain substrates, they are too short to form the tunnel and they are not in hydrophobic contact with the residues seen with (3R)-OH-C10 (Figure 5(b) and (e)). The tails of the short-chain fatty acids are thus not properly anchored in the active site. Furthermore, the hydrophobic tail of short-chain fatty acids contacts Leu44, located apart from the active site, thus guiding the catalytic hydroxyl group away from the catalytic center for the dehydrogenation reaction to take place. The calculated distances from the (3R)-hydroxy group to catalytic Tyr163 and ° Ser150 are 7.8 and 11 A, respectively, being 4.6 and ° for the 3R-OH-C10 substrate, respectively. 7.6 A Substrate binding to C. tropicalis dehydrogenase B Docking of substrates to dehydrogenase B presupposed building to completion of the substrate binding loop. When this was done according to the rat structure, dehydrogenase B was found to bind CoA in a similar manner to dehydrogenase A. The closed form of the substrate binding loop present in the template rat dehydrogenase structure did not exclude the substrate being docked into the yeast dehydrogenase B structure. If the loop was

Figure 4. Comparison of the backbone structures of different dehydrogenases of MFE-2s: rat (yellow), C. tropicalis dehydrogenase A (red) and C. tropicalis dehydrogenase B (light blue). NADC as part of the rat structure is shown in violet. Pairwise superimpositions (rat versus C.t.A, rat versus C.t.B, C.t.A versus C.t.B) indicate r.m.s. ° differences on main-chain atoms of 3.68, 2.56 and 2.69 A, respectively, as calculated in Swiss-PdbViewer.29 Major structural differences are the different conformations of substrate binding loops (brace on top), the possible contact site for the hydratase 2 unit in dehydrogenase A (red arrow on the right) and the missing loop above the NADC binding site in yeast dehydrogenase B (blue arrow on the left). Dehydrogenase A has this loop, but it was not visible in the crystal structure. The Figure was drawn using Swiss-PdbViewer29 and POV-Ray v3.5 (http:// www.povray.org/povlegal.html).

A, in turn, differs from the rat and dehydrogenase B structures (Figures 3(b), 4 and 5(c)) by having a shorter helix aHa than the aHb or the aH in the rat dehydrogenase and also by having a longer loop forming an extra turn in the vicinity of helix aCT2a. All these structural differences, the last helix aH and the extra turn of the loop in the C terminus of dehydrogenase A, reside on the same side of the polypeptide and also come close to each other (Figure 3). Since the C terminus of dehydrogenase B immediately precedes the hydratase 2 unit in the full-length MFE-2 (Figure 1) and thus faces it, it is possible that the above structural features either provide a contact site for the hydratase 2 unit within a monomer or act as contact sites between two monomers in the C. tropicalis MFE-2 dimer.

B, leaving an additional loop to replace the non-existing turn of the helix. The short-chain fatty acyl-CoA is located above this loop, which also binds the CoA-part of the substrate. The substrate binding loop (dark yellow) is in a more closed conformation than in dehydrogenase A. This gives more space for the substrate between the NADbinding domain of dehydrogenase B and the C-terminal domain of dehydrogenase A. The NAD-binding domain of dehydrogenase B is hence not equally restrictive for substrate binding in dehydrogenase B, and the substrate has space to kink to a kind of hairpin or letter L shape.

Crystal Structure of Dehydrogenases of Yeast MFE-2

1291

Figure 5. Docking of (3R)-OH-C4 and (3R)-OH-C10 substrates to C. tropicalis dehydrogenases A and B. Essential parts of the various MFE-2 dehydrogenase polypeptides are shown as ribbons as follows: C. tropicalis dehydrogenase A (red), C. tropicalis dehydrogenase B (blue) and rat dehydrogenase (yellow). Docked substrates are shown as wire models with atoms colored: carbon (grey), oxygen (red), nitrogen (blue) and phosphorus (yellow). The rat dehydrogenase structure is superimposed onto C. tropicalis dehydrogenases A or B for comparison. The Figure was drawn using Swiss-PdbViewer29 and POV-Ray v3.5 (http://www.povray.org/povlegal.html). (a) and (d) (3R)-hydroxydecanoyl-CoA docked into the active site of dehydrogenase A. Residues Ser589, Thr590 and Thr591 from the C-terminal domain of dehydrogenase B form hydrogen bonds to the phosphate groups of the substrate. Hydrophobic interactions by Pro151, Leu194, Ala195 and methyl groups of CoA guide the fatty acyl tail of the substrate to fold into an L shape. The substrate binding loop of dehydrogenase A is in the open conformation, as compared to the rat dehydrogenase. The distance from the (3R)° hydroxy group to catalytic Tyr163 is 4.6 A. (b) and (e) (3R)-hydroxybutyryl-CoA docked into the active site of dehydrogenase A. Contacts to CoA are as for the (3R)-OH-C10 substrate, but the fatty acyl tail makes hydrophobic interactions with Leu44 and the (3R)-hydroxy group is thus forced out of the active site. The distance from the (3R)° hydroxy group to catalytic Tyr163 is 7.8 A. (c) and (f) (3R)-hydroxybutyryl-CoA docked into the active site of dehydrogenase B. The binding of the phosphate groups of the substrate is via the N-terminal residue of the helix aH, as with dehydrogenase A: the main-chain nitrogen of Tyr297 from dehydrogenase A forms a hydrogen bond with the phosphate group of CoA. Although helix aH is shorter than in the rat dehydrogenase structure, it is equally positioned. The length of helix aH resets the position of the (3R)-hydroxy group with respect to the active site of dehydrogenase A, making (3R)-OH-C4 a substrate for dehydrogenase B. The distance from the (3R)-hydroxy group to catalytic Tyr163 is ° 2.7 A. Substrate binding loop of dehydrogenase B, which was partly invisible in the crystal structure due to its flexibility, is in the conformation modeled according to the rat dehydrogenase structure. There is one loop (arrow) in the C-terminal domain of dehydrogenase A between the helices aCT2 and aH, which differs from the corresponding structure of the rat

1292 modeled according to dehydrogenase A, no contacts between the loop and the substrate could be formed (results not shown). Docking of (3R)-OH-C4 to dehydrogenase B resulted in similar binding of the phosphopantetheine group of the substrate as with dehydrogenase A (Figure 5(c) and (f)). When the substrate is in the active site of dehydrogenase B, the phosphopantetheine of the substrate is bound to the C-terminal domain of dehydrogenase A: the phosphate group forms a hydrogen bond with the mainchain nitrogen of Tyr297. CoA-binding residues locate in the helix aH or just before it in both dehydrogenases. However, this helix is different in length in dehydrogenase A and B, causing difference in the position of the substrates. Substrates in the active site of dehydrogenase A are pushed to the groove between two dehydrogenases by the long helix aHb in the C-terminal domain of dehydrogenase B, as can be seen in the case of medium and short-chain substrates (Figure 5(a) and (d), and (b) and (e)). However, in the case of short-chain fatty acid binding to the active site of dehydrogenase B, the short helix aHa in the C terminus of dehydrogenase A guides the CoA of the substrate towards the substrate binding loop of dehydrogenase B (Figure 5(c) and (f)). Inspection of the active site in dehydrogenase B reveals that the short-chain substrate does not bind as deep inside the binding pocket as in dehydrogenase A, making it also possible to dock the ° ° substrate with the 3R-OH group 2.7 A and 3.7 A from the catalytic Tyr467 and Ser454, respectively. Leu406 forms hydrophobic interactions with the fatty acid tail of the short-chain substrate, whereas the corresponding residue in dehydrogenase A, Leu102, forms hydrophobic contacts with the CoA of the substrate, because the fatty acid tail is deeper inside the substrate binding pocket.

Crystal Structure of Dehydrogenases of Yeast MFE-2

Discussion
Although the structures of C. tropicalis and rat (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenases are overall very similar, certain features in the structures give rise to important differences in the substrate specificities of these enzymes. In all cases, the binding of the CoA part is transmitted by a similar hydrogen bonding pattern, whereas the binding of the acyl groups shows remarkable differences. Concerning dehydrogenase A, which is active with long and medium-chain substrates (kcat with C16:C10:C4 substratesZ36:33: not detectable!sK1),8 docking results confirm the model of the conformational change in substrate specificity

loop induced by the binding of NADC. This change brings the residues important for the substrate specificity (Thr506, Ile507 and Phe508 from dehydrogenase B) in the vicinity of the substrate acyl group. Hydrophobic fatty acyl chains of medium and long-chain substrates are bound as bent in the binding pocket of dehydrogenase A, whereas shortchain substrates are disfavored by two mechanisms: (i) short-chain-length substrates are too short to be bound as bent in the active site: and (ii) Leu44 attracts short-chain-length substrates to an opposite direction from the active site. Since substrate binding in dehydrogenase A is accompanied by a pronounced conformational adaptation of the substrate in the case of short-chain substrates, the (3R)-OH group is not positioned at a proper distance from the catalytic residues. Surprisingly, Leu44 is located in the tip of the loop above the NADC, and this loop does not exist in dehydrogenase B. This additional loop thus seems to be a key factor controlling the substrate specificity of dehydrogenase A by attracting the short-chain fatty acid tail away from the active site. Steric limitations do not allow similar behavior with the fatty acid tail of (3R)-OH-C10 or longer, because there is no space for a larger substrate in this location. Although dehydrogenase B has the highest kcat value for short-chain substrates, medium and longchain substrates are also accepted (C4:C10:C16Z 29:17:12!sK1).8 In order to be able to work with such a wide variety of different chain-length substrates, the enzyme has evolved to adapt to the right conformation for all different substrates.8 The binding pocket of dehydrogenase B is shallow, the substrates are bound as unbent and they cannot sink as deep into the active site. Since the ability to use short-chain substrates is the main feature of the substrate specificity difference between the two dehydrogenases, it was of prime interest to dock the (3R)-OH-C4 to dehydrogenase B and see whether it was correctly placed for catalysis to occur. It was observed that due to the absence in dehydrogenase B of a corresponding loop as in dehydrogenase A where Leu44 is located, the binding of the shortchain substrate was optimal. Comparison of C. tropicalis (unliganded) and rat (liganded) dehydrogenases (Figure 4) shows that the areas which bind NADC are very similar in all of them. This is in line with a commonly found characteristic of the NAD(P)-binding Rossmann fold enzymes: the apo and holo structures are namely virtually identical.13,15­17 Structural adaptation upon entry and exit of the cofactor is not great, and more pronounced domain movements are only proposed for the abortive ternary complex.16 In rat dehydrogenase the pocket

dehydrogenase. This loop that putatively points towards the hydratase 2 domain is longer in the C terminus of yeast dehydrogenase A. (d), (e), and (f) Binding of (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA substrates into the substrate binding pockets of dehydrogenases A and B as in (a), (b) and (c), respectively. Negative surface potentials are in red, positive surface potentials in blue and neutral potentials in white. The Figures were produced with the Swiss-PdbViewer. Substrate binding loops have been removed from the structure to show the binding cleft.

Crystal Structure of Dehydrogenases of Yeast MFE-2

1293 binding of short-chain substrates, in agreement with in vitro enzyme assays. The crystal structure of (3R)-hydroaxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenases of C. tropicalis MFE-2, determined herein, completes the series of prototypic structures of the functional units of peroxisomal MFE-2 proteins with the previously determined structures of rat dehydrogenase, human and C. tropicalis hydratase 2s and human SCP-2-like domain.11,19,20

entrance is so narrow that it does not allow NAD(H) to enter or exit without moving the substrate binding loop. However, after binding NADC, the substrate binding loop can return to an open form. Therefore, NADC was docked into the yeast structure manually by superimposing the structures on each other and transferring the NADC to the yeast structure. The critical residues for the binding of NADC in yeast dehydrogenases are located similarly as in the rat structure.11 The heterodimeric, cooperative structure of the dehydrogenases from yeast MFE-2 was expected to be very similar to the structure of homodimeric dehydrogenase from rat MFE-2. It should be noted that while dehydrogenases A and B are part of the same polypeptide chain, the rat dehydrogenase dimer consists of two separate molecules. Both mammalian and yeast full-length MFE-2s are known to be dimers.7,18 It follows that while the mammalian MFE-2 dimer holds two dehydrogenases, two hydratase 2 units and two SCP-2-like domains, the yeast MFE-2 dimer has four dehydrogenases and two hydratase 2 units, but no SCP-2like domains. Consequently, not only the contacts between the dehydrogenases and the hydratase 2 units but also the assembly of these units relative to each other in the mature MFE-2 must be different. Supposing that C. tropicalis MFE-2 operates with a substrate channeling mechanism (a condition yet to be characterized, and in progress in our laboratory), it is to be realized that while hydratase 2 in mammalian MFE-2 delivers its product to the sole dehydrogenase, hydratase 2 in yeast MFE-2 delivers its product selectively to either of the two dehydrogenases (compare Figure 1 with Figure 5 of Koski et al.19). This calls for more stringent requirements for domain interplay in the form of "intramolecular traffic lights". It is known from the crystal structure of yeast hydratase 220 that these units form a dimer, but whether the dehydrogenase dimers form a tetramer in the mature MFE-2 is currently unknown (Figure 1). When testing various yeast dehydrogenase variants amenable for crystallization, it was noticed that if eight more residues (from 605 to 612 in the yeast MFE-2) were included in the dehydrogenase AB heterodimer construct, an (AB)2 heterotetramer was formed.10 This observation suggests that the linker region between dehydrogenase B and hydratase 2 units (arrow 5 in Figure 1) could be one contact site for quaternary interactions. As a conclusion, the (3R)-OH-C10 substrate creates a hydrophobic surrounding for itself by bending upon binding into dehydrogenase A. By this, more favorable conditions for the reaction are set, seen in the higher catalytic efficiency of dehydrogenase A with a medium and long-chain substrate. For the short-chain (3R)-OH-C4 substrate the catalysis cannot occur, because the substrate is bound as unbent and thereupon the (3R)-hydroxy group is not in the vicinity of the catalytic triad. The geometry of the substrate binding pocket and its vicinity in dehydrogenase B also allows the proper

Materials and Methods
Construction of the plasmid for overexpression The MFE-2h2D construction used for this study contains the two dehydrogenase units but lacks the hydratase 2 unit from the C. tropicalis MFE-2. The construction was modified from the original clone8 and cloned into pET3a vector for expression in E. coli BL21 Codon Plus (DE3)-RIL cells as described.10 The construction contains amino acid residues 1­604, a C-terminal hexahistidine tail and includes point mutations Thr506Ser and Phe508Met. Protein production, purification and crystallization These methods have been described.10 Briefly: induction of protein production was done for 3 h at 306 K in the presence of 0.4 mM isopropyl-1-thio-b-D-galactoside. Harvested E. coli cells were lysed by sonication, cell debris was removed and the supernatant applied to a NiNTA column. The fractions containing the target protein were further purified by a Resource S cation exchanger and a Superdex 200 HR 10/30 column (Amersham Biosciences). A concentrated (5 mg/ml) homogenous MFE-2h2D was used for hanging-drop vapor-diffusion crystallization screening, resulting in optimized crystallization conditions of 30% (w/v) PEG-4000, 0.1 M sodium acetate (pH 4.2) and 0.2 M ammonium acetate. The crystals belong to the orthorhombic space group P212121 ° ° with unit cell dimensions of aZ74.9 A, bZ78.3 A, cZ ° 95.4 A. Data processing and structure determination Data, which were collected on a rotating anode X-ray source,10 were processed and scaled by using XDS.21 Data processing statistics are presented in Table 1. The structure of C. tropicalis (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase AB heterodimer was solved by molecular replacement using rat (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (PDB entry 1gz6)11 as a starting model. Initial phases were determined from a molecular replacement solution obtained with AMoRe.22 One solution was clearly above the others, with correlation coefficient 45% and R-factor 44.2%. Refinement was started with CNS.23 After the first round of simulated annealing refinement the R-factor and Rfree were 36.9% and 44.1%, respectively. Mutating the residues to match the C. tropicalis (3R)hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase sequence, followed by annealing and refinement of B-factors in CNS, lowered the R-factor to 30.5% and Rfree to 35.6%. This model was further improved by model building in O.24 Refinement of the structure was continued with Refmac employing TLS25 such that each of the two dehydrogenases, i.e. residues 1­313 and 314­604, were treated as separate TLS

1294
groups. The solvent water molecules were added by using Arp/Warp.26 The final refinement statistics are given in Table 1. The last refinement cycle resulted in the final R-value of 19.5% and Rfree of 25.2% at the resolution ° of 2.2 A. The structure was validated using WHAT IF27 and PROCHECK.28 Stereochemistry of the structure is good, with 87.8% and 12.2% of the residues in the most favored and additionally allowed regions of the Ramachandran plot, respectively. Loop reconstruction Reconstruction of the loops with fragmented electron density (from Gly41 to Ser51 in dehydrogenase A and from Thr504 to Asp512 in dehydrogenase B) to follow the conformation of the rat structure was done with the SWISS-MODEL Protein Modeling Server.29­31 The loop sequences were reconstructed using rat structure (PDB entry 1gz6)11 as template. The resulting loop structures were energy-minimized. Docking of acyl-CoA to (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase For the substrate dockings an NADC from the rat structure (PDB entry 1gz6)11 was first included to the file through superposition, and a subsequent energy minimization was performed with GROMACS 3.0.32 Several dockings were then performed using ICM (Internal Coordinates Mechanics) from Molsoft Ltd. version 2.8.33,34 The dockings were performed using a two-step docking procedure.35 The first step consisted of a rigid body docking, while the second step refined the sidechains of the resulting conformations. The protein that acts as the receptor in a given docking calculation was selected for mapping in an area that most likely is the binding site for the ligand. After this, the probe for the ligand was positioned near the ligand binding site of the receptor and the box was adjusted so that there was enough room for the ligand to be moved. ICM generates a van der Waals potential, electrostatic potential, hydrogen bonding potential and hydrophobic potential profile over a 0.05 nm receptor grid map to identify suitable configurations. After the docking was performed, the conformations obtained were further refined and subsequently evaluated. Data base depositions The atomic coordinates and structure factors (code 2et6) have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank, Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ (http://www. rcsb.org/). After we had completed our work the structure of the human (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase domain appeared in the Protein Data Bank (accession code 1zbq).

Crystal Structure of Dehydrogenases of Yeast MFE-2

the Fonds National Suisse de la Recherche Scientifique (3100A0-105874). We thank Dr Kristian Koski and Dr Tomi Airenne for practical and theoretical help during structure determination; Marika Kamps, Eeva-Liisa Stefanius, and Ville Ratas for ¨ ¨ technical assistance; and Dr Paivi Pirila for acylCoAs. Professor Rik Wierenga is thanked for useful comments on the manuscript.

References
1. Hiltunen, J. K. & Qin, Y. M. (2000). b-Oxidation-- strategies for the metabolism of a wide variety of acylCoA esters. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1484, 117­128. 2. Hiltunen, J. K., Mursula, A. M., Rottensteiner, H., Wierenga, R. K., Kastaniotis, A. J. & Gurvitz, A. (2003). The biochemistry of peroxisomal b-oxidation in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 27, 35­64. 3. Russell, D. W. (2003). The enzymes, regulation, and genetics of bile acid synthesis. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 72, 137­174. 4. Verhoeven, N. M. & Jakobs, C. (2001). Human metabolism of phytanic acid and pristanic acid. Prog. Lipid Res. 40, 453­466. 5. Bartlett, K. & Eaton, S. (2004). Mitochondrial b-oxidation. Eur. J. Biochem. 271, 462­469. 6. Bhaumik, P., Koski, M. K., Glumoff, T., Hiltunen, J. K. & Wierenga, R. K. (2005). Structural biology of the thioester-dependent degradation and synthesis of fatty acids. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 15, 621­628. 7. Hiltunen, J. K., Wenzel, B., Beyer, A., Erdmann, R., ° Fossa, A. & Kunau, W. H. (1992). Peroxisomal multifunctional b-oxidation protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Molecular analysis of the fox2 gene and gene product. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 6646­6653. 8. Qin, Y. M., Marttila, M. S., Haapalainen, A. M., Siivari, K. M., Glumoff, T. & Hiltunen, J. K. (1999). Yeast peroxisomal multifunctional enzyme: (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase domains A and B are required for optimal growth on oleic acid. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 28619­28625. 9. Marchesini, S., Erard, N., Glumoff, T., Hiltunen, J. K. & Poirier, Y. (2003). Modification of the monomer composition of polyhydroxyalkanoate synthesized in Saccharomyces cerevisiae expressing variants of the b-oxidation-associated multifunctional enzyme. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 69, 6495­6499. 10. Ylianttila, M. S., Qin, Y. M., Hiltunen, J. K. & Glumoff, T. (2004). Site-directed mutagenesis to enable and improve crystallizability of Candida tropicalis (3R)hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 324, 25­30. 11. Haapalainen, A. M., Koski, M. K., Qin, Y. M., Hiltunen, J. K. & Glumoff, T. (2003). Binary structure of the two-domain (3R)-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase from rat peroxisomal multifunctional enzyme ° type 2 at 2.38 A resolution. Structure (Camb), 11, 87­97. 12. Tanaka, N., Nonaka, T., Tanabe, T., Yoshimoto, T., Tsuru, D. & Mitsui, Y. (1996). Crystal structures of the binary and ternary complexes of 7 a-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase from Escherichia coli. Biochemistry, 35, 7715­7730. 13. Grimm, C., Maser, E., Mobus, E., Klebe, G., Reuter, K. & Ficner, R. (2000). The crystal structure of 3 a-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/carbonyl reductase from

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the FP6 European Union Project "Peroxisomes" (LSHG-CT-2004´ 512018) and by the Universite de Lausanne and by grants from the Academy of Finland (no. 201262 and no. 211109), the Sigrid Juselius Foundation and

Crystal Structure of Dehydrogenases of Yeast MFE-2

1295
Crystallography & NMR system: a new software suite for macromolecular structure determination. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 54, 905­921. Jones, T. A., Zou, J. Y., Cowan, S. W. & Kjeldgaard, M. (1991). Improved methods for building protein models in electron density maps and the location of errors in these models. Acta Crystallog. sect. A, 47, 110­119. Murshudov, G. N., Vagin, A. A. & Dodson, E. J. (1997). Refinement of macromolecular structures by the maximum-likelihood method. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 53, 240­255. Perrakis, A., Morris, R. & Lamzin, V. S. (1999). Automated protein model building combined with iterative structure refinement. Nature Struct. Biol. 6, 458­463. Wriend, G. (1990). WHAT IF: a molecular modeling and drug design program. J. Mol. Graph. 8, 52­56. Laskowski, R. A., McArthur, M. W., Moss, D. S. & Thornton, J. M. (1993). PROCHECK: a program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures. J. Appl. Crystallog. 26, 283­291. Guex, N. & Peitsch, M. C. (1997). SWISS-MODEL and the Swiss-PdbViewer: an environment for comparative protein modeling. Electrophoresis, 18, 2714­2723. Peitsch, M. C. (1995). Protein modeling by E-mail. Bio/ Technology, 13, 658­660. Peitsch, M. C. (1996). ProMod and Swiss-Model: internet-based tools for automated comparative protein modelling. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 24, 274­279. Lindahl, E., Hess, B. & van der Spoel, D. (2001). GROMACS 3.0: a package for molecular simulation and trajectory analysis. J. Mol. Mod. 1, 306­317. Abagyan, R. A. & Totrov, M. M. (1994). Biased probability Monte Carlo conformational searches and electrostatic calculations for peptides and proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 235, 983­1002. Abagyan, R. A., Totrov, M. M. & Kuznetsov, D. N. (1994). ICM--a new method for protein modeling and design. Applications to docking and structure prediction from the distorted native conformation. J. Comp. Chem. 15, 488­506. ´ Fernandez-Recio, J., Totrov, M. & Abagyan, R. (2002). Soft protein-protein docking in internal coordinates. Protein Sci. 11, 280­291. Thompson, J. D., Gibson, T. J., Plewniak, F., Jeanmougin, F. & Higgins, D. G. (1997). The CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucl. Acids Res. 25, 4876­4882.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22. 23.

Comamonas testosteroni shows a novel oligomerization pattern within the short-chain dehydrogenase/ reductase family. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 41333­41339. ´ Chapman, A. D., Cortes, A., Dafforn, T. R., Clarke, A. R. & Brady, R. L. (1999). Structural basis of substrate specificity in malate dehydrogenases: crystal structure of a ternary complex of porcine cytoplasmic malate dehydrogenase, a-ketomalonate and tetrahydoNAD. J. Mol. Biol. 285, 703­712. Alphey, M. S., Yu, W., Byres, E., Li, D. & Hunter, W. N. (2005). Structure and reactivity of human mitochondrial 2,4-dienoyl-CoA reductase: enzyme-ligand interactions in a distinctive short-chain reductase active site. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 3068­3077. Barycki, J. J., O'Brien, L. K., Strauss, A. W. & Banaszak, L. J. (2000). Sequestration of the active site by interdomain shifting. Crystallographic and spectroscopic evidence for distinct conformations of L-3hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 27186­27196. Blankenfeldt, W., Kerr, I. D., Giraud, M. F., McMiken, H. J., Leonard, G., Whitfield, C. et al. (2002). Variation on a theme of SDR. dTDP-6-deoxy-L- lyxo-4-hexulose reductase (RmlD) shows a new Mg2C-dependent dimerization mode. Structure (Camb), 10, 773­786. Jiang, L. L., Kobayashi, A., Matsuura, H., Fukushima, H. & Hashimoto, T. (1996). Purification and properties of human D-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratase: medium-chain enoyl-CoA hydratase is D-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratase. J. Biochem. (Tokyo), 120, 624­632. Koski, K. M., Haapalainen, A. M., Hiltunen, J. K. & Glumoff, T. (2005). Crystal structure of 2-enoyl-CoA hydratase 2 from human peroxisomal multifunctional enzyme type 2. J. Mol. Biol. 345, 1157­1169. Koski, M. K., Haapalainen, A. M., Hiltunen, J. K. & Glumoff, T. (2004). A two-domain structure of one subunit explains unique features of eukaryotic hydratase 2. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 24666­24672. Kabsch, W. (1993). Automatic processing of rotation diffraction data from crystals of initially unknown symmetry and cell constants. J. Appl. Crystallog. 26, 795­800. Navaza, J. (1994). AMoRe: an automated package for molecular replacement. Acta Crystallog. sect. A, 50, 157­163. ¨ Brunger, A. T., Adams, P. D., Clore, G. M., DeLano, W. L., Gros, P., Grosse-Kunstleve, R. W. et al. (1998).

24.

25.

26.

27. 28.

29. 30. 31. 32. 33.

34.

35. 36.

Edited by R. Huber (Received 18 November 2005; received in revised form 28 February 2006; accepted 1 March 2006) Available online 30 March 2006

