Journal of Structural and Functional Genomics 5: 241­254, 2004. DOI: 10.1007/s10969-004-4899-x

241

Backbone solution structures of proteins using residual dipolar couplings: application to a novel structural genomics target
H. Valafar1, K.L. Mayer1, C.M. Bougault2, P.D. LeBlond1, F.E. Jenney Jr.3, P.S. Brereton3, M.W.W. Adams3 & J.H. Prestegard4,*
1

Southeast Collaboratory for Structural Genomics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA; 2Institut de Biologie Structurale, 41 rue Jules Horowitz, F-38027 Grenoble Cedex 01, France; 3Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA; 4Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA; *Author for correspondence (Fax: +1-706542-4412; E-mail: jpresteg@ccrc.uga.edu)

Received 11 June 2004; accepted in revised form 5 October 2004 Ó Springer 2005

Key words: NMR, partial alignment, Pyrococcus furiosus, RDC, structure determination Abstract Structural genomics (or proteomics) activities are critically dependent on the availability of highthroughput structure determination methodology. Development of such methodology has been a particular challenge for NMR based structure determination because of the demands for isotopic labeling of proteins and the requirements for very long data acquisition times. We present here a methodology that gains efficiency from a focus on determination of backbone structures of proteins as opposed to full structures with all sidechains in place. This focus is appropriate given the presumption that many protein structures in the future will be built using computational methods that start from representative fold family structures and replace as many as 70% of the sidechains in the course of structure determination. The methodology we present is based primarily on residual dipolar couplings (RDCs), readily accessible NMR observables that constrain the orientation of backbone fragments irrespective of separation in space. A new software tool is described for the assembly of backbone fragments under RDC constraints and an application to a structural genomics target is presented. The target is an 8.7 kDa protein from Pyrococcus furiosus, PF1061, that was previously not well annotated, and had a nearest structurally characterized neighbor with only 33% sequence identity. The structure produced shows structural similarity to this sequence homologue, but also shows similarity to other proteins, which suggests a functional role in sulfur transfer. Given the backbone structure and a possible functional link this should be an ideal target for development of modeling methods. Abbreviations: c12E5 ­ pentaethylene glycol monododecyl ether; CTAB ­ hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide; DSS ­ 2,2-dimethyl-2-silapentane-5-sulfonic acid; DTT ­ dithiothreitol; RDC ­ residual dipolar coupling.

Introduction Recent interest in structural genomics (proteomics) has forced significant re-thinking of accepted practice in protein structure determination methodology. This has been particularly important for NMR structure determination because traditional

methods, based on NOE distance constraints, require both long periods of data acquisition and significant preparative effort in introducing NMR active nuclear isotopes [1]. Both factors impede NMR contributing to a truly high-throughput structure determination activity. Recently we introduced a new concept, based largely on the use

242 of residual dipolar couplings (RDCs) instead of NOEs, that offered the possibility of reduced labeling requirements, reduced data acquisition time, and streamlined analysis that integrated resonance assignment and structure determination steps [2]. The concept was based on potential time savings associated with the production of backbone structures as opposed to structures containing both backbone and sidechain atoms. Production of just backbone structures melds well with one of the primary tenants of the structural genomics initiative. In particular, the initiative envisions coverage of `fold space' by solving representative structures in something on the order of 7000 different fold families [3, 4]. Computational methods are then anticipated to provide structures for many new proteins using their specific sequences and representative structures as starting points. Since sequence deviation within fold families can be up to 70%, most sidechains in the representative structure will be replaced in the course of computational modeling, making backbone atom positions of primary importance [5, 6]. Here, we describe a new efficient protocol for backbone structure determination, and apply that protocol to a significant target in a structural genomics effort [7]. The protocol begins with production of proteins with high levels of 15N labeling, but low levels of 13 C labeling. These isotopes, in combination with the 100% naturally abundant 1H can provide a variety of bonded nuclear pairs with measurable RDCs (1H­15N, 1H­1H, 1H­13C and 15N­13C). 15 N labeling through expression of protein targets in Escherichia coli grown on minimal media is inexpensive compared to the cost of uniform labeling at high levels of 13C. Use of a mixture of C1­13C-glucose and C2­13C-glucose to provide a 15­20% 13C labeled sample reduces cost somewhat in comparison to use of uniformly and highly enriched glucose, and does so without debilitating losses in sensitivity. More importantly, methodology based on less than 90% 13C labeling sets a useful precedent for work with expression systems in which high levels of 13C labeling are more difficult to achieve. The samples are subsequently prepared in one or more field orientable liquid crystal media to induce partial orientation of the protein needed to give finite RDCs. Acquisition of RDC data is based on just three core experiments and two supplemental experiments. A coupled 15N­1H HSQC returns 15 N­1H RDCs. An E.COSY-HNCA experiment [2] returns three types of RDCs (a three-bond 1 HN­1HCai coupling, a four-bond 1HN­HCai)1 coupling, and a one-bond 1Ha)13Ca coupling), plus a 3JHN­Ha scalar coupling. It also establishes residue connectivity through Ca chemical shift correlations between i and i)1 residues. Finally, a coupled HNCO experiment provides two additional types of couplings (a two-bond 1HN­13CO coupling, and a one-bond 13CO­15N coupling) [2]. Supplementary NOESY)HSQC and TOCSY-HSQC experiments provide a limited number of long-range backbone NOEs important for fixing translational degrees of freedom. They also provide some help with sequential assignment. Data acquisition time of a little over 1 week is shown to be accessible. This is about one third the time used in conventional NMR approaches. The structure determination program developed here adopts the integral assignment and structure determination characteristics of our earlier proofof-principle application [2], but it is highly automated, is more tolerant of errors in experimental data, and produces structures more efficiently. Initially, the program generates fragments of just two peptide planes connected by a Ca carbon with variable u and w angles, collects RDC data for these fragments, and solves for order matrix elements using singular value decomposition. Scoring of fragment geometries is based on agreement with back-calculated RDCs, agreement with allowed Ramachandran space, agreement with estimated principal order parameters, and agreement with scalar coupling values. Two peptide fragments of acceptable geometry are selected and combined based on consistency with sequential connectivity through Ca shifts, new order tensor solutions are found for the extended fragment, new combined geometries are scored, and the process is repeated. Once fragments are extended to five or more amino acids we find that they can be placed in the protein sequence utilizing limited Ca chemical shift and a recently reported program named SEASCAPE [8], or they can be manually placed in sequence using additional data from TOCSY experiments. Finally, extended fragments of welldefined local structure are oriented using coincidence of alignment axes found for two different alignment media, and translated to satisfy chemical connectivity and limited backbone­backbone

243 NOE data. Missing loops are added and the final structure is refined with the program XPLORNIH [9]. The target of application presented here is an 8.7 kDa protein selected from the genome of Pyrococcus furiosus. Protein targets from this genome were initially selected based on their lack of significant sequence identity (<30%) with structures already in the protein data bank (PDB, www.rcsb.org) [10]. This particular target (PF1061, Q8U1Z3) initially showed less than 20% identity (over >60 amino acids), but subsequent to selection, a structure of a protein with 33% identity was deposited (1JSB/1RYJ). This level of sequence identity puts PF1061 at the limit where production of a reasonable structure by homology modeling might be expected. Both proteins were also annotated simply as conserved hypothetical proteins, offering the possibility of either producing a novel structure or improving functional definition by making a structural link to a better defined protein. Structure determination did prove successful and comparison of the new structure to the closest sequence homologue, 1JSB/1RYJ, showed the ex° pected level of structural agreement (<3.3 A RMSD of structured backbone atoms). Both can be described as mixed a/b proteins with a ubiquitin-like roll. Of more interest is a strong structural similarity to functionally characterized proteins, suggesting that this protein may play a role in sulfur transfer in the synthesis of molybdopterin cofactors or thiamine. applications to rapid protein structure determination have evolved since that time [2, 13­15]. However, demonstration that RDC analysis can be the basis of an efficient structure determination protocol requires a significant effort in software development. RDCs arise from the interaction of two magnetically active nuclei in the presence of an external magnetic field [16, 17]. Equation (1) describes the average angular dependence of the RDC. ( ) Àl0 ci cj h 3 cos2 ðhij ðtÞÞ À 1 Dij ¼ ð1Þ 2 ð2prij Þ3 Dij is the observed RDC in Hz between the nuclei i and j, cij are nuclear magnetogyric ratios, l0 is the permittivity of free space, h is Planck's constant, r is the inter-nuclear distance and h(t) is the time dependent angle of the inter-nuclear vector with respect to the external magnetic field. When nuclei are directly bonded, r is fixed and the primary variable is the angle, h. The brackets around the angular function signify the time average of the quantity. Normally, the random, isotropic sampling of angles by a molecule tumbling in solution reduces RDCs to zero. This isotropic sampling may be made anisotropic by a magnetically induced alignment or with the aid of various types of liquid crystalline media [18]. This anisotropic sampling will result in a measurable RDC quantity that is indicative of the average orientation of an inter-nuclear vector. The dipolar couplings can also be written in terms of elements of an order matrix, skl, which contains orientation and order information for a molecular fragment, and direction cosines relating various vectors in a rigid fragment to an arbitrarily chosen fragment frame as shown in Equation (2). In this equation Dmax corresponds to the collection of all constants in Equation (1) and rij is the distance between two nuclei i and j. Dmax X Dij ¼ 3 ij skl cosðhk Þ cosðhl Þ ð2Þ rij k;l Given a trial fragment geometry, analysis of a set of equations in the form of Equation (2) for a collection of RDCs allows evaluation of all order matrix elements. These elements can then be used to assess the correctness of the hypothesized geometry by back-calculating RDCs using Equation (2) and comparing calculated to experimental

Software development The reason that RDCs are so well suited to backbone structure determination is that they are capable of providing orientational constraints as opposed to distance constraints. While NOEs are generally very useful in structure determination, distance constraints derived from NOEs are very short range, and atoms in non-sequential segments of protein backbones seldom come within distances appropriate for NOE observation. Orientational constraints, on the other hand, have no distance limitations and can effectively constrain remote sections of protein backbones no matter what their separation. The utility of RDCs in protein structure determination was recognized nearly a decade ago [11, 12], and several

244 values. This is the computational basis of the program developed here. The program, named REDcRAFT for REsidual Dipolar coupling based Residue Assembly and Filter Tool, analyzes RDC data in two separate stages; namely a short-range and a long-range stage. The first stage generates coordinates for dipolar interaction vectors contained in a fragment composed of just two peptide planes connected by variable angles u, w. In our implementation this is done for all u and w angles using a 10° step size spanning 0°­360°. RDC data for each pair are collected, Equation (2) is solved, and RDCs are back calculated. The program produces a list of possible geometries for sequential pairs of peptide planes (in terms of u, w angles) ranked in the order of best to worst, based on a comparison of backcalculated RDC data to experimental RDC. Subjecting all possible combinations of /, w angles to a Ramachandran filter creates the initial list for this procedure. The current implementation only accommodates two types of residues, either Glycine or Alanine (anything that is not Glycine). Glycines are allowed to assume all possible geometries, whereas a limited set of torsion angles is allowed for Alanines based on a user selectable level of geometry preference. Although the allowed Ramachandran space is much more restricted for Proline than for Alanine, the current version of this program does not take advantage of this difference. The list of possible torsion angles is further filtered based on the experimentally collected scalar coupling data (J-Filter). This filter utilizes the Karplus relation for 3JHN-Ha to eliminate geometries that are in severe conflict with the experimentally collected scalar couplings. This equation is used in a slightly different fashion in the case of Glycines. Since it is difficult to measure and assign the individual scalar couplings for the two Ha protons of Glycines, we utilize the sum of scalar couplings. In both cases conformations are eliminated based on back-calculated values deviating more than twice the estimated error in scalar coupling measurements. In the second stage, dipeptide planes are assembled to produce a longer fragment. Selection of pairs of dipeptides to be connected proceeds primarily based on overlap of inter-residue Ca chemical shifts seen for fragment i with the intraresidue Ca shifts seen for fragment i ) 1, but this connectivity is supplemented by requiring a match of 13Ca­1Ha splittings for oriented media as well. In principle, each entry in the allowed /, w list for one peptide could be combined with each entry in the allowed /, w list for the second peptide. The coordinates for each combined geometry could be generated, new order matrices and back-calculated RDCs could be computed, and each new geometry ranked. The process would then be repeated for the next dipeptide extension. Scoring geometries for combined dipeptide fragments in this way can grow into a computationally intensive task. We therefore perform a restricted search at each step based on the ranking within the list. This strategy has enabled the attainment of structures in real time (less than a day in most cases). The depth of search can be selected by the user as a fixed depth or an RMSD cut-off. Each one of these two approaches has its advantages and disadvantages. A fixed depth will result in a fixed execution time. This is useful if an answer is required within a predetermined amount of time. On the other hand, an RMSD cut-off may allow the search to proceed over a more relevant list of possible torsion angles.

Materials and methods Protein cloning, expression and purification All standard molecular biology was performed as described in [19]. Reagents were obtained from either Sigma Chemical (St. Louis, MO) or USB (Cleveland, OH). PF1061 was subcloned into the BamHI and NotI restriction sites of a modified pET-24 vector containing an N-terminal His-tag and kanamycin (Kan) resistance (Novagen, Madison, WI). The sequence of the tagged, recombinant protein is: (M)AHHHHHHGSK MIKVKVIGRNIEKEIEWREGMKVRDILRA VGFNTESAIAKVNGKVVLEDDEVKDGDFV EVIPVVSGG. The presence of an Alanine in the second position results in removal of the N-terminal Methionine by the endogenous methionine aminopeptidase of E. coli. The plasmid was transformed into E. coli BL21(DE3) supplemented with the pRIL plasmid (Strategene, La Jolla, CA) for rare codon usage and plated onto LB/kanamycin (50 lg/ml) plates overnight. Five colonies were used to inoculate 30 ml of M9 minimal medium

245 supplemented with Kan (50 lg/ml), vitamins and trace metals [19], which was incubated overnight at 37 °C. Ten milliliter of this culture was then used to inoculate 500 ml of media that was incubated with shaking at 200 rpm at 37 °C for about 6 h before the inducer isopropyl-b-D -thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) was added to a final concentration of 0.4 mM. The temperature was then lowered to 18 °C, the cells were incubated overnight with shaking, and then harvested by centrifugation. Isotopically labeled protein was expressed using uniformly labeled 15N ammonium chloride (1 g/l) and a 1:1 ratio of 13C-1 and 13C-2 labeled glucose (2 g/l) as the nitrogen and carbon sources. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in 30 ml of start/lysis buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate, 500 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, pH 7.0) and frozen at )20 °C. After thawing, phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF, 1 mM), DNAse (0.1 mg/ml) and lysozyme (0.1 mg/ml) were added and the cells incubated at 37 °C for 1 h before sonication (5 min on ice). The cellular debris was removed by centrifugation (20,000 · g for 20 min) and the supernatant containing the recombinant protein was saved. The protein was purified using NiNTA affinity chromatography (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). A column with a 3 ml bed volume of NiNTA superflow media (Qiagen) was equilibrated in start/lysis buffer. Protein was eluted from the column with the same buffer containing 300 mM imidazole and concentrated to 1.5 ml. A heat shock (70 °C, 5 min) was used to precipitate contaminating E. coli proteins. The precipitate was removed in a micro-centrifuge (15,800 · g, 10 min) and the supernatant was loaded onto a Superdex 30 16/60 gel filtration column (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) equilibrated with 50 mM K phosphate, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), pH 8.0. The eluted protein was pooled and concentrated to about 25 mg/ml (3 mM). The final yield was typically 10 mg protein per liter of culture. NMR sample preparation, including alignment An isotropic sample of 1 mM 16% 13C/u-15N PF1061was prepared in a buffer containing 50 mM potassium phosphate and 200 mM KCl at pH 5.5. All samples also contained 2 mM DTT, 1 mM DSS and 10% D2O. After isotropic data collection, this sample was used to prepare two aligned samples. A sample with C12E5 bicelles as the alignment medium was prepared to be 0.5 mM PF1061 in 50 mM potassium phosphate and 100 mM KCl at pH 6.0. The 4.26% (w/v) bicelle medium composed of C12E5/hexanol at a 0.98 molar ratio was allowed to equilibrate at room temperature (22 °C) overnight on the bench, at which point it showed a deuterium splitting of 8.7 Hz on returning it to the magnet. A second aligned sample was prepared to be 4% (w/v) C12E5/hexanol at a molar ratio of 0.87, doped with CTAB at a C12E5:CTAB ratio of 27:1. This sample gave a 13.0 Hz 2H splitting after equilibration. An isotropic sample containing 3 mM 15 N labeled PF1061 was also prepared and used for the 15N-edited experiments. NMR data collection, processing and analysis NMR data were collected on a Varian UnityInova 600 MHz spectrometer using a conventional z-gradient triple resonance probe or a z-gradient triple resonance cryogenic probe, or on an Inova 800 MHz spectrometer using a conventional z-gradient triple resonance probe (Varian Inc., Palo Alto, CA). Isotropic data were collected at 298 K, C12E5 data were collected at 300 K and C12E5/CTAB data were collected at 293 K. Three experiments were run using the cryogenic probe for measurement of RDCs: a soft HNCAE.COSY [20], modified HNCO [2] and 15N coupled HSQC. Data were acquired for the isotropic and the C12E5 bicelle sample using all three experiments to provide a complete set of RDCs. The HNCA-E.COSY and 15N coupled HSQC were collected on the C12E5/CTAB sample to provide a partial data set for a second alignment medium. Data collection for the soft HNCAE.COSY included 96 t1 points, 20 t2 points and 2048 t3 points over 37 h. Data collection for the modified HNCO included 256 t1 points and 2048 t2 points over 16 h. Data collection for the 15N coupled HSQC included 512 t1 points and 2048 t2 points over 2 h. RDCs were calculated as the difference of the coupling measured in the aligned and isotropic conditions. In addition, 15N-edited NOESY and 15N-edited TOCSY data sets were collected on the isotropic 15 N sample using the standard probe. The two 3D 15 N experiments were collected with 32 t1 points, 16 t2 points and 2048 t3 points over 16 h. NOEs

246 involving HN­Ha and HN­HN connections were identified for use in energy minimization (see below). NMR data processing The soft HNCA-E.COSY, modified HNCO and 15 N coupled HSQC were processed using NMRPipe [21] and visualized using NMRDraw. Peaks were picked using the automatic picking procedure in NMRDraw. Arbitrary assignments were automatically transferred in from the HSQC and the splittings (J or J + D) were calculated using a series of Tcl scripts modified from NMRDraw. Intra- and inter-residue designations were automatically assigned for the E.COSY-HNCA based on the isotropic 3JHN-Ha value (zero for inter-residue). Text files containing chemical shifts and splittings were inserted into a mySQL database. A table of RDCs was generated from the difference between splittings in aligned and isotropic datasets. In the case of proton-proton scalar couplings an empirical correction for relaxation effects was made (+1 Hz at 3 Hz to +2 Hz at 10 Hz). From this point on, all data were stored in and accessed from the database, which ensures data integrity, provides a means of data sharing, and allows for rapid software development. Fragment structure determination (REDcRAFT) The main analysis of the RDC data was conducted by the use of an in-house developed program named REDcRAFT (REsidual Dipolar coupling based Residue Assembly and Filter Tool). This program was developed specifically for the task of structure determination based on orientational information from RDCs. The program, written in C++, was installed on both desktop computers and a 64 node LINUX cluster, each node having dual Pentium 3 processors. RDC data for fragments were assembled into formatted input files, with the assistance of PERL and Tcl scripts. Computational time required for production of the dipeptide lists is insignificant and the procedure was therefore implemented on a single CPU machine. This procedure requires less than 5 min for a protein of size 60 residues. Runtimes for final fragments of varying lengths are presented in Table 1. The time required for each fragment depended greatly on the length of fragment and the depth of search into dipeptide and fragment ranked geometry lists. We attempted to assemble fragments at least five peptide planes in length; the longest fragment was 18 residues. In terms of search depth, we used the fixed depth option. A typical search depth of 1000 was used with search depths of up to 10,000 examined for more problematic fragments. The above fragment structure determination process was also applied to several possible assembled sets of planes because connection based on Ca overlap was ambiguous. When several possibilities for extension exist, each possibility must be examined. In a number of instances only one assembly gave an acceptable RMSD between experimental and back-calculated data. The process aided in identifying proper sequential assemblies and identification of mis-assigned peptide planes. The process terminated when ambiguities could not be resolved or no suitable extension could be found. Fragments could normally be extended beyond one or two residues with completely missing data (such as Prolines). However, this was done only if the segment with missing data was preceded by a segment with a near complete set of data. Sequential assignment of fragments The fragments discussed above are based on sequential connection of sets of dipolar data, but are not in general assigned to sequence specific positions in the protein. In general, placement in sequence was accomplished independently, and most often subsequent to fragment geometry determination, using a number of pieces of information. One came from the program SEASCAPE [8] that uses Ca chemical shifts in combination with local geometry to give scores to various placements of fragments in the protein sequence. This is useful in identifying sequential placement when fragment lengths were five or more. Data from the 15N TOCSY-HSQC experiment was also used to supplement these initial assignments and validate all assignments. Fragment validation, assembly and refinement The principal order parameters obtained from the analysis of the correct rigid fragment structures should approximate the same principal order

247
Table 1. Final fragments of our target protein after chemical shift connectivity and RDC consistency. Fragment 1 2 3 4 5 ° Length (A) 18 16 17 8 5 Residues 3­20 21­36 38­54 56­63 65­69 ° RMSD (A) to model 3.4 1.33 0.82 0.62 0.76 RMSD (Hz) to data 2.2 2.18 1.23 2.07 0.30 Computation time 5 1 1 1 1 h h h h h cluster cluster cluster 1 CPU 1 CPU

parameters obtained from analysis of the distribution of all observed couplings [16, 22, 23]. The program REDCAT [24] was used to determine principal order parameters and Euler angles that relate the initial coordinate frames to the principal alignment frames for each final fragment. This information was used to validate the structure of the final fragments. A threshold for agreement was set to ±10 and ±20% for the z and x/y order parameters, respectively. All but the C-terminal fragment met this condition. Fragments that demonstrate different order parameters from the rest of the molecule, or from the order parameters estimated from a histogram of all RDCs, can be accepted if there is experimental data to support flexibility of that region such as the presence of rapid amide exchange or anomalous spin relaxation data. This was the case for the C-terminal fragment where amide exchange data exhibited anomalously high rates for several residues in the terminus. The final result of the entire process produced structures that are in agreement with Ramachandran space, observed J coupling and RDC data and estimated magnitudes of order parameters. REDCAT Euler angles, and a rotate PDB function in REDCAT were used to produce principal alignment frame coordinates for the various PF1061 fragments. These fragments were loaded into the molecular graphics program, Chimera [25] (http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera), and the fragments were translated manually to satisfy a small set of inter-fragment NOEs and covalent end-toend connections. Connections between fragments were made adding missing residues and connecting bonds using utilities in the program MolMol [26]. This procedure produced an unrefined structure of the complete protein. Structure refinement The bonds created in MolMol were not of ideal lengths and the backbone dihedral angles for the

connecting residues were chosen arbitrarily. In addition, REDcRAFT in its current application does not correct for bad Van der Waals contacts between atoms. XPLOR-NIH [9] was used to correct these issues and produce a minimized structure that satisfied all the geometrical and orientational restraints. RDC restraints were included as both SANI (directly bonded) and XDIP (non-bonded) terms, and were scaled by a factor of the maximum RDC for that atom pair divided by the cube of the bond length. The bond length denominator was not included for the non-bonded terms. The errors associated with the measured RDC values were scaled in the same way. The scaled RDC terms were used to calculate the coefficients Da and Rh, according to [23]; these values were )8.2832 and )0.32, respectively. The force constants used for the RDC terms were taken from the square of the ratio of the scaled errors with respect to the 1HN­15N value. For example, a 1HN­15N error of 4 Hz and a 1Ha­13Ca error of 2 Hz would give a 1Ha­13Ca force constant of (4/2)2 ¼ 4, with respect to the force constant of 1 for 1HN­15N. This would result in the 1Ha­13Ca RDC value being weighted 4 · more strongly than the 1HN­15N RDC value. The force constants determined in this manner were: 13CO­15N ¼ 0.063; 1HN­13CO ¼ 0.50; 1HN­1HCa (non-bonded intra- and inter-residue) ¼ 177. Note that the value for 1HN­13CO ¼ 0.50 is higher than the value of 0.18 calculated using the above method; the calculated value proved to be too low and resulted in a lack of agreement of the structures with the RDC data. Final force constants of 50 for NOE terms, 200 for dihedral terms, and 4 for VdW terms were also used. The refinement procedure began with 50 steps of Powell minimization of the entire protein with a small Van der Waals force constant (0.002) to allow atoms to move through each other. This was followed by a round of simulated annealing during which only the atomic positions for the connecting

248 residues and the two residues immediately preceding and following them were allowed to change (five residues total per gap). The simulated annealing stage consisted of eight cycles of 2.23 ps each as the temperature of the system was cooled from 100 to 20 K with 10 K decrements. During this time, the force constants of the RDC, NOE and VdW terms were slowly increased from 0.01, 2.0 and 0.003, respectively, to their final values. Force constants for dihedral terms remained at 200 during the cooling stage. The final stage of refinement consisted of 30,000 steps of Powell minimization to allow the system to converge. In all, 20 structures were calculated. Each was examined for agreement with the RDC data using REDCAT [24] and for Ramachandran quality and peptide planarity using Procheck on the RCSB ADIT server (http://deposit.pdb.org/validate). The structure which best fit these criteria was chosen as the final structure. This final structure and the corresponding constraints have been submitted to the PDB database under the PDB code 1SF0. eliminating the correct connection in cases of spectral overlap or peak distortion. Approximately 13 short, unambiguous, fragments were generated in this way and used as starting points for further analysis. These fragments ended with ambiguous extensions that were examined in terms of consistency with RDC data. The initial fragments were confirmed and extended by manual inspection of the HNCA data. In addition, 15N-edited NOESY data were used on a limited basis to confirm some sequential connectivities when 13Ca chemical shifts were ambiguous. Several of the longer fragments were structurally characterized using RDC data at this point (see below). Having the local / and w angle geometry defined enhances the value of Ca chemical shifts in identifying amino acid types and placing fragments into the protein sequence. An automated program (SEASCAPE) [8] was used to identify best placements for these fragments. In addition, data from 15N-edited TOCSY experiments were used to confirm amino acid types and extend several of the segments once an appropriate placement in the sequence was deduced. In this manner, we generated five fragments, described in Table 1, which ranged in length from 5 to 18 amino acids. Each fragment contained at least one Glycine, which made a definitive sequential assignment relatively straightforward. Fragment 2, a 16-mer, had 2 Glycine residues separated by 10 amino acids, and could only be assigned to residues 21­36. The shortest fragment, a 5-mer, ended in Gly­Gly, and corresponded to the C-terminal residues 73­77. Correct placement of the other three fragments was easily confirmed based on the positions of the Glycines and other characteristic chemical shifts such as those for Val, Ile and Leu. In all cases a check for consistency of TOCSY data with amino acid types predicted from fragment placements was used to validate assignments. Additional RDCs were collected from coupled HSQC spectra (1H­15N couplings) and E.COSYHNCO spectra (1H­13CO and 15N­13CO couplings) to complement the structural data from the E.COSY-HNCA experiment. These were measured and collected in a central database in a manner analogous to that described for couplings coming from the E.COSY-HNCA experiment. In all, 68 1H­15N dipolar couplings, 69 1H­13CO dipolar couplings, 69 15N­13CO dipolar couplings, 59 1Ha­13Ca dipolar couplings, 59

Results Representative E.COSY-HNCA data are shown in Figure 1 for both isotropic and aligned conditions. These spectra provide 1Ha­13Ca dipolar couplings, 1HN­1Ha intra-residue dipolar couplings, 1HN­1Ha inter-residue dipolar couplings, and 1HN­1Ha intra-residue scalar couplings. They also allow connection of residues into fragments by comparing 13Ca chemical shifts and 1Ha­13Ca dipolar couplings for inter- and intra-residue peaks. Ambiguities in connections that normally arise from 13Ca shift degeneracy in using HNCA data for residue connectivity are reduced by matching the 1Ha­13Ca splittings (under multiple alignment conditions). Distinction of intra- and inter-residue multiplets is also aided by recognizing that there should be no significant 1HN­1Ha coupling for the inter-residue peak in the isotropic spectrum (a four-bond coupling). Extraction of couplings and collection of residues into fragments was initially accomplished using in-house software that stores data in a searchable database (see Methods). During this automated step of assembling fragments a generous chemical shift cutoff of 0.2 ppm in 13C was used to avoid

249

Figure 1. E.COSY-HNCA spectra for PF1061 under (a) isotropic and (b) C12E5 aligned conditions. Boxed peaks show the change in coupling upon alignment, which was used to measure RDCs as well as to connect fragments. The samples were prepared as described in the NMR sample preparation section of Materials and methods.

Figure 2. Structural overlay of fragment 3 with the appropriate section of the structure modeled from 1JSB with backbone ° RMSD of 0.82 A. This fragment is a direct outcome of REDcRAFT before any minimization. This structure exhibits the hairpin-like structure very well.

1

HN­1Ha intra-RDCs, 56 1HN­1Ha inter-residue dipolar couplings, and 59 1HN­1Ha intra-residue scalar couplings were collected. This amounts to an average of 5.5 residual dipolar couplings per amino acid residue. All couplings have been deposited with the BMRB along with residue specific chemical shift values for the backbone atoms (deposition # 6187). Fragment geometry Determination of the local geometry of various fragments proceeded in parallel with the sequential placement and extension of fragments described above. The five fragments as shown in Table 1 were analyzed in their entirety. All of the geometric analyses were conducted using the program REDcRAFT. The philosophy behind this program was described briefly in the Introduction and details will be reported more fully in a separate

Figure 3. Structural overlay of fragment 1 with the appropriate section of the structure modeled from 1JSB with backbone ° RMSD of 3.4 A. This fragment is a direct outcome of REDcRAFT before any minimization. Although the dihedral angles of each strand correspond to that of a b strand, the relative orientation of the two strands is not recognized as a b sheet in MolMol.

250 publication (H. Valafar and J.H. Prestegard, in preparation). The output is a ranked list of possible sets of / and w angles for each fragment. The computational times required to reach a structure for each of the fragments were shown in Table 1. The top scoring set for each fragment has been converted to a PDB file, representing amino acids as either Alanine or Glycine as appropriate for their sequential placement. It is possible to make fragment-by-fragment comparisons of these structures to the corresponding fragments found in the closest sequential homologue (1RYJ, 33% sequence identity) by overlaying fragments for the best RMSD of backbone atom coordinates. Figures 2 and 3 show fragments 3 and 1 (respectively) superimposed on the corresponding fragments from 1RYJ. Figure 2 illustrates a hairpin fragment that exhibits a high degree of backbone correlation to that of the homologue. Figure 3 illustrates a region that shows more substantial divergence. RMSD values for all fragments are included in Table 1. Fragment assembly Fragments described above carry with them inherent information about their preferred orientation in space. This is contained in the order tensors produced by REDcRAFT in the process of solving sets of equations describing dipolar couplings for each trial geometry (Equation (2)). Equivalently, an order tensor can be produced for the final fragment using the analysis tool, REDCAT [24]. This tool can also rotate the PDB coordinate file for each fragment into a principal alignment frame using Euler angles that result from diagonalizing the initial order tensor. Since all fragments of a rigid protein must share an alignment frame, displaying fragments in their principal alignment frames will in principle show their relative orientations. There is one caveat; alignment frames have a fourfold degeneracy corresponding to rotation of the initial frame by 180° about any single axis. The resulting degeneracy in fragment orientations needs to be removed. In cases where there is a small number of amino acids separating fragment ends, degeneracies can often be eliminated by considering allowed covalent connections. There is, however, a more general approach using data from two or more alignment media [27]. In our case we have sufficient data from C12E5 media with and without the positively charged amphiphile, CTAB. Figure 4 illustrates the procedure with fragments 2 and 3. The top line shows the initial principal frame orientation for fragment 2 along with the four degenerate orientations for fragment 3 as determined in one medium (C12E5). The bottom line shows the fragment orientation for fragment 2 along with the four degenerate orientations for fragment 3 as determined in a second medium (C12E5-CTAB), except that all have been rotated so that the orientations of fragment 2 coincide for the two media. Note that there is only one case in each line where the orientation of the alternate views of fragment 3 coincide (state 1 of the upper line and state 1 of the lower line). This effectively fixes the true relative orientation, and removes the degeneracy problem. All other relative fragment orientations were defined in a similar way. Theoretically, the magnitudes of principal order parameters for each fragment must also agree if they are a part of a single rigid entity. This can be a useful additional basis for selection of fragment geometries once order parameters for several segments are known. However, there are circumstances in which the calculated principal order parameters do not agree, even when fragment geometries are approximately correct. One prime example occurs when there is substantial internal motion and one fragment moves relative to the others. This normally forces an overall reduction in the magnitude of the principal order parameters reported by that particular fragment. In our case, with the exception of one fragment, the order parameters reported from all of the fragments are similar ()1.85e)4 ± 0.1e)4, )4.26e)4 ± 0.64e)4 and 6.1e)4 ± 0.9e)4). The exception was the C-terminal fragment. It had order parameters of )7.65e)5, )2.18e)4 and +2.95e)4. The nearly 50% reduction in the order parameters indicates a substantial degree of motion at the C-terminus. If motion is approximated as the C-terminus wobbling in a cone, geometry and average orientation relative to the rest of the fragments would still be relevant, but the amplitude of wobble would be substantial (approximately ±50°). Although we include a structure for the C-terminus in what follows, the structure must be interpreted with caution. This is advised both because of the averaging of the orientation relative to the rest of the protein, and because all

251

Figure 4. Resolving orientational ambiguities using two media. (a) Possible relative orientations for a helix and hairpin fragment using C12E5-CTAB as a medium. (b) Possible relative orientations for the same helix and hairpin fragments using C12E5 as a medium. All structures in (b) have been rotated to superimpose helix orientations. Only the relative orientation shown as the first hairpin structure is seen in both media.

RDC data, including elements possibly contaminated by internal motion, were used when calculating the fragment structure. The final structure was assembled by translation of oriented fragments to satisfy a set of 12 interfragment HN­HN and HN­HA NOEs. These have been deposited along with the RDC data to the BMRB (deposition # 6187). Fragments were connected by simply bonding or adding missing residues between fragment ends using a utility in MolMol [26]. The final structure was refined with minimization and mild simulated annealing of connecting loops using the program XPLOR-NIH [9]. The structure is shown in Figure 5 while the total number of used constraints is summarized in Table 2. The total number of violations is also shown in this table. These violations were determined by using the program REDCAT as described before.

Discussion The structure produced for PF1061 can be classified using protein structure classification schemes such as CATH [28]. Using the GRATH server for this database, PF1061 has classification 3.10.20. It can be described as a mixed a/b protein with a ubiquitin-like roll. Thus, despite a significant divergence in sequence from the nearest structurally defined proteins (33% identity), the protein is found to belong to a well-populated fold class. Visually, the structure of PF1061 bears a striking similarity to that of 1JSB/1RYJ, the homoFigure 5. Final structure of PF1061. The structure was produced with the MolMol program. The mixed a/b character is apparent, as is the C-terminal tail which exhibits substantial internal motion.

logue identified based on sequence identity and threading programs early in our studies. The RMSD for backbone atoms between our structure ° and 1RYJ is 3.4 A over a central segment that excludes the first residue and the C-terminal mobile segment (2­63). If a subset of 44 residues in

252
Table 2. Constraints, violations, and structure statistics for PF1061 (1SF0).a Constraint HN­ N (RDC) N­13CO 1 HN­13CO (RDC) 1 Ha­13Ca (RDC) 1 HN­1Ha (i)i, RDC) 1 HN­1Ha (i)i)1,RDC) 1 HN­1Ha (scalar) 1 HN long-range NOEs Ramachandran
15 1 15

# of constraints 68 69 69 59 59 56 59 12 58% ­ favored

Error limit (Hz) 4 3 3 4 3 3 3 ° 0.5 (A) 42% ­ allowedb

# of violations 2 1 0 5 2 2 0 0 0% ­ disallowed

a Only neutral C12E5 medium constraints used in refinement are listed. An additional 220 constraints from a charged C12E5/CTAB medium were used in the initial structure determination. b Eight percent are in the generously allowed region, but all of these are in linkage regions between fragments where no experimental data exist.

regions conserved in the top threading targets (1F0Z, 1FMA) found using a current version of mGenThreader [29], 15­38 plus 49­64, is used, the ° RMSD to 1RYJ is 2.5 A. Models can be built using alignments with 1JSB/1RYJ generated by threading programs such as mGenThreader [29] and PROSPECT [30], and a complete structure can be generated using programs such as MODELLER [31]. A structure produced from 1JSB in this way shows a slight improvement for both the central segment and conserved segments, 3.2 and ° 2.4 A RMSD, respectively. This level of agreement between experimental and modeled structures is within expected accuracy for threading approaches beginning with a template having 30% sequence identity. Thus, the structure does confirm a suspected similarity to 1JSB/1RYJ and adds confidence to a structure produced by a new NMR structure determination approach. Our heavy reliance on new methodology makes it difficult to attach absolute measures of accuracy to our structure. Families of structures satisfying constraints are difficult to generate by the usual simulated annealing protocols because these protocols do not converge well in the absence of large numbers of translational constraints. We can, however, calculate a quality factor for our structure [32]. Using all RDC constraints we obtain a value of 27%. If we compare this to quality factors for structures in the literature that can be compared to other NMR or crystal structures, we would suggest a pairwise RMSD for backbone ° atoms of approximately 2.0 A [32]. The utility of a structure at this level of accuracy as a starting

point for modeling of other proteins, complete with sidechains, remains to be seen. Assessment of the accuracy required for backbone atom positions in the application of programs that fill in sidechains remains an active area of research [33­35]. The availability of a structure also offers the possibility of further functional characterization of PF1061. Unfortunately, 1JSB, the only homologue identified with confidence by threading and sequence identity at the beginning of our studies, was classified simply as a conserved hypothetical protein. Having produced a structure, one can now use structural similarity to search against structural databases. Using a structural comparison program based purely on backbone atom positions, DALI [36], there are three structurally related proteins that score better than 1JSB/1RYJ. These include 1C1Y, a Ras related protein Rap 1A, 1UBI, ubiquitin itself, and 1FMA-D, which plays a role in sulfur transfer during a molybdopterin biosynthesis. Programs that include residue specific information for alignments such as PSI-BLAST [37] and the newer multiple alignment version of GenThreader [29] do not score 1C1Y and 1UBI near the top of their lists, but 1FMA is near the top of both, as is another protein 1F0Z, a sulfur transfer protein involved in thiamine synthesis. The latter protein appears in the DALI list as well, but with a somewhat lower score than 1JSB/1RYJ. The two protein structures, 1FMA-D and 1F0Z, also have slightly better RMSDs from backbone atoms of PF1061 than does 1RYJ. If we

253 use the same 44 amino acid conserved alignment region discussed above which excludes the C-ter° minus, 1FMA-D has an RMSD of 2.3 A with re° for 1RYJ. spect to PF1061 as compared to 2.5 A ° 1F0Z has a deviation of 2.5 A, the same as 1RYJ for the conserved region, but a smaller RMSD if a longer segment is used. These two new structures are interesting comparisons because they are better annotated. 1F0Z is the thiamine-S protein from E. coli. It is involved in a sulfur transfer in which the sulfur is carried as a thiocarboxylate at the terminal Glycine. 1FMA-D is a converting factor involved in the synthesis of protein bound pterin cofactors that bind molybdenum in molybdo enzymes via a dithiolene sidechain. The crystal structure as deposited actually contains two proteins; the 1FMA-D subunit to which PF1061 bears similarity is denoted the MoaD protein; it interacts very specifically with its partner, MoaE. Both 1F0Z and 1FMA have a characteristic C-terminal pair of Glycines as well as other conserved residues. In fact, comparing our sequence to a consensus sequence generated by ProDom [38] that contains 1F0Z and 1FMA-D, our protein, with some allowance for gaps, appears to share the 11 most conserved residues. Aside from the C-terminal residues these conserved residues cluster on one side of the molecule, indicating a possible involvement in protein­protein interaction. It is significant that the C-terminus in our structure showed significantly lower order parameters than the rest of the protein, suggesting that in isolation this segment was undergoing significant internal motion. On examining the structure of the MoaD part of the IFMA-D converting factor, one sees that the C-terminal extension extends deeply into the core of the MoaE. One would, therefore, not expect this terminus to be structured in the absence of its partner protein. Hence, structural data in this case supports a possible assignment of PF1061 to a family of thiamine-S proteins and the structure has possible implications for its function as a part of a complex. This suggestion requires a more detailed search for a partner to PF1061 in the Pyrococcus furiosus genome as well as further functional testing. Hence, we have been able to produce a protein backbone structure for the conserved hypothetical protein, PF1061, from Pyrococcus furiosus, using a significantly new approach to protein structure determination. The new methodology based heavily on RCDs, allowed data acquisition in a time period of slightly over 1 week for this 8.7 kDa protein, and with minor modifications it appears applicable up to proteins approaching twice this size. This represents a reduction in time required by about a factor of three. Experiments are chosen primarily for the structural data returned, and no strictly separate set of experiments for resonance assignment is required. The analysis in terms of structure benefited from development of a new analysis package called REDcRAFT. This has allowed determination of fragment structures in a period well matched to the week-long data acquisition. Orientation and assembly of fragments remains largely a manual operation and is an area in need of further development of new software tools. The resulting structure, however, appears to ° be accurate at the 2.0 A level and shows utility in making connections to function for a previously un-annotated protein.

Acknowledgements We would like to thank Anita Kishore for her assistance in the preparation of the alignment media for this work. This work was supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health, GM062407.

References
1. Montelione, G.T., Zheng, D.Y., Huang, Y.P.J., Gunsalus, K.C. and Szyperski, T. (2000) Nat. Struct. Biol. 7, 982­ 985. 2. Tian, F., Valafar, H. and Prestegard, J.H. (2001) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123, 11791­11796. 3. Orengo, C.A., Todd, A.E. and Thornton, J.M. (1999) Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 9, 374­382. 4. Sali, A. and Kuriyan, J. (1999) Trends Biochem. Sci. 24, M20­M24. 5. Holm, L. and Sander, C. (1991) J. Mol. Biol. 218, 183­ 194. 6. Lee, C. and Subbiah, S. (1991) J. Mol. Biol. 217, 373­388. 7. Adams, M.W.W., Dailey, H.A., Delucas, L.J., Luo, M., Prestegard, J.H., Rose, J.P. and Wang, B.C. (2003) Acc. Chem. Res. 36, 191­198. 8. Morris, L.C., Valafar, H. and Prestegard, J.H. (2004) J. Biomol. NMR 29, 1­9. 9. Schwieters, C.D., Kuszewski, J.J., Tjandra, N. and Clore, G.M. (2003) J. Magn. Reson. 160, 65­73.

254
10. Berman, H.M., Westbrook, J., Feng, Z., Gilliland, G., Bhat, T.N., Weissig, H., Shindyalov, I.N. and Bourne, P.E. (2000) Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 235­242. 11. Tolman, J.R., Flanagan, J.M., Kennedy, M.A. and Prestegard, J.H. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 9279­9283. 12. Tjandra, N. and Bax, A. (1997) Science 278, 1111­1114. 13. Cornilescu, G., Delaglio, F. and Bax, A. (1999) J. Biomol. NMR 13, 289­302. 14. Fowler, C.A., Tian, F., Al-Hashimi, H.M. and Prestegard, J.H. (2000) J. Mol. Biol. 304, 447­460. 15. Andrec, M., Du, P.C. and Levy, R.M. (2001) J. Biomol. NMR 21, 335­347. 16. Prestegard, J.H., Al-Hashimi, H.M. and Tolman, J.R. (2000) Quart. Rev. Biophys. 33, 371­424. 17. Bax, A., Kontaxis, G. and Tjandra, N. (2001) Dipolar couplings in macromolecular structure determination, In Nuclear Magnetic Resonance of Biological Macromolecules, Pt B, Methods in Enzymology Vol. 339, pp. 127­174. 18. Prestegard, J.H. and Kishore, A.I. (2001) Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 5, 584­590. 19. Sambrook, J. and Russell, D. (2000) Molecular Cloning, A Laboratory Manual, 3rd ed., Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 999 pp. 20. Weisemann, R., Ruterjans, H., Schwalbe, H., Schleucher, J., Bermel, W. and Griesinger, C. (1994) J. Biomol. NMR 4, 231­240. 21. Delaglio, F., Grzesiek, S., Vuister, G.W., Zhu, G., Pfeifer, J. and Bax, A. (1995) J. Biomol. NMR 6, 277­293. 22. Varner, S.J., Vold, R.L. and Hoatson, G.L. (1996) J. Magn. Reson. Ser. A 123, 72­80. 23. Clore, G.M., Gronenborn, A.M. and Bax, A. (1998) J. Magn. Reson. 133, 216­221. 24. Valafar, H. and Prestegard, J.H. (2004) J. Magn. Reson. 167, 228­241. 25. Huang, C.C., Couch, G.S., Pettersen, E.F. and Ferrin, T.E. (1996) Pacific Symp. Biocomput. 1, 724. 26. Koradi, R., Billeter, M. and Wuthrich, K. (1996) J. Mol. ¨ Graphics 14, 51­55. 27. Al-Hashimi, H.M., Valafar, H., Terrell, M., Zartler, E.R., Eidsness, M.K. and Prestegard, J.H. (2000) J. Magn. Reson. 143, 402­406. 28. Pearl, F.M.G., Lee, D., Bray, J.E., Sillitoe, I., Todd, A.E., Harrison, A.P., Thornton, J.M. and Orengo, C.A. (2000) Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 277­282. 29. Jones, D.T. (1999) J. Mol. Biol. 287, 797­815. 30. Xu, Y., Xu, D., Crawford, O.H., Einstein, J.R., Larimer, F., Uberbacher, E., Unseren, M.A. and Zhang, G. (1999) Protein Eng. 12, 899­907. 31. Sali, A. and Blundell, T.L. (1993) J. Mol. Biol. 234, 779­ 815. 32. Bax, A. (2003) Protein Sci. 12, 1­16. 33. Liang, S.D. and Grishin, N.V. (2002) Protein Sci. 11, 322­ 331. 34. Mendes, J., Baptista, A.M., Carrondo, M.A. and Soares, C.M. (1999) Proteins Struct. Funct. Genet. 37, 530­543. 35. Looger, L.L. and Hellinga, H.W. (2001) J. Mol. Biol. 307, 429­445. 36. Holm, L. and Sander, C. (1995) Trends Biochem. Sci. 20, 478­480. 37. Altschul, S.F., Madden, T.L., Schaffer, A.A., Zhang, J.H., Zhang, Z., Miller, W. and Lipman, D.J. (1997) Nucleic Acids Res. 25, 3389­3402. 38. Servant, F., Bru, C., Carrere, S., Courcelle, E., Gouzy, J., Peyruc, D. and Kahn, D. (2002) Brief Bioinform. 3, 246­ 251.

