doi:10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00381-9 available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

w B

J. Mol. Biol. (2002) 319, 1165­1176

Activation of the Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor Involves a Switch in Conformation of the a Subunits
N. Unwin1*, A. Miyazawa2, J. Li1 and Y. Fujiyoshi3,4
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Neurobiology Division Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK
2 RIKEN Harima Institute 1-1-1 Kouto, Mikazuki-cho Sayo, Hyogo 679-5148, Japan 1

Department of Biophysics Faculty of Science, Kyoto University, Oiwake Kitashirakawa, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan
4 Japan Biological Information Research Centre, 2-41-6 Aomi Kohtoh-ku, Tokyo 135-0064, Japan

3

The nicotinic acetylcholine (ACh) receptor belongs to a superfamily of synaptic ion channels that open in response to the binding of chemical transmitters. Their mechanism of activation is not known in detail, but a time-resolved electron microscopic study of the muscle-type ACh receptor had suggested that a local disturbance in the ligand-binding region and consequent rotations in the ligand-binding a subunits, connecting to the transmembrane portion, are involved. A more precise interpretation of this structural change is given here, based on comparison of the extracellular domain of the ACh receptor with an ACh-binding protein (AChBP) to which a putative agonist is bound. We find that, to a good approximation, there are two alternative extended conformations of the ACh receptor subunits, one characteristic of either a subunit before activation, and the other characteristic of all three non-a subunits and the protomer of AChBP. Substitution in the three-dimensional maps of a by non-a subunits mimics the changes seen on activation, suggesting that the structures of the a subunits are modified initially by their interactions with neighbouring subunits and switch to the non-a form when ACh binds. This structural change, which entails 15 ­ 168 rotations of the inner pore-facing parts of the a subunits, most likely acts as the trigger that opens the gate in the membrane-spanning pore.
q 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved

*Corresponding author

Keywords: acetylcholine receptor; extracellular domain; ion channel; activation; electron microscopy

Introduction
The nicotinic acetylcholine (ACh) receptor is a member of the Cys-loop superfamily of transmitter-gated ion channels which includes neuronal ACh receptors, GABAA receptors, 5HT3 receptors and glycine receptors. It is found in high concentrations at the nerve ­ muscle synapse, where it mediates fast chemical transmission of electrical signals by opening a narrow pore across the postsynaptic membrane of the muscle cell in response to ACh released from the nerve terminal into the synaptic cleft. Although the ACh receptor is by far the best characterized member of the superfamily in terms of its biochemical and physiological properties,1 ­ 3 the detailed structural mechanism underlying activation of the ion channel is not yet understood. The ACh receptor is a large (, 290 kDa) glyco° protein comprised of five , 160 A long rodshaped subunits, two (the as) having identical
Abbreviation used: ACh, acetylcholine; AChBP , AChbinding protein.

amino acid sequences, and the three others (b, g and d) having similar sequences (36 ­ 42% pairwise identity with the as4). The subunits have in common a large N-terminal extracellular domain, four predicted transmembrane regions and an extended cytoplasmic loop. These are arranged around a pseudo 5-fold axis, delineating a cation-selective pathway across the membrane pore when the channel is open, but a robust barrier to the ions when it is closed. Opening of the channel occurs upon binding of ACh to both a subunits (ag and ad) at sites that are at, or close to, the interfaces made with neighbouring g and d subunits.5 ­ 7 These sites are shaped by three separate regions of the a polypeptide chain,2,3 and include the so-called C-loop, which contains several key residues implicated in ACh binding. Postsynaptic membranes isolated from the (muscle-derived) electric organ of the Torpedo ray have been a major source of material for structural studies of the receptor. The membranes are readily converted into tubular crystals,8,9 which have receptors on their surfaces arranged almost as

0022-2836/02/$ - see front matter q 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved

1166

Conformational Change in ACh Receptor a Subunits

Figure 1. Wooden model of the extracellular portion of ° the ACh receptor, constructed from the 4.6 A structure13 (see Methods). The membrane surface is at the bottom of the Figure. C denotes the C-loop region of the receptor (see also Figure 2), which makes part of the ACh-binding site. S1, in the shaft connecting to the transmembrane portion, and S2, near the synaptic end of the receptor, refer to cross-sectional regions over which detailed comparisons are made between the resting and activated structures (Figures 7 ­ 9). The width of each wooden slab ° corresponds to 2 A.

they are in vivo.10 Electron crystallographic studies of the tubular crystals have provided basic information about three-dimensional structure of the receptor and about how it functions as an ion channel.11 ­ 14 In a previous electron crystallographic

Figure 2. Structure of the AChBP protomer (a-carbon backbone trace), showing the inner (blue) and outer (red) sheet parts that were fitted to the densities to the ° 4.6 A map,13 and the (unfitted) connecting loops (grey). Also indicated are the locations of S1 and S2 in Figure 1 (vertical bars), and the conserved Cys-loop disulphide bond formed between residues 123 and 136. The view is towards the central axis from outside the pentamer. The amino acid sequence stretches composing the two sheets involve residue numbers 1 ­ 66, 71 ­ 78, 97 ­ 106, 108­ 125, 149­ 153 (inner); and 85­ 90, 134­ 143, 169­ 183, 192­ 203 (outer). The N terminus is at the top.

investigation of the activation mechanism, a rapid spray-freezing technique was used to represent the synaptic release of ACh and to trap the receptor in the open-channel form.14 An analysis ° of the activated structure at 9 A resolution indicated that the binding of ACh initiates two interconnected events in the extracellular domain. One is a local disturbance in the region of the binding sites, about halfway between the membrane and the synaptic end of the receptor, and the other a larger-scale conformational change, which communicates to the transmembrane portion. The latter appeared to involve small axial rotations predominantly in the ligand-binding a subunits. A more precise description of the extended conformational change is reported here, based on a correlation between the structure of the ACh ° receptor at 4.6 A resolution, obtained from electron images of Torpedo membranes recorded at liquid helium temperatures,13 and the atomic model of AChBP complexed with the putative agonist HEPES.15 AChBP is a soluble, homo-pentameric protein and therefore lacks part of the construction and the physiological properties one would associate with an ion channel. Nevertheless, this protein has the same overall architecture as the extracellular portion of the receptor (Figure 1), and the AChBP protomer has 20­ 23% sequence identity with the N-terminal , 200 amino acid residues of the receptor subunits. The structural homology between the two assemblies therefore enables a reliable interpretation of the receptor densities over much of the extracellular domain. The core of the AChBP protomer is organized around two sets of b-stands, forming "Greek key" motifs, which are linked together through the Cys-loop disulphide bond and folded into a curled b-sandwich.15 This core was divided into separate "inner" and "outer" parts of the sandwich, which were fitted independently to the densities in the ° 4.6 A, resting-state structure. We found that the two parts in all three non-a subunits (b, g and d) were oriented approximately as in AChBP, whereas the two parts in the a subunits had a different alignment. Although this distinction between the non-a and a subunits applied to the receptor in the resting state, no such distinction applied in the density map obtained from the activated receptor. The structures of the a subunits therefore appear to be modified initially by their interactions with neighbouring subunits and to switch to the non-a configuration when ACh binds. This conformational change in the extracellular portion of the receptor, parallels other changes observed previously in the transmembrane portion, suggesting it may act as a trigger to open the gate in the membrane-spanning pore.

Results
A wooden model of the extracellular domain ° of the receptor was constructed from the 4.6 A

Conformational Change in ACh Receptor a Subunits

1167

Figure 3. Sections through the densities composing the extracellular portion of the ACh receptor, and superimposed Torpedo polypeptide chains. (a) A cross-section near the membrane end, i.e. at level S1 in Figure 1; (b) is a crosssection near the synaptic end, i.e. at level S2 in Figure 1; (c) shows sections approximately perpendicular to these views through the outersheet regions of the d and ag subunits along the red lines in (a). The fitted polypeptide chains have where possible the AChBP rotamer assignments, and are in different colours (inner sheet parts) or in red (outer sheet parts). The pairs of black dots in (a) identify the Ca positions of the cysteine residues which form the disulphide bonds linking the inner to the outer sheets. The inner sheets of the a subunits are rotated 15 ­ 168 anticlockwise (curved arrows in (a)), relative to the inner sheets of the non-a subunits, before activation. The outer sheets of the a subunits are tilted (curved arrow in (c)) relative to the outer sheets of the non-a subunits, before activation. The arrowhead in (b) points to a region of unexplained density at the ag ­ b interface. The contours in the density maps are at 1s (grey) and 1.5s (yellow).

structure (Figure 1; see Methods) to provide a reference for this analysis. The domain extends ° about 65 A from the membrane surface, at the bottom of the Figure, and the ring of five subunits ° ° encircle a , 20 A diameter and , 65 A long central vestibule. There is a prominent protrusion, C, at the level of the ACh-binding region, which can be identified with the C-loop in AChBP (see below). Two cross-sectional regions, S1 and S2, near either end of the domain, are examined in detail below in a comparison made between the resting and activated structures. The ag, ad and d subunits are assigned in Figure 1 according to the locations determined from electron images of subunit-specific labelling reagents.16,17 Biochemical experiments identifying residues in the g and the d subunits which, in addition to those in the a subunits, influence ACh binding, have suggested that g is the single subunit between the as.5 ­ 7 The direct finding that these residues are clustered together at the AChBP protomer ­ protomer interface15 indicates that g almost certainly is between the as, as shown in the Figure, and that the assignment of b to this

position, based on the apparent location of an anti-b antibody fragment,16 was incorrect. Comparison with AChBP Figure 2 shows an a-carbon backbone tracing of the AChBP protomer, viewed from approximately the same direction as the ag subunit in Figure 1, and draws attention to the C-loop at the mid-level of the structure, and the Cys-loop disulphide bond, cross-linking the two sheets of the b-sandwich, near the "membrane end". In overall shape, the protomer and the receptor subunits are quite similar. Nevertheless there are some clear differences between the two structures, especially at the mid-level where there are a number of connecting loops and where ACh binds. For example, the protruding density, C, in ag, is not curved inwards towards the neighbouring g subunit as strongly as the C-loop in AChBP. A detailed interpretation of this important region will be given when the structure of the receptor can be presented at higher resolution. The analysis here will be focused on the packed secondary structure elements of the

1168

Conformational Change in ACh Receptor a Subunits

Table 1. Estimated in-plane rotations (deg.) of b-sheets relative to AChBP
Inner sheet ag ad b g d 16.3 15.2 0.4 0.2 0.5
a

Outer sheet 0.8 1.2 0.0 1.6 0.0

a All angles are anticlockwise relative to AChBP, viewed from the synaptic cleft.

subunits, which are conserved among all members in the superfamily.15 Initially we compared the receptor subunits individually with the whole b-sandwich core of the AChBP protomer, by real space rigid body refinement,18 and calculation of correlation coefficients between the two structures (see Methods). However, while the comparison yielded good agreement for the b, g and d subunits, the agreement for the two a subunits was poorer, with some parts of the a-carbon backbone lying outside the main densities in the map. We therefore divided the b-sandwich into separate "inner" and "outer" b-sheet fragments, and independently fit these. The inner and outer-sheet fragments, considered separately, correlated well with the densities in all five receptor subunits, including the as. This result indicated that the two fragments were oriented differently in the a subunits than in the other subunits and in AChBP. Finally, we found that the inner and outer-sheet fragments could be extended, and still retain reasonable fit to the densities, until they included most of the structured elements present in AChBP, but excluded several (unconserved) connecting loops (Figure 2). Sections through the extracellular domain Sections through the densities composing the extracellular domain, with the fitted inner and outer-sheet polypeptide chains superimposed, are shown in Figure 3. Figure 3(a) is a cross-section normal to the receptor axis in the region close to the membrane (S1, Figure 1), where the disulphide bonds are located (black dots identifying the pairs of Ca positions). The subunits at this level are broken up into separable densities, and most distinctly at the ag ­b and ad ­ g interfaces. The inner sheets of the a
Table 2. Estimated tilts (deg.) of outer sheets relative to AChBP
ag ad b g d 13.5a 15.6 3.4 2.4 4.2

subunits are rotated anticlockwise (arrows), relative to the other inner sheets, distorting the shape of the vestibule wall. The fitted chains account for most of the densities, as would be expected, since this part of the structure is composed almost entirely of the sheets and only one (omitted) connecting loop. Figure 3(b) is a comparable cross-section near the synaptic end of the extracellular domain (S2, Figure 1), where only the inner, and not the outer part of the b-sandwich is present. The subunits at this level are not clearly divided, but the fitted inner-sheet polypeptide chains account well for most of their features and delineate, therefore, the subunit interfaces. There are some unexplained densities, particularly near the subunit interfaces (for example, indicated by the arrowhead), which might be associated with the presence of unconserved loops or glycosylation of the subunits.19 Figure 3(c) shows equivalent longitudinal sections through the outer sheets of the d and ag subunits. The sections are along the lines indicated in Figure 3(a). The outer sheet part of the a subunit is more tilted (arrow) than its non-a counterpart, about an axis normal to the pseudo 5-fold axis. This can be seen directly from visual comparison of the two arced bands of density. Properties of the receptor subunits The orientations of the inner and outer-sheet fragments, after fitting to each subunit, were measured relative to their orientations in AChBP. We found large differences between the a subunits and the other subunits, including the protomer of AChBP. As Table 1 shows, the inner-sheet fragments of both a subunits were rotated by 15 ­ 168 anticlockwise from the AChBP orientation, when viewed along the pseudo 5-fold axis from the synaptic cleft, whereas the other fragments all aligned within 28 of their counterparts in AChBP. Similar, but smaller differences were found in the orientations of the outer sheets (Table 2). In the a subunits, these sheets were , 118 more tilted (anticlockwise, viewed from outside the pentamer), about an axis normal to the pseudo 5-fold axis, than were the non-a outer-sheet fragments; the non-a outer-sheet fragments, in turn, were 2­ 48 more tilted than their counterparts in AChBP. Compared with the a/non-a differences, the variations between individual non-a subunits were small. Thus the subunits of the receptor would be arranged with near perfect 5-fold symmetry, as are the protomers in AChBP, if it were not for the alignments specific to the a subunits (and minor differences in intersubunit spacings; see below). Figure 4(a) and (b) compare the alternative non-a and a configurations, and the arrows in Figure 4(a) indicate the two rotations required to convert non-a to a. Also shown are the (predominantly translational) variations exhibited by

a All angles are anticlockwise relative to AChBP, viewed from outside the pentamer.

Conformational Change in ACh Receptor a Subunits

1169

Figure 4. Arrangement of the inner (blue) and outer (red) sheet parts of (a) the non-a and (b) the a subunits, after fitting to the ° densities in the 4.6 A map of the receptor.13 The views are in the same direction, towards the central axis from outside the pentamer. Arrows in (a) denote the rotations relating the non-a to the a sheets. The traces are aligned so that the inner sheets are superposed.

individual subunits. With their inner sheets aligned, the average pairwise rms differences in ° ° Ca positions were 1.48 A and 1.15 A for the non-a and a subunits, respectively. These Figures are small compared with the rms difference between ° the two configurations, which was 3.3 A (averaged a and non-a coordinates, aligned to a protomer in AChBP). The largest differences between the two ° configurations, , 6 A, were at the ag ­b and ad ­g interfaces, involving the inner sheets. The smallest differences were on the other sides of the subunits, near the Cys-loop disulphide bonds. Given the limited resolution, errors in the rigid body refinements would be expected to account

for some of the variation shown in Figure 4. However, the measured Ca ­ Ca separations of the disulphide bonds linking the two b-sheets in each ° subunit were all within 4 ­ 6 A, which is close to the expected range.20 Also, the average measured ° value for the Ca ­ Ca separation (5.2 (^ 0.9) A) was ° separation in the protomer. Since close to the 5.1 A the presence of the disulphide bond was not used as a constraint in the rigid body refinements, these measurements imply that the individual chains ° were fitted to an accuracy of about 1 A; i.e. marginally smaller than the variation observed between the non-a subunits, and comparable with that observed between the as. Our analysis therefore indicates a significant difference between the a and non-a subunits, in terms of alignment of the two fragments, but does not allow a reliable distinction to be drawn between the two as, or between b, g and d. The clear-cut distinction between the average a and non-a configurations is apparent in Figure 4. Interfaces between subunits and with the transmembrane domain The intersubunit distances, measured from the ° separations of the disulphide bonds, were 1 ­ 3 A greater in the receptor than in AChBP, with the exception of the d ­ b pair, which had the same value in both structures (Figure 5). The greater separations in the receptor suggest that the subunit ­subunit interfaces, on the whole, involve less extensive interactions than do the protomers in AChBP. This is possible because the ion channel assembly may be stabilized by interactions within the membrane, whereas the stability of the AChBP pentamer depends solely on interactions in the soluble domain. The interface between the extracellular and transmembrane domains is marked by an abrupt change in structure associated with the appearance of rod-shaped densities, which almost certainly

Figure 5. Subunit ­ subunit separations around the receptor, measured from the positions determined for the Cys-loop disulphide bonds. The protomer­ protomer ° separation in the AChBP pentamer is 27.8 A; i.e. essentially the same as the d ­ b pair, which is the smallest subunit ­subunit separation in the receptor.

1170

Conformational Change in ACh Receptor a Subunits

Structures before and after activation The conformational change induced by activation had been analysed previously by comparing equivalent subunits in the shaft linking the binding region to the transmembrane portion of the receptor, using three-dimensional maps of structures obtained before and after exposure to ACh.14 The densities composing each subunit were isolated and compared in successive sections along the shaft. The a-subunit shafts had to be rotated by 3.88 and 3.98 to achieve the highest correlation coefficients between the two maps, and hence were estimated to rotate clockwise by these amounts upon activation (i.e. opposite in sense to the arrows in Figure 3(a)). The higher-resolution information has now shown that receptor subunits can be divided into two parts that are oriented differently in the a than in the non-a subunits, before activation, suggesting that the conformational change may involve intra-subunit conversion of a to the non-a configuration, rather than a whole-cross-section movement. This would entail the much larger 15 ­168 clockwise rotations of the inner sheets. However, the measured values of the rotations in the earlier study were averaged over the subunit cross-sections and would have underestimated the true rotations if instead they were associated with parts of the subunits. To explore the possibility that the conformational change involves intrasubunit movements of the kind suggested by the ° present analysis, we isolated 8 A thick slabs from near either end of the receptor (S1 and S2 in Figure 1) and evaluated their resting and activated projected structures, using the borders of the fitted polypeptide chains (Figure 3) to indicate the locations of the subunit ­subunit interfaces. First we compared projection maps from near the membrane end (Figure 7(a) and (b)). The most significant differences between the resting and activated structures at this level were on the inner walls of the a subunits near their interfaces with the b and g subunits (the ag ­ b and ad ­ g interfaces). The difference map (activated-minus-resting

Figure 6. Interface between the extracellular and transmembrane domains. The polypeptide chains in each subunit overlie four rod-shaped densities projecting upward from the membrane surface. These rods probably correspond to the membrane-spanning segments, M1 ­ M4. Regions from the fitted inner and outer sheets lying close to the interface are in blue and red (a-carbon traces; ad subunit). The green dots identify the locations of the two cysteine residues forming the Cys-loop disulphide bond. C denotes the C-terminal end of the outersheet (extended to include the residue equivalent to Gly205 of AChBP). The pentagon denotes the pseudo 5-fold axis.

correspond to the membrane-spanning segments, M1 ­ M4 (Figure 6). These segments are identified tentatively in the Figure, based on the proximity of the C-terminal end of the extracellular portion of the polypeptide chain to the rod on the left (designated M1), and evidence that M2 and M4 lie, respectively, closest and furthermost from the water-filled pore.1 ­ 3,21 The superposition shown of the interface structures suggests there may be close associations between the inner sheet and M2 and between the Cys-Cys and M2 ­ M3 loops.

Figure 7. Projected structures calculated from the shaft region (S1 in Figure 1) of the receptor (a) before and (b) after activation, and (c) the corresponding difference map (activated-minus-resting structure; see Methods). There are two main positive peaks in (c), indicating that the most significant differences between the resting and activated structures are on the inner walls of the a subunits. The asterisks in (a) and (b) denote the positions of these two peaks; the arrows in (a) indicate the nature of the displacements needed to account for them.

Conformational Change in ACh Receptor a Subunits

1171

Figure 8. (a) Resting and (b)­ (f) hybrid projected structures calculated from the shaft region of the receptor, and superimposed difference peaks from the activated-minus-resting structures (as in Figure 7(c)). The a subunits in (a) have been replaced in the other panels with: (b) 48 clockwise rotated-a; (c) g from the activated structure; and (d)­ (f) b, g and d from the resting structure. The dots in (a) show the locations of the Cys-loop disulphide bonds, determined from the rigid body refinements. The asterisks in (b)­ (f) denote the positions of the two peaks in (a).

structure; Figure 7(c)) showed two main positive peaks at these locations. This suggests that the densities moved inwards upon activation in the direction of the (clockwise-pointing) arrows, Figure 7(a). However such a result might have arisen either from whole-cross-section rotation of the a subunits or from a change in their internal organization. To characterize further the likely origin of the differences, we therefore calculated "hybrid" projected structures in which both as were substituted with rotated-a and a range of non-a subunits. These maps could be created unambiguously by using the positions determined for the Cys-loop disul-

phide bonds (Figure 3(a); dots in Figure 8(a)) to align, and the pentagonal symmetry relation between the non-a subunits, to orient the substituted subunits (see Methods). Figure 8 compares the main difference peaks from the activatedminus-resting structure (Figure 8(a)) with the equivalent difference peaks obtained after substituting the as with rotated-a (48 clockwise) and b, g and d subunits (Figure 8(b) ­ (f)). The simple 48 rotation of the a subunits only marginally affected the strengths of the difference peaks (Figure 8(b)). In contrast, substitution of either a by any of the non-a subunits, from either the activated (ga; Figure 8(c)) or resting structures (b, g, d; Figure

Figure 9. Projected structures calculated from a region (S2 in Figure 1) near the synaptic end of the receptor (a) before and (b) after activation, and (c) the corresponding difference map (activatedminus-resting structure). There are two main positive peaks in (c), consistent with displacement of the a subunits on the inner wall, near their interfaces with the g and b subunits (see Figure 3(b)). These displacements appear to extend over the whole cross-section of the a subunits, giving rise to additional differences between the two structures on the outer wall (arrowheads in (b)). The asterisks in (a) and (b) denote the positions of the main difference peaks; the arrows in (a) indicate the nature of the displacements needed to account for them.

1172

Conformational Change in ACh Receptor a Subunits

Figure 10. Superimposed a-carbon backbone tracings of the a and non-a chains, derived from rigid-body fitting of AChBP fragments to the three-dimensional densities, in their observed orientations relative to the pseudo 5-fold axis. The inner and outer-sheet parts of the a subunits are in blue and red; the non-a chains are in grey. The tracings represent the averaged coordinates of the two a and three non-a chains. The views are from directions (a) parallel with, and (b) normal to the membrane plane (the pseudo 5-fold axes are indicated). The circles in (a) and (b) denote the locations of the rotation axes relating respectively the outer and inner sheets. A switch from the a to the non-a configuration (arrows) would cause the inner and outer sheets to move away from each other in the region (striped line) where their edge strands (b8 and b10)15 come next to each other.

8(d) ­ (f)), essentially eliminated these peaks. Thus an ACh-induced conversion of the as to a non-a configuration did indeed account for the main structural changes at this level, whereas wholecross-section rotation of the a subunits did not. To check that changes in other parts of the a subunits could also be explained as a conversion to the ° non-a configuration, we isolated another 8 A thick slab from near the synaptic end of the receptor (S2 in Figure 1) and compared projection maps of the resting and activated structures at this level (Figure 9(a) and (b)). It was not possible to obtain as reliable an assessment of the changes here because of the more continuous densities around the central axis and the greater proportion of unaccounted polypeptide chain, the refolding of which cannot be predicted. Nevertheless, there were again two main positive difference peaks (Figure 9(c)), which were on the inner walls of the a subunits close to their interfaces with the neighbouring g and b subunits (Figure 9(a); see also Figure 3(b)). The changes on the inner wall, indicating movement of density inwards, were accompanied by corresponding changes on the outer wall (arrowheads, Figure 9(b)). Therefore, the whole cross-sections of the a subunits appeared to be displaced (clockwise-pointing arrows, Figure 9(a)). This result is consistent with a switch to the non-a configuration,

since the receptor at this level contains only the inner-sheet part (Figure 2).

Discussion
Earlier electron microscopical studies had pointed to several properties that were special to the a subunits, beyond the fact that they contain the principal components of the ACh binding sites. The shapes of these subunits, before activation, were different from the others; for example, they had more open internal structures in the AChbinding region, where they formed distinct (but non-equal) pockets, framed by twisted b-strands.13 The a subunits also responded in a different way to ACh, being the primary mediators of the conformational change connecting to the transmembrane portion of the receptor.14 While detailed interpretation of the structural properties of the a subunits will have to await an analysis at higher resolution, ° the fitting of the AChBP core structure to a 4.6 A map of the (unliganded) receptor, described here, has provided a valuable starting point. The difference between the a and non-a subunits, in terms of their alignments to the AChBP protomer, has also allowed a more precise interpretation of the ACh-induced conformational change.

Conformational Change in ACh Receptor a Subunits

1173

The a and non-a subunits The preliminary trials aimed at fitting the AChBP protomer to the receptor densities showed that reasonable agreement between the two structures could be obtained if most of the connecting loops surrounding the conserved b-sandwich core were excluded. The core of the protomer clearly fitted well the densities composing each of the non-a subunits, and we achieved best agreement with all subunits by dividing the b-sandwich into inner and outer parts (Figure 2) and then aligning these parts independently. We thus found that the two parts in the non-a subunits were oriented approximately as in AChBP, whereas in the two a subunits they had a different alignment. The differences between the a and non-a configurations were large compared with the variations in alignments between the two a subunits and between individual non-a subunits (Figure 4). It was shown that conversion of a to the non-a configuration would require 15­ 168 clockwise rotations of the inner sheets about an axis normal to the membrane plane, and 118 changes in tilt of the outer sheets (about an axis parallel with the membrane plane). Hence there were essentially two distinct classes of ACh receptor subunits: one represented by the unliganded a subunits and the other by the non-a subunits. Figure 10 shows superimposed a-carbon traces of the a (red and blue) and non-a (grey) configurations (averaged coordinates) in their observed orientations about the pseudo 5-fold axis. The two views, which are parallel (Figure 10(a)) and normal (Figure 10(b)) to the membrane plane, give a picture of the displacements (blue arrows, for inner sheet) that would be required to convert a to a non-a configuration. The magnitude of the displacements is determined by the location of the rotation axes relating, respectively, the two sets of outer sheets (red circle, Figure 10(a)) and the two sets of inner sheets (blue circle, Figure 10(b)). These axes pass directly through the Cys-loop disulphide bond (inner sheets), and within a few ° A of it (outer sheets). Near the membrane end of the extracellular domain, where the inner and outer sheets pack regularly against each other, the conversion of a to non-a would not affect much the internal structure of the subunit because both sheets would move in the same (clockwise) sense around the subunit axis. The maximum relative displacements would ° be small (, 2 A), and could be accommodated by adjustments in the torsion angles of the inwardfacing side-chains.22 Near the synaptic end, only the inner sheets are present and so the internal structure of the subunit should not change. At the mid-level, on the other hand, where the inner sheet curls round to meet the outer sheet (striped line, Figure 10(a)), the two sheets would move oppositely, away from each other, and the changes in internal structure would be greatest. Hence the (unliganded) a subunits are most distorted, rela-

tive to their non-a counterparts, at the mid-level. These distortions are probably brought about by interactions with g and d, the subunits making tightest contacts with the as (Figure 5), and may contribute to the distinct appearance of the a subunits in the ACh-binding region of the resting structure.13 Conversion of a subunits to a nona configuration To examine the possibility that the primary conformational change communicated to the transmembrane portion of the receptor, upon activation, is a switch of the a subunits to a non-a configuration (as in Figure 10), we compared the resting and activated structures near either end of the extracellular domain. These regions lay outside the mid-level, where activation initiates a local disturbance affecting all subunits.14 The comparison confirmed that the major structural changes were associated with the two a subunits (Figures 7 and 9). The changes at the membrane end were around the inner walls of the a subunits, but at the synaptic end appeared to be distributed over the whole subunit cross-sections. This result would be expected from a realignment towards a non-a configuration because the inner sheets, which are mostly responsible for the in-plane displacements (Table 1), form the inner wall of the subunit near the membrane end, but the whole cross-section near the synaptic end (Figure 2). Furthermore, the greatest displacements at both levels were near the ag ­ b and ad ­g interfaces (i.e. the clockwise faces of the a subunits), as would be expected from the relationship between the two configurations in the pentamer (Figure 10(b)). To determine if the magnitudes of the observed changes were explained by a conversion to the non-a configuration, we substituted the a subunits with non-a subunits in the maps from the membrane end of the extracellular domain. The effect of replacing either a subunit by any of the non-a subunits was essentially to "cancel out" the main differences between the two structures (Figure 8). In contrast, substitution of the as with 48-rotated-a subunits had only a minor effect. Hence the observed changes were consistent with a switch fully to the non-a configuration, but not with rotations of the a subunits, as was suggested previously by measurements averaged over their cross-sections.14 We conclude that a switch of the a subunits to a non-a form is indeed the primary structural change by which the binding reaction is communicated to the transmembrane portion of the receptor. The nature of the associated smaller changes in the other subunits is less clear. Their participation is implied by the minor difference peaks in Figures 7(c) and 9(c), and has also been indicated by a linear free energy relationship analysis.23 Small subunit rotations and small relative displacements

1174

Conformational Change in ACh Receptor a Subunits

of the inner and outer sheets (comparable to the variability exhibited between the b, g and d subunits) may both be involved. Overall conformational change This study has shown that the a subunits of the ACh receptor have two alternative extended conformations, represented by the two configurations in Figure 10. Their activated conformation is like that of the non-a subunits. But in the resting state, they have altered "distorted" conformations, brought about presumably by their interactions with neighbouring subunits. Accordingly a simple interpretation of the extended conformational change (leaving aside the lesser contributions of the other subunits) is that the binding of ACh overcomes the distortions created in the a subunits, allowing them to relax into the normal, non-a form. Such a transition would be analogous to that of other allosteric proteins converting from the T state to the R state in the presence of a specific ligand.24 However in terms of the whole protein assembly, there is a shift toward all subunits adopting the same non-a configuration. The conversion of the receptor to a more symmetrical state is therefore an additional, fundamental property of the activation mechanism. The realignment of the a subunits to a non-a form gives rise to large clockwise rotations of the polypeptide chains on the inner surface of the vestibule next to the membrane-spanning pore. Furthermore the a subunits, which are on opposite sides of the vestibule, create rotational movements that are in opposite directions in the membrane plane. The segments in the membrane lining the pore, M2, are likely to be affected because they lie directly under the rotating, inner-sheet parts of these chains (Figure 6). The M2 ­M3 loop, which is implicated in coupling the ACh-binding reaction to gating,25 is also in the vicinity of these moving elements. So this conformational change could well act as a trigger that would destabilize a gate formed by weak side-to-side interactions of residues on encircling M2 segments,12 and allow the channel to open. Although we do not yet know how the coupling to M2 is achieved, it is notable that the ACh-induced changes within the membrane consist of clockwise rotations of these inner segments,14 paralleling the in-plane rotations of the inner sheets. The Cys-loop disulphide bond is absolutely conserved among all members of the ion channel superfamily and may play a key role in this mechanism, the essential principles of which must also be conserved. The disulphide bond links together the inner and outer b-sheet parts, and stabilizes the three-dimensional fold.15 While we have shown that the b-strands move by up to ° , 6 A upon activation, there are only minor perturbations in the region of the disulphide bond itself. Thus, to a good approximation, the Cysloop disulphide bond may function as a pivot

point stabilizing either conformation. Other intrasubunit interactions, involving mostly hydrophobic side-chains, must also be important in facilitating the small, but precise relative displacements of the polypeptide chains. On the other hand, predominantly polar and charged sidechains at the subunit interfaces would be expected to have less exacting roles. The interfaces in the receptor appear less extensive than those in AChBP (Figure 5), and may serve mainly to modulate these internal rearrangements and to make space available so that the rearrangements are not energetically constrained. This would explain why amino acid residues composing the hydrophobic core and packed secondary structure elements of the monomer, rather than those exposed to the interfaces, are conserved among members of the ion channel superfamily.15 How does binding of ACh bring about the extended conformational change in the a subunits, converting them into a non-a form? This question cannot be answered in detail until the structure of the binding region is seen at higher resolution, and the localised disturbance created there is better understood. However, a likely possibility, consistent with the three-dimensional maps and also with the results of biochemical experiments using binding-site reagents,5 is that the C-loop is drawn inward by the bound ACh, bringing it closer to its location in the (non-a) protomer of AChBP. The joined outer sheet could in this way be reoriented and stabilized in the configuration it would have in the absence of subunit interactions, hence favouring a switch to the relaxed, non-a form of the subunit.

Conclusions
There are two alternative extended conformations of the ACh receptor subunits: one characteristic of either a subunit before activation; the other characteristic of the three non-a subunits. The structures of the a subunits are modified initially by their interactions with neighbouring subunits, and convert to the non-a form when ACh binds. This transition involves movements of the inner and outer parts of the b-sandwich, composing the core of the a subunit, around the Cys-loop disulphide bond. The resultant activated protein assembly is in a more symmetrical state. The structural change in the extracellular domain of the a subunits is the primary conformational change communicating the ACh-binding reaction to the transmembrane portion of the receptor. This structural change entails 15 ­ 168 rotations of the inner pore-facing parts, and most likely acts as the trigger that opens that gate in the membranespanning pore.

Conformational Change in ACh Receptor a Subunits

1175

Methods
Structure of extracellular domain ° The 4.6 A structure of the ACh receptor in the resting state has been described.13 Briefly, it was determined by electron microscopy from tubular crystals of Torpedo postsynaptic membranes, embedded in amorphous ice. The electron images were recorded at 4K with a 300 kV field emission source, and analysed by a helical Fourier method11 with corrections being made for the contrast transfer function and for distortions present in the tubes.26 Datasets from four helical families of tube were merged to obtain the final three-dimensional density map. Although it was possible to resolve individual b-strands in some regions of this map, the resolution was insufficient to indicate reliably the folding of the polypeptide chains or to identify unambiguously individual side-chains. To construct the model in Figure 1, sections were ° calculated perpendicular to the receptor axis at 2 A inter° vals, using a resolution cut-off of 5 A. The sections were contoured at a level to retain ,80% of the molecular mass. Although the localisation of subunit-specific labels and biochemical experiments have indicated the relative positions of individual subunits, it has not been possible previously to locate accurately the subunit boundaries near the synaptic end of the receptor. The boundary positions shown near this end are based on alignment of the three-dimensional densities with the structure of AChBP. To enhance the side-chain densities (Figure 3), and to ° improve the accuracy of the fitting, the 4.6 A map was normally calculated with the low-resolution terms (to ° 10 A) subtracted at half weight. Alignment of polypeptide chains Rigid body fitting to the three-dimensional densities of the inner and outer-sheet fragments was based on the AChBP coordinates (1I9B coordinates from the RCSB Protein Data Bank), and was done using the real space refinement option18 in the program O.27 The fragments were each refined independently, without constraints, after first fitting the AChBP protomers to the densities. The localisation of the fragments close to their final positions, before their refinement, minimized the possibility of an incorrect alignment due to the influence of extraneous densities from unaccounted portions of the polypeptide chain. There were systematic departures of the a inner and outer-sheet fragments (Tables 1 and 2), and the non-a outer-sheet fragments (Table 2) from the AChBP orientations, making it unlikely that the AChBP structure had biased the results. The improved fits of the inner-sheet fragments of the a subunits after rotation by 15­ 168 from the AChBP orientations (Table 1) were accompanied by , 15% increases in the correlation coefficients calculated between the computed structures of the fragments and the densities. However, the correlation coefficient was fairly insensitive to orientational and positional changes at the resolution of this analysis, and optimisation of this parameter is not a reliable measure, without accounting accurately for fact that the fragments represent only a portion of the densities.28,29 We found that the small measured variation of the Ca ­ Ca separations of the Cysloop disulphide bonds, after the fitting, and absence of serious clashes at any of the inter-fragment or inter-subunit boundaries, provided the most objective criterion, indicating that the real space refinements had yielded

near-optimal results. A more quantitative analysis of the conformational variation between the subunits should be feasible when a higher-resolution structure of the receptor becomes available. The Figures presenting the atomic structures and density maps (Figures 2 ­ 4 and 10) were prepared with the program SETOR.30 Analysis of differences between resting and activated structures The structure of the activated receptor has been described.14 It was obtained from electron images of ACh receptor tubes exposed to ACh for ,5 ms before rapid freezing in liquid-nitrogen-cooled ethane. The analysis was conducted solely on the (2 16,6) family ° of tube,11 and the data were to a resolution of 9 A. To minimize possible systematic errors in the present study, we therefore used just the (2 16,6) family from the resting structure,13 and both structures were com° pared at 9 A resolution. At this resolution, there were only minor differences between the recently determined resting structure13 and the resting structure determined earlier,12 before the distortion-correction method26 had been developed. To characterize the structural change associated with ° activation, we selected two 8 A thick stretches from near either end of the extracellular domain (see Figures 1 and 2) on the basis that they included a minimum amount of unfolded polypeptide, which is not accounted for in the maps, and were away from the ACh-binding region, where the localised disturbance would complicate interpretation of the results. Sections were calculated at ° 1 A intervals normal to the receptor axis, and projected structures were obtained by summing over the thickness of the stretch. Difference maps were calculated by subtracting the densities of the resting from the activated projected structures. These and the other maps were plotted with continuous contours representing positive peaks, or regions of higher protein density. Difference maps calculated using the earlier,12 rather than more recent13 (216,6) datasets yielded the same major peaks, but minor discrepancies were present, indicating that small variations, e.g. between Figure 8(c) and (e), may not be significant. Substitution of the as by other subunits, in the shaft region of the extracellular domain (S1, Figure 1), was done in several steps, making use of the locations determined for the disulphide bonds to achieve accurate alignments. First, we used the boundaries indicated by ° the fitting of the polypeptide chains to the 4.6 A map (Figure 3(a)) to identify the 728 sector that encompassed the whole cross-section of the subunit in question. Second, the subunit within the sector was rotated by the appropriate multiple of 728 to bring it into approximate register with the a subunit it was destined to replace. Third, the subunit was translated until the position of its disulphide bond coincided with that of the a subunit. Finally, the sharp boundary edges were removed by bandpass filtering. An equivalent procedure was used for rotating by 48 and realigning the a subunits (Figure 8(b)).

Acknowledgments
We thank Titia Sixma, Tony Auerbach and Michael Stowell for valuable discussions. This work was

1176

Conformational Change in ACh Receptor a Subunits

supported in part by grants from the National Institutes of Health (GM61941) and the European Commission (QLG3-CT-2001-00902).

References
1. Karlin, A. (2002). Emerging structure of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 3, 102­114. 2. Changeux, J.-P. & Edelstein, S. J. (1998). Allosteric receptors after 30 years. Neuron, 21, 959­980. ` 3. Corringer, J.-P., Le Novere, N. & Changeux, J.-P. (2000). Nicotinic receptors at the amino acid level. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 40, 431­ 458. 4. Popot, J.-L. & Changeux, J.-P. (1984). Nicotinic receptor of acetylcholine: structure of an oligomeric membrane protein. Physiol. Rev. 64, 1162­ 1239. 5. Karlin, A. (1993). Structure of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 3, 299­ 309. 6. Sine, S. M., Kreienkamp, H.-J., Bren, N., Maeda, R. & Taylor, P. (1995). Molecular dissection of subunit interfaces in the acetylcholine receptor: identification of determinants of a-conotoxin M1 selectivity. Neuron, 15, 205­ 211. 7. Xie, Y. & Cohen, J. B. (2001). Contributions of Torpedo nicotinic acetylcholine receptor gTrp-55 and dTrp-57 to agonist and competitive antagonist function. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 2417­ 2426. 8. Kistler, J. & Stroud, R. M. (1981). Crystalline arrays of membrane-bound acetylcholine receptor. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 78, 3678­ 3682. 9. Brisson, A. & Unwin, P. N. T. (1984). Tubular crystals of acetylcholine receptor. J. Cell. Biol. 99, 1202­ 1211. 10. Heuser, J. E. & Salpeter, S. R. (1979). Organization of acetylcholine receptors in quick-frozen, deep-etched, and rotary-replicated Torpedo postsynaptic membrane. J. Cell. Biol. 82, 150­ 173. 11. Toyoshima, C. & Unwin, N. (1990). Three-dimensional structure of the acetylcholine receptor by cryo-electron microscopy and helical image reconstruction. J. Cell. Biol. 111, 2623­ 2635. 12. Unwin, N. (1993). Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor at ° 9 A resolution. J. Mol. Biol. 229, 1101­ 1124. 13. Miyazawa, A., Fujiyoshi, Y., Stowell, M. & Unwin, N. ° (1999). Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor at 4.6 A resolution: transverse tunnels in the channel wall. J. Mol. Biol. 288, 765­ 786. 14. Unwin, N. (1995). Acetylcholine receptor channel imaged in the open state. Nature, 373, 37 ­ 43. 15. Brejc, K., van Dijk, W. J., Klaassen, R. V., Schurmanns, M., van der Oost, J., Smit, A. B. & Sixma, T. K. (2001). Crystal structure of an ACh-binding protein reveals the ligand-binding domain of nicotinic receptors. Nature, 411, 269­ 276.

16. Kubalek, E., Ralston, S., Lindstrom, J. & Unwin, N. (1987). Location of subunits within the acetylcholine receptor by electron image analysis of tubular crystals from Torpedo marmorata. J. Cell. Biol. 105, 9 ­ 18. 17. Beroukhim, R. & Unwin, N. (1995). Three-dimensional location of the main immunogenic region of the acetylcholine receptor. Neuron, 15, 323­331. 18. Jones, T. A. & Liljas, L. (1984). Crystallographic refinement of macromolecules having non-crystallographic symmetry. Acta Crystallog. sect. A, 40, 50 ­ 57. 19. Nomoto, H., Takahashi, N., Nagaki, Y., Endo, S., Arata, Y. & Hayashi, K. (1986). Carbohydrate structures of acetylcholine receptor from Torpedo californica and distribution of oligosaccharides among the subunits. Eur. J. Biochem. 157, 233­ 242. 20. Thornton, J. M. (1981). Disulphide bridges in globular proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 151, 261­ 287. 21. Tobimatsu, T., Fujita, Y., Fukuda, K., Tanka, K.-I., Mori, Y., Konno, T. et al. (1987). Effects of substitution of putative transmembrane segments on nicotinic acetylcholine receptor function. FEBS Letters, 225, 56 ­62. 22. Chothia, C. & Lesk, A. M. (1985). Helix movements in proteins. Trends Biochem. Sci. 10, 116 ­ 118. 23. Grossman, C., Zhou, M. & Auerbach, A. (2000). Mapping the conformational wave of acetylcholine receptor gating. Nature, 403, 773­ 776. 24. Monod, J., Wyman, J. & Changeux, J.-P. (1965). On the nature of allosteric transitions: a plausible model. J. Mol. Biol. 12, 88 ­ 118. 25. Grosman, C., Salamone, F. N., Sine, S. M. & Auerbach, A. (2000). The extracellular linker of muscle acetylcholine receptor channels is a gating control element. J. Gen. Physiol. 116, 327­ 340. 26. Beroukhim, R. & Unwin, N. (1997). Distortion correction of tubular crystals: improvements in the acetylcholine receptor structure. Ultramicroscopy, 70, 57 ­ 81. 27. Jones, T. A., Zou, J.-Y., Cowan, S. W. & Kjeldgaard, M. (1991). Improved methods for building protein models in electron density maps and the location of errors in these models. Acta Crystallog. sect. A, 47, 110 ­ 119. 28. Wriggers, W. & Chacon, P. (2001). Modeling tricks and fitting techniques for multiresolution structures. Structure, 9, 779­ 788. 29. Roseman, A. M. (2000). Docking structures of domains into maps from cryoelectron microscopy using local correlation. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 56, 1332­ 1340. 30. Evans, S. V. (1993). SETOR: hardware lighted threedimensional solid model representations of macromolecules. J. Mol. Graph. 11, 134­ 138.

Edited by J. Karn (Received 8 February 2002; received in revised form 17 April 2002; accepted 17 April 2002)

