310

Nucleocytoplasmic transport enters the atomic age Elena Conti and Elisa Izaurralde
Nucleocytoplasmic transport occurs through nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) and is mediated by saturable transport receptors that shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm. Our understanding of the molecular interactions underlying this process has improved dramatically as a result of the elucidation of the crystal structures of several nuclear transport factors either alone or in a complex with other components of the nuclear transport machinery. Furthermore, a conserved family of proteins, which is distinct from the well characterized family of importin -like nuclear export receptors, is implicated in the export of messenger RNA to the cytoplasm.
Addresses EMBL, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany. Correspondence: Elisa Izaurralde; e-mail: izaurralde@embl-heidelberg.de Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2001, 13:310­319 0955-0674/01/$ -- see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. Abbreviations hnRNP heterogenous nuclear RNA Kap karyopherin NE nuclear envelope NES nuclear export signal NTF2 nuclear transport factor 2 NLS nuclear localization signal NPC nuclear pore complex NXF nuclear export factor NXT NTF2-related export protein Ran Ras-related nuclear protein RNP ribonucleoprotein particle UsnRNAs uridine-rich small nuclear RNAs

importins or exportins, collectively known as karyopherins [1­5]. Each karyopherin specifically recognizes a set of NLSs or NESs, either directly or indirectly, with the help of adaptor molecules. Cargo uptake and cargo release is restricted to the appropriate cellular compartment by the interaction of the receptor with Ran, a Ras-related GTPase. Ran binds to GTP or GDP, and its nucleotidebound state is regulated by several cofactors. The conversion of RanGDP into RanGTP requires the guanine nucleotide exchange factor (RanGEF, also known as RCC1). GTP hydrolysis by Ran is triggered by the RanGTPase activating protein-1 (RanGAP1 or Rna1p in yeast) and is costimulated by the Ran-binding proteins 1 and 2 (RanBP1 and RanBP2). RanBP1, RanBP2 and RanGAP1 are predominantly cytoplasmic, whereas RanGEF is tightly bound to chromatin in the nucleus. Thus, Ran is thought to be present predominantly in the GTP-bound form in the nucleoplasm, whereas the cytoplasmic pool of Ran is in the GDP-bound form [1­5]. Importins bind to their cargo in the cytosol, in the absence of RanGTP, and release it upon binding to RanGTP in the nucleus. Conversely, exportins bind their cargoes in the presence of RanGTP in the nucleus and release it in the cytoplasm upon hydrolysis of Ran-bound GTP. Following transport of a cargo molecule in one direction, both adaptors and receptors must be recycled through the NPC to allow another round of transport to occur [1­5]. The numerous import and export signals and the receptors and adaptors that recognize them have been the subject of many excellent reviews [1­5] and will not be described in detail here. Instead, we focus our attention on the molecular insights to which structural and cell-biological studies have contributed recently. We now know the structures of several components of the nuclear transport machinery at near atomic levels. The ensemble of these static images permits visualization of the molecular interactions of many of the consecutive steps that lead to the import of an NLScontaining protein into the nucleus. We also describe the progress in our current understanding of the translocation mechanism through the NPC. Finally, unlike protein import and tRNA and UsnRNA export, studies of mRNA export are identifying a set of transport factors that are not related to the karyopherin family.

Introduction
In eukaryotic cells, RNA biogenesis and DNA replication are confined within the nucleus and are segregated from the cytoplasmic machinery for protein synthesis by the nuclear envelope (NE). As a consequence, messenger RNAs (mRNAs), and indeed all cytoplasmic RNAs, need to be transported from their transcription site in the nucleus to their final cytoplasmic destination. Conversely, nuclear proteins need to be imported from the cytosol into the nucleus. Macromolecular traffic between the nucleus and cytoplasm is mediated by soluble transport receptors that shuttle through nuclear pore complexes (NPCs), which are large protein assemblies that form aqueous channels across the NE (see Forbes, pp 363­375 of this issue). The transport receptors are able to associate with components of the NPC and to bind to cargo molecules that need to be translocated across the pore. Cargo molecules are recognized via import or export targeting signals, which are referred to as nuclear localization signals (NLSs) or nuclear export signals (NESs), respectively [1­5]. The vast majority of transport receptors are members of a conserved family of homologous proteins known as

Versatility of receptor­cargo interactions
The karyopherin family of transport receptors includes fourteen proteins in yeast and at least 22 proteins in humans. Importin  (Kap 1) is the prototype of the family, as it was the first to be discovered and is the best characterized, and for this reason karyopherins are also referred to as importin--like proteins. Importin  transports proteins carrying so-called canonical NLSs (see

Nucleocytoplasmic transport enters the atomic age Conti and Izaurralde

311

below) as well as the uridine-rich small nuclear RNAs (UsnRNAs) into the nucleus (see Will and Lührmann, pp 290­301 of this issue). Importin  does not recognize either of these cargoes directly however, but requires additional adaptor proteins. Canonical NLSs are recognized by importin , whereas UsnRNAs are recognized by snurportin-1 (see Will and Lührmann, pp 290­301 of this issue). Importin  and snurportin-1 recruit importin  via a highly basic importin--binding (IBB) domain present at the amino terminus of these adaptors [6,7]. Importin  can also recognize certain non-canonical NLSs, such as those present in ribosomal proteins [8], Smad proteins [9] and HIV Rev and Tat [10,11], directly without adaptors. Import of histone H1 requires heterodimerization of importin  with importin 7 (RanBP7) [12]. Like the importins, exportins specifically recognize a variety of NESs, but binding of exportins to their cargoes requires association with RanGTP [1­5]. The transport apparatus is versatile not only by virtue of the individual receptors recognizing multiple cargoes but also because of the individual cargoes binding to multiple receptors. This redundancy is best exemplified in the case of ribosomal protein import, which represents, in quantitative terms, the most important pathway in rapidly dividing cells. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, both Kap123p and Kap121p (also known as Pse1p) import ribosomal proteins [13] but only Kap121p is essential. In vertebrates, import of ribosomal proteins is mediated by multiple receptors, including transportin, importin , importin 5 and importin 7 [8]. Of the 14 yeast karyopherins, 13 have a known function, but despite the wealth of information accumulated in the past years, only 9 of the 22 human -like proteins have been assigned a function (D Görlich, personal communication), and the signals that they recognize have yet to be characterized.

 bound to the IBB domain of , the 19 HEAT repeats form a snail-like molecule tightly wrapped around the IBB (Figure 1a; [15··]). In the structure of transportin bound to RanGTP [16··], the HEAT repeats are arranged into a more extended spiral with the two halves of the protein forming separate arches roughly at right angles (Figure 1b). The different conformations observed in the two structures might reflect changes upon binding of cargo or RanGTP or differences in the amino acid sequences or both. The domain of importin  that binds to canonical NLSs is a helical repeat protein built by the regular stacking of 10 armadillo (ARM) repeats [17··,18]. ARM repeats consist of approximately 40 amino acids that fold into three -helices (H1, H2 and H3) arranged with an approximately triangular cross-section (Figure 1c; [17··,19]). The structures of individual HEAT and ARM motifs are very similar (Figure 1a and c; [14]). When these structures are superimposed, the B helix of the HEAT motif superimposes with the H3 helix of the ARM motif, and a part of the A helix of the HEAT motif superimposes with the H2 helix. The main difference between the two types of repeat is a kink in helix A of the HEAT motif that is induced by a proline residue. This kink is more pronounced in the ARM motif because of an additional glycine residue and results in the generation of two different helices (H1 and H2) instead of a single bent helix (Figure 1a and 1c). Not only are the structural building units of  and  similar, but also, as in , the ARM repeats of  stack side by side, generating a superhelix with the inner concave surface formed by the H3 helices ([17··,18]; Figure 1c). The structural and topological similarities of importin  and  support the suggestion that these proteins are evolutionarily related [14,15··,20]. A particularly compelling argument for this hypothesis is the similar use of tryptophan residues at identical structural positions at the concave surface of  and  to bind to critical positively charged residues of their cargoes as discussed below.

Karyopherins are helical-repeat proteins
Nuclear transport receptors of the importin--like family have distinct binding specificities but share a similar structural framework. They consist entirely of tandemly repeated modules known as HEAT motifs. These are sequences of approximately 40 residues characterized by a loose consensus pattern of conserved hydrophobic amino acids folded into a bent helix (A) and a straight helix (B) (Figure 1a; [14]). The two helices are connected by a short turn. The multiple HEAT repeats pack side by side in an almost parallel fashion, forming elongated molecules with a superhelical twist, as shown in the structures of importin  and transportin (also known as Kap 2) (Figure 1a and b; [15··,16··]). The repeats are arranged regularly, resulting in a layer of A helices forming the external surface of the proteins and a layer of B helices lining their internal concave surface. The most irregular feature in these structures is a long acidic loop in the center of the molecules, which connects helices A and B of the eighth HEAT repeat (HEAT8). Despite their similar topology, the receptors have a different overall shape. In the structure of importin

Molecular mechanism of NLS cargo-binding in the cytoplasm
A large proportion of nuclear proteins contain canonical NLSs that are recognized by importin ­ heterodimers. Canonical NLSs are characterized either by a single cluster of several positively charged residues (monopartite NLS) or by two clusters separated by a linker of 10­12 residues (bipartite) [1­5]. Both monopartite and bipartite NLSs bind in an extended conformation to the ARM-repeat domain of importin  (Figure 1c; [17··,21,22]). The interaction is mediated by a set of conserved residues that are solvent exposed on the concave surface of importin . In particular, several tryptophans form hydrophobic pockets where the side chains of the NLS residues are buried. The presence of multiple regularly spaced binding pockets along the concave face of  allows specific NLS recognition despite the lack of a strict consensus sequence [17··,21,22]. The central ARM-repeat domain of importin  is flanked by a short carboxyl terminus and an amino-terminal IBB domain.

312

Nucleus and gene expression

Figure 1 (a) W B HEAT repeat A P Importin- (Kap ) ARM domain Importin  IBB domain Bipartite NLS ARM repeat H2 P G H1 (c)

W H3

Importin- (Kap 1)

A helices

N B helices Upstream C

Downstream

IBB C IBB domain C Acidic loop H3 helices (b) (d) RanGDP Switch II Switch II Switch I RanGTP C C-term helix swIII (e) RanGTP Switch II Switch I C-term helix swIII Switch I SwII

N

H1 and H2 helices

Transportin (Kap 2)

SwI

GDP

1 AT HE 2 AT HE

N sw II sw I RanBD (RanBP2)

GTP
HE 8 AT

C C-term helix

C-term helix swIII RanGTP RanBD

Acidic loop C
Current Opinion in Cell Biology

Nucleocytoplasmic transport enters the atomic age Conti and Izaurralde

313

Figure 1 legend A structural view of components of the transport machinery. (a) Importin  (Kap 1) is a HEAT-repeat protein (in magenta). Each HEAT repeat folds into two helices (A and B) as shown in the schematic drawing at the top, which highlights critical structural and functional residues discussed in the text. The structure of importin  bound to the helical IBB domain of importin  (in green) shows an overall snail-like conformation of the transport receptor. The carboxy-terminal domain of importin  binds to the IBB cargo via the inner surface lined by B helices. The acidic loop, which is important for binding, is identified in the schematic drawing at the bottom. (b) Structure of transportin (Kap 2, in magenta) bound to RanGTP (in cyan). The molecule is viewed with its amino-terminal arch in a similar orientation to that of importin  (in panel A). The switch regions of Ran involved in the interaction are indicated. The regions of 2 important for the interaction are highlighted in the schematic drawing at the bottom (numbering based on a structural homology alignment with importin ). The carboxy-terminal helix of Ran (dotted line) does not interact with 2 and points into the solvent. (c) Importin  has an ARM-repeat domain (in green) that binds to nuclear localization signals (NLSs). ARM repeats fold into three helices that share common characteristics with HEAT repeats, as schematically shown at the top. The structure shows a bipartite NLS (in gray) bound in an extended conformation to the inner surface of , which is lined by H3 helices. Several binding pockets are present on this surface, and they bind to the upstream and downstream clusters of positively-charged residues of this NLS, as schematically shown at the bottom. (d) RanGDP has the two switch regions in a more open conformation than observed in the RanGTP structures (b and e). The carboxy-terminal tail is packed against the core G domain of Ran. This tail is displaced from the G-domain in the GTP-bound form (b and e). (e) The structure of RanGTP bound to the RanBD of RanBP2 shows the tight embrace of the two proteins. The carboxy-terminal tail of RanGTP, which is flexible and exposed when bound to 2 (panel B), plays an important role in binding the RanBD. P, proline; W, tryptophan; C, carboxyl terminus; N, amino terminus; Sw, switch.

The IBB consists of approximately 40% basic residues [6,7]. In the absence of importin  or an NLS, the carboxy-terminal end of the IBB may function as an autoinhibitory segment by binding in an extended conformation at the NLS-binding pockets of importin  [18]. In free importin , most of the IBB is flexible, exposed and thus accessible for binding to importin  (Figure 2a). In the importin ­IBB complex, key basic residues of the IBB are specifically recognized by tryptophans in much the same way as observed in NLS­importin  interactions [15··,17··]. The amino terminus of the IBB binds near to the central hinge of , and it makes specific contacts with the acidic loop. The rest of the IBB folds into a helix and is completely surrounded by the carboxy-terminal arch of , whose inner surface is negatively charged and thus electrostatically complementary to the IBB (Figure 1a). The grip on the IBB is tightened by another specific interaction at the last HEAT repeat of  [15··]. It is possible that these multiple importin ­IBB interactions occur consecutively, with the carboxy-terminal domain of  progressively spiraling around the IBB. Indeed, in the absence of the IBB, importin  has an increased susceptibility to proteases, suggesting a less compact conformation in the unbound state [15··].

Molecular mechanisms of NLS-cargo release in the nucleus

Once in the nucleus, the importin ­cargo complex is dissociated by RanGTP. Like all other Ras-related GTPases, Ran has a core structure, known as the G domain, featuring two loops or switch regions that adopt different conformations in response to its nucleotide state. In addition, Ran has a carboxy-terminal tail of about 40 residues that functions as an extra switch (switch III), responding to the nucleotide state of the GTPase. When GDP is bound, the switch I and switch II regions move away from the nucleotide, adopting an open conformation, whereas the carboxy-terminal tail packs as an -helix against the G domain (Figure 1d; [23]). When GTP is bound, the switch regions I and II move closer to the nucleotide to interact with its -phosphate, whereas the carboxy-terminal tail is flipped away from the G domain (Figure 1e).

The structure of RanGTP is known only in complex with its binding partners. When in complex with the Ran-binding domain (RanBD) of RanBP2, the carboxy-terminal helix of Ran is engaged in important interactions with the RanBD (Figure 1e; [24]). The structures of RanGTP bound to full-length transportin and to the first 10 HEAT repeats of importin  show that the switch I and switch II regions of Ran bind to the amino-terminal arches of both receptors [16··,25··], whereas the carboxy-terminal tail is not involved in these interactions and is flexible and solvent exposed [16··,25··]. In both cases, the first HEAT repeat of the receptors interacts with a small part of the switch I of Ran, most of which, however, remains exposed to solvent (Figure 1b). The second HEAT repeat binds to the switch II of Ran with extensive hydrophobic interactions. The acidic loop at HEAT8 interacts with a region of the G domain of Ran accessible in the GTP-bound form, but it is covered by the carboxy-terminal tail in the GDPbound form. Although the recognition of RanGTP by importin  and transportin exhibits gross similarity, when examined in detail only a few interactions are found to be the same, suggesting that the two receptors use a similar shape-recognition mechanism to bind to RanGTP and to discriminate against RanGDP rather than having a precise conserved, chemical recognition mechanism. A comparison of the structures of the first ten HEAT repeats of  bound to RanGTP or bound to the BB reveals that these interactions are mutually exclusive. The central region of  is involved in binding to both RanGTP and the IBB [15··,25··]. Moreover these molecules utilize the same key residues for some of their crucial interactions with importin . For instance, a tryptophan residue in the acidic loop of importin  is involved in Ran binding and in the interaction with the IBB. This suggests an explanation for how binding of RanGTP to importins promotes cargo release in the nucleoplasm. It is possible that RanGTP approaches the amino-terminal domain of  by docking the switch I region to the first HEAT repeat and the switch II region more extensively to the contiguous repeat. The

314

Nucleus and gene expression

Figure 2 The canonical NLS import cycle. The schematic drawings are based on the available crystal structures and depict the NLS-containing nuclear protein in gray, importin  in green, importin  in magenta, nucleoporins in yellow, Ran in cyan and Ran cofactors in orange and red. The dotted lines indicate missing parts in the structures. (a) Cargo uptake in the cytosol. A canonical NLS of a nuclear protein is recognized by importin ­ heterodimers. The NLS-binding pockets of importin  bind to the NLS, whereas most of the IBB domain of importin  is entirely enclosed by the carboxyterminal arch of importin . (b) NPC docking and translocation of the import complex. Importin  binds to FG-repeats of nucleoporins using its outer surface for NPC docking. Note that the available structure comprises only the amino-terminal half of . (c) Cargo release in the nucleus. RanGTP binds to the aminoterminal arch of the receptor, displacing importin  and the NLS-containing nuclear protein. (d) NPC docking and translocation of -RanGTP. Importin  is also recycled back in complex with a exportin (not shown). (e) Receptor recycling. The RanGAP-mediated hydrolysis of RanGTP bound to  is facilitated by the RanBD of RanBP2 and results in the formation of RanGDP and the release of  in the cytosol. (f) Ran recycle. RanGDP is transported from the cytosol back to the nucleus by NTF2. (g) Once in the nucleus, the GEF exchanges the nucleotide, leading to the formation of RanGTP.

Importin  ­ NLS

Importin  ­  IBB NLS (a)  a 

Protein­cargo

GAP (e)

(b) Cytoplasm NPC
FG Fx

RanGDP RanGDP NTF2

NE Nucleus

(f)

 (fragm) FxFG (g) RanGTP (c) GEF (d)

RanGTP RanBD

NLS 

 (fragm) RanGTP
Current Opinion in Cell Biology

binding of Ran to the central region and the acidic loop of  would displace the amino-terminal part of the IBB and might cause at least local changes in the conformation of the carboxy-terminal domain of  to avoid steric clashes, progressively loosening the interaction with the IBB, which then dissociates. At present it is unclear how canonical NLSs are unloaded from . Possible mechanisms involve competition with the autoinhibitory region of the free IBB domain and/or the action of other binding partners of  in the nucleus. The precise mechanism might not be identical for the different NLSs [18,26].

NPC docking and mechanism of translocation

The importin  family of receptors associates with the NPC to mediate translocation. NPCs are composed of multiple copies of 30 to 50 different proteins called nucleoporins, which often contain clusters of several phenylalanine-glycine (FG) dipeptide repeats. In vitro and in yeast two-hybrid assays, the repeated FG domains of nucleoporins interact with multiple transport receptors, and it has been proposed that they provide an interaction surface for receptors moving across the central channel of the pore ([27], see Forbes pp 363­375 of this issue). The molecular determinants of a specific case of FG-repeat docking have been seen in the structure of an amino-terminal

fragment of importin  in a complex with contiguous repeats of the yeast nucleoporin Nsp1 [28··]. Importin  uses its outer surface between HEAT 5 and 7 to interact with these FG repeats (Figure 2b). The binding sites are compatible with the structure of  bound to the IBB but not with the structure of  bound to RanGTP. Indeed, despite the fact that RanGTP binds at the inner surface of the amino-terminal domain of importin , it causes a conformational change at the outer surface that occludes the FG-binding sites [25··,28··]. Binding of RanGTP to  would therefore not only release the IBB or the cargo but would also release  from this type of binding site on the NPC. How importin ­RanGTP complexes dock back into the NPC to be exported into the cytoplasm remains open to question. It is possible that other HEAT repeats are involved in importin ­nucleoporin interaction during export. NPC passage of transport receptors on their own or in association with at least small cargoes is not obligatorily coupled to hydrolysis of GTP by Ran (reviewed in [1]). Given that energy is not required for one round of translocation, two working models have been proposed to explain the mechanism of movement through the pore. Both models postulate that the central channel of the NPC is occupied by a dense array of filamentous FG-repeat nucleoporins, which present a significant barrier to the passive diffusion of macromolecules. In

NPC

Nucleocytoplasmic transport enters the atomic age Conti and Izaurralde

315

the `Brownian affinity gating model', binding of receptors to nucleoporins increases their residence time at the entrance of the central channel, and so their diffusion across the NPC is greatly facilitated [29··]. On the other hand, molecules that do not bind to nucleoporins are deflected away from the channel by the diffusive movement of the filamentous nucleoporins. In this model, the central channel of the NPC is a virtual gate operating by entropic exclusion of molecules that have no affinity for nucleoporins. The `dynamic sieve model' proposes that the central channel of the NPC functions as a permeability barrier built by the mutual attraction between the hydrophobic FG-repeats of nucleoporins [30··]. This might result in a meshwork that restricts the flow of most molecules. Nuclear transport receptors and receptor­cargo complexes, however, can be incorporated into the meshwork because they interact with the FG-repeats of nucleoporins and locally compete for binding, owing to their mutual attraction. The translocating species could then selectively partition into the central channel and use this selective `solvation' to cross the permeability barrier at a high rate. Kinetic studies in combination with computer simulations may permit determination of which of these models best accounts for the high rate of NPC translocation, which is much higher than anticipated. For example, a single NPC is capable of translocating 1,000 transportin molecules per second [30··].

Although a contribution of the importin -related transport receptors to mRNA export cannot be ruled out, several lines of evidence indicate that human TAP (also known as NXF1) and its yeast ortholog Mex67p may function as export receptors for mRNA [1,4,32]. TAP and Mex67p are distinct from the importin -like receptors. Therefore different mechanisms from those described above may account for the selectivity and directionality of mRNA export. TAP and Mex67p belong to an evolutionarily conserved family of proteins known as the nuclear export factor (NXF) family [33·]. As expected for a nuclear mRNA export receptor, TAP and Mex67p bind directly to nucleoporins [32,33·,34·,35,36] and can be crosslinked to polyadenylated RNAs [34·,37]. S. cerevisiae Mex67p and the Caenorhabditis elegans protein NXF1 are essential for the export of bulk polyadenylated RNAs to the cytoplasm [38,39··]. Direct evidence for a role in mRNA export has also been obtained recently for Drosophila melanogaster NXF1 (A Herold, E Izaurralde, unpublished data) and human TAP [40]. Furthermore, human TAP has been directly implicated in the export of simian type D retroviral RNAs bearing the constitutive transport element (CTE) [41·,42]. The current hypothesis is that NXFs function as export receptors by bridging the interaction between cellular mRNP export cargoes and the NPC [32,33·]. But before this conclusion can be confirmed, it will be necessary to determine how NXFs confer directionality on the export process. The NXF family has several members in metazoans [33·]. This multiplicity might reflect an adaptation to tissue-specific requirements or, alternatively, to a greater substrate complexity in higher eukaryotes as compared to yeast. Consistent with the first possibility is the observation that human NXF5 is mainly expressed in the brain, and interruption of the nxf5 gene by a chromosomal inversion has been recently associated with one case of male mental retardation (G Froyen, P Maryen, personal communication). Note that a different function from export cannot currently be excluded for some of these proteins. Phylogenetic analysis of the NXF protein sequences, homology searches and the elucidation of the crystal structure of the amino-terminal domain of TAP show that NXFs have a conserved modular domain organization [33·]. The structural building units of these proteins are an RNP-type RNA-binding domain (RBD) [43], a leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domain [38,43], a middle region showing significant sequence similarity to NTF2 [44] and a carboxy-terminal region related to ubiquitin associated (UBA) domains (the UBA-like domain) ([44]; Figure 3). The LRR and the NTF2-like domains are the most conserved features of NXF proteins [33]. The NTF2-like domain of metazoan NXFs binds to p15 (also known as NXT), a small nuclear protein also related to NTF2 [34·,45]. Unlike NTF2, which forms homodimers,

NXF: a distinct family of export receptors mediates the nuclear exit of mRNA

The importin ­RanGTP complex is recycled to the cytoplasm where GTP hydrolysis on bound Ran is stimulated by the concerted action of RanGAP, RanBP1 and/or RanBP2 (Figure 2e). Ran is resistant to RanGAP-mediated GTP hydrolysis when bound to importins [1,5], probably due to the inaccessibility of the switch regions in such a complex (Figure 1b). Ran becomes susceptible to RanGAP-mediated GTP hydrolysis when bound to the RanBD of RanBP1 or RanBP2 [1]. The RanBDs can access RanGTP even when it is in a complex with , as they recognize the carboxy-terminal helix of Ran, which is exposed to solvent in RanGTP­importin complexes (Figure 1e; [16··,25··]). The recognition of different regions on the surface of Ran by its cofactors allows their consecutive binding and therefore the progression of the nuclear import cycle. Importins and exportins constantly export RanGTP into the cytoplasm, where it is converted into RanGDP. RanGDP can then diffuse back into the nucleus, but its nuclear uptake is facilitated by NTF2 (also known as p10), which recognizes, particularly, the GDP-conformation of the switch II region of Ran (Figure 2f; [31]). In the nucleus, RanGEF promotes the conversion of RanGDP into RanGTP (Figure 2g). Finally, importin  is exported by a dedicated exportin (also known as CAS or Cse1p) with which it associates in the nucleus in the presence of RanGTP and from which it dissociates in the cytoplasm by the action of RanGAP and RanBP1/RanBP2 [1,2,5].

Recycling of adaptors, receptors and Ran completes the import cycle

316

Nucleus and gene expression

Figure 3 Intronless mRNAs m7GAAAA m7GIntron-containing mRNAs AAAA The mRNA export pathway. The proteins REFs (Aly/Yra1p), SRm160, DEK, Y14 and RNPS1 preferentially associate with spliced mRNAs and may facilitate the recruitment of TAP­p15 heterodimers (or other export factors) to mRNP complexes. REFs also facilitate the export of some intronless mRNAs most likely by facilitating binding of TAP­p15 heterodimers. Note that the precise order of association of these proteins with the mRNA is unknown, and how these proteins interact with each other needs to be determined. TAP and its yeast ortholog Mex67p belong to the evolutionarily conserved family of NXF proteins and have a modular domain organization. TAP domains indicated in the figure are as follows: RBD, RNP-type RNAbinding domain; LRR, leucine rich repeat domain; NTF2-like, domain showing sequence and structural similarities with NTF2. The NTF2-like domain heterodimerizes with p15, which is also related to NTF2. The UBA-like domain exhibits sequence similarities to ubiquitin associated domains and is necessary, but not sufficient, for the localization of TAP and Mex67p at the NPC in vivo. The LRR, NTF2-like and UBA-like domains are also present in Mex67p, however, there is no p15 homolog encoded by the yeast genome, and in S. cerevisiae Mex67p binds to Mtr2p, a protein that may be a functional analog of p15. The dissociation of the receptor­RNP complexes in the cytoplasm occurs by an unknown mechanism that may implicate the RNA helicase Dbp5. Abbreviations: m7G, cap structure present in all polymerase II transcribed RNAs; AAAA, polyA tails.

Splicing

SRm160 REF m7GAAAA m7GRNPS1 REF DEK AAAA Y14

NTF2 like TAP­p15 heterodimers

RB

D

LRR

UBA

p15

NE NPC Dbp5
Current Opinion in Cell Biology

p15 heterodimerizes with the NTF2-like domain of NXF proteins [44]. The NTF2-like domain also occurs in Mex67p, although there is no obvious p15 homolog encoded by the yeast genome [34·,44]. In S. cerevisiae Mex67p, this domain is implicated in the interaction with a protein known as Mtr2p [37,46], which might be functionally analogous to p15 [34·,44]. Formation of TAP­p15 and Mex67p­Mtr2p heterodimers is required for efficient export of mRNAs to the cytoplasm [40,46]. Direct binding of NXFs to nucleoporins is mediated by a carboxy-terminal NPC-binding domain comprising the UBA-like domain [32,33·,44]. Deletion of the UBA-like domain from metazoan NXFs or Mex67p prevents their localization to the nuclear pore in vivo [32,33·,35,39··,46], indicating that the mode of interaction of NXFs with nucleoporins is likely to be conserved. Moreover, the NPC-binding domain of TAP competes with the importin like proteins for binding sites at the NPC [32], suggesting similarities in the mode of FG nucleoporin interactions between -like transport factors and NXFs. However, while the interactions of -like receptors with their cargo and with nucleoporins are regulated by Ran, the mechanisms by

which NXFs regulate their binding to the NPC and release their cargoes after translocation are unknown. It has been proposed that Dbp5, an RNA helicase essential for mRNA export in yeast that localizes at the cytoplasmic face of the NPC, may disrupt mRNA­protein interactions as the mRNP emerges from the NPC, but direct evidence for this hypothesis is still lacking [47·­49·].

Splicing: the safe way to the cytoplasm
There is increasing evidence that splicing can influence mRNA export as well as the translational activity and stability of an mRNA in the cytoplasm. The process termed nonsense-mediated decay (NMD), which serves to degrade mutant mRNAs with premature translation termination codons [50], best illustrates this. The position of a stop codon relative to the most 3 intron determines whether it is interpreted as being premature or normal in mammalian cells. This gave rise to the concept that splicing might deposit a mark at sites where an intron has been removed (exon­exon junctions). These marks would remain associated with mRNAs during nuclear export and could be used as a reference to define a stop codon as premature (upstream of the last mark) or normal (downstream of the last mark).

Nucleocytoplasmic transport enters the atomic age Conti and Izaurralde

317

Several proteins that associate with mRNAs during splicing and distinguish spliced from unspliced mRNAs have recently been identified [51··,52··,53·­55·]. These include Y14, REF/Aly, RNPS1, DEK and SRm160. These proteins are components of a 340 kDa complex that binds 20­24 nucleotides upstream of a splice junction in a splicingdependent but sequence-independent manner [51··,52··]. Although it is not yet clear how such a large complex can bind to RNA with high affinity in a sequence-independent manner, the complex meets the prediction for the hypothetical splicing mark. In addition to its putative role in NMD, this complex or some of its components can be expected to influence the transport, translation or stability of spliced mRNAs. A role for this complex in mRNA export is suggested by the observation that some of its components have been shown to interact, directly or indirectly, with TAP [53·,56·­58·]. Furthermore, direct evidence of a role for vertebrate REFs in mRNA export has been reported [58·,59]. There is no obvious yeast homolog of Y14, SRm160, DEK and RNPS1, but a S. cerevisiae homolog of REF, Yra1p, interacts with Mex67p and is essential for mRNA export from the nucleus [56·,57·]. The fact that the spliceosome deposits a complex containing TAP-binding proteins at exon­exon junctions implies that splicing guarantees the recruitment of TAP, and hence the export of spliced mRNAs in a sequence-independent manner. In contrast, export of unspliced mRNAs would depend on their ability to recruit TAP or other export factors efficiently, which may depend in turn on their primary sequence and/or their length [40,58]. This provides a rationale for understanding the observation that expression of some specific genes in mammalian cells is highly stimulated by the presence of an intron, whereas mRNAs transcribed from the corresponding cDNAs are expressed poorly ([59] and references therein). Indeed, the presence of an intron might confer a kinetic advantage to mRNAs generated by splicing, versus the corresponding cDNA-derived mRNAs, when competing with other mRNAs for export factors. Splicing is not obligatory for export, though, as several mRNAs that do not contain introns, such as the histone mRNAs, are exported efficiently. The histone H2a mRNA appears to have a sequence element that efficiently recruits the splicing factors SRp20 and 9G8 [60]. The involvement of pre-mRNA processing factors in mRNA export appears to be a more general phenomenon than anticipated [61], but regardless of the particular set of RNA-binding proteins that are recruited by a given mRNA, the available evidence suggests that spliced and unspliced mRNAs share common factors for export, including TAP­p15 heterodimers [40,58·].

remain to be elucidated. In particular, the export pathway of ribosomal subunits is an important challenge, although some factors involved in this process are already emerging (reviewed in [62]). Moreover, many questions still remain unanswered in the mRNA export pathway. What are the mechanisms for the selectivity and directionality of this process? What are the roles of the different NXFs in metazoans? How many different pathways from the nucleus are available to mRNAs? Another protein that exhibits several of the characteristic features of a nuclear export receptor is RAE1/Gle2p [1,4]. This protein plays an essential role in mRNA export in S. pombe [1,4] but a direct role in mRNA export in higher eukaryotes has not yet been demonstrated. It is now abundantly clear that nuclear protein import and export are regulated (reviewed in [1,63]). It is therefore anticipated that RNA export might also be controlled. A clear example of mRNA export regulation occurs in response to stress or heat-shock when export of most cellular mRNAs is shut down although transcripts encoding heat-shock proteins are exported [2,4]. Furthermore, a number of viruses appear to have evolved the ability to regulate nuclear transport processes in the host cell, and we might expect that similar cellular mechanisms exist. The structures of various components of the transport machinery have revealed and explained more than expected, although a considerably larger number of structures will need to be solved before we have a comprehensive understanding of nuclear transport processes. Future crystallographic studies should seek to answer several questions. Why does RanGTP binding to exportins result in association with their cargo rather than in cargo release as in the case of the importins? What are the molecular determinants that make a HEAT-repeat karyopherin behave as an exportin or as an importin? How are nucleoporin­receptor interactions regulated during import and export? But, even the crystal structure of the nuclear pore complex at atomic resolution is unlikely to provide information on the mechanism of translocation. Imaging techniques combined with studies in living cells are expected to fill the gap between our current static view of the transport machinery and the amazingly transient and dynamic interactions that must occur during NPC translocation.

Acknowledgements
We apologize to colleagues whose original work we could not cite due to limitations of space. We thank all members of our laboratories and our colleagues in the Gene Expression Program for critical reading and helpful comments on the manuscript. We are very grateful to Petra Riedinger and Udo Ringeisen for helping with the schematic drawings.

Conclusions
Recent years have seen dramatic progress in the identification of novel members of the importin  family and the elucidation of transport pathways for several proteins and RNA molecules. However, several `orphan' receptors await the identification of their cargoes, and major export pathways

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

· of special interest ·· of outstanding interest
1. Görlich D, Kutay U: Transport between the cell nucleus and the cytoplasm. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1999, 15:607-660.

318

Nucleus and gene expression

2. 3. 4. 5. 6.

Mattaj IW, Englmeier L: Nucleocytoplasmic transport: the soluble phase. Annu Rev Biochem 1998, 67:256-306. Pemberton LC, Blobel G, Rosenblum J: Transport routes through the nuclear pore complex. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1998, 10:392-399. Nakielny S, Dreyfuss G: Transport of proteins and RNAs in and out of the nucleus. Cell 1999, 99:677-690. Weis K: Importins and exportins: how to get in and out of the nucleus. Trends Biochem Sci 1998, 23:185-189. Görlich D, Henklein P, Laskey RA, Hartmann E: A 41 amino acid   motif in importin- confers binding to importin- and hence transit into the nucleus. EMBO J 1996, 15:1810-1817. Weis K, Ryder U, Lamond AI: The conserved amino-terminal domain of hSRP1 alpha is essential for nuclear protein import. EMBO J 1996, 15:7120-7128. Jakel S, Gorlich D: Importin beta, transportin, RanBP5 and RanBP7 mediate nuclear import of ribosomal proteins in mammalian cells. EMBO J 1998 17:4491­502. Xiao Z, Liu X, Lodish HF: Importin beta mediates nuclear translocation of Smad 3. J Biol Chem 2000, 275:23425-23428.

21. Conti E, Kuriyan J: Crystallographic analysis of the specific yet versatile recognition of distinct nuclear localization signals by karyopherin . Structure 2000, 8:329-338. 22. Fontes MR, Teh T, Kobe B: Structural basis of recognition of monopartite and bipartite nuclear localization sequence in mammalian importin . J Mol Biol 2000, 297:1183-1194. 23. Scheffzek K, Klebe C, Fritz-Woolf K, Kabsch W, Wittinghofer A: Crystal structure of the nuclear Ras-related protein Ran in its GDP-bound form. Nature 1995, 374:378-381. 24. Vetter IR, Nowak C, Nishimoto T, Kuhlmann J, Wittinghofer A: Structure of a Ran-binding domain complexed with Ran bound to a GTP analogue: implications for nuclear transport. Nature 1999, 396: 474-477. 25. Vetter IR, Arndt A, Kutay U, Görlich D, Wittinghofer A: Structural view ·· of the Ran-Importin  interaction at 2.3 Å resolution. Cell 1999, 97:635-646. This paper describes the structure of RanGTP bound to an amino-terminal fragment of importin . Ran interacts with the importin using surfaces that do not overlap with those required for interacting with the Ran-binding domain of RanBP2 (24). A model for importin ­RanGTP disassembly upon RanBDassisted and RanGAP-mediated GTP hydrolysis is proposed. 26. Hodel MR, Corbett AH, Hodel AE: Dissection of a nuclear localization signal. J Biol Chem 2000, 276:1317-1325. 27. Ryan K, Wente SR: The nuclear pore complex: a protein machine bridging the nucleus and cytoplasm. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2000, 12:361-371.

7.

8.

9.

10. Henderson BR, Percipalle P: Interactions between HIV Rev and nuclear import and export factors: the Rev nuclear localisation signal mediates specific binding to human importin-beta. J Mol Biol 1997 274:693-707. 11. Truant R, Cullen BR: The arginine-rich domains present in human immunodeficiency virus type I Tat and Rev functions as direct importin -dependent nuclear localization signals. Mol Cell Biol 1999, 19:1210-1217. 12. Jakel S, Albig W, Kutay U, Bischoff FR, Schwamborn K, Doenecke D, Gorlich D: The importin beta/importin 7 heterodimer is a functional nuclear import receptor for histone H1. EMBO J 1999, 18:2411-2423. 13. Rout MP, Blobel G, Aitchison JD: A distinct nuclear import pathway used by ribosomal proteins. Cell 1997, 89:715-725. 14. Andrade MA, Petosa C, O'Donoghue SI, Müller CW, Bork P: Comparison of ARM and HEAT protein repeats. J Mol Biol 2001, in press  15. Cingolani G, Petosa C, Weis K, Müller CW: Structure of importin-  ·· bound to the IBB domain of importin-. Nature 1999, 399:221-229. This crystallographic analysis shows that importin  (Kap 1) is tightly curled up around the IBB domain of importin . The authors performed proteolysis experiments to test the flexibility of importin  when free and when bound to importin , which indicated a more compact conformation in the latter case. The structural and biochemical studies in this paper suggest that a significant conformational change occurs when importin  binds or releases the IBB. 16. Chook YM, Blobel G: Structure of the nuclear transport complex  ·· karyopherin-2-GppNHp. Nature 1999, 399:230-237. The crystal structure of full-length Kap 2 (transportin) in complex with RanGTP shows that the HEAT-repeat molecule is shaped into two orthogonal arches, separated by a hinge region from which a very long acidic loop protrudes. The interactions of the acidic loop with Ran are described, and its possible implications in cargo binding are discussed. Please note that the HEAT repeat numbering is different in this paper from that of the importin  structures described in [15,25,28] (e.g. the acidic loop-containing HEAT 7 in transportin corresponds to HEAT8 in importin ). Conti E, Uy M, Leighton L, Blobel G, Kuriyan J: Crystallographic analysis of the recognition of a nuclear localization signal by the nuclear import factor karyopherin . Cell 1998, 94:193-204. This paper describes the first crystal structure of a nuclear targeting signal bound to its receptor. The NLS of the SV40 T antigen binds to importin  (Kap ) along a surface groove. The groove is lined by a ladder of several conserved Trp and Asn residues that binds to the main chain and side chains of the NLS peptide. A similar chemical recognition has been observed in the structure of other NLSs bound to yeast and human importin  [21,22]. 18. Kobe B: Autoinhibition by an internal nuclear localization signal revealed by the crystal structure of mammalian importin . Nature Struct Biol 1999, 6:388-397. 19. Peifer M, Berg S, Reynolds AB: A repeating amino acid motif shared by proteins with diverse cellular roles. Cell 1994, 76:789-791. 20. Malik HS, Eickbush TH, Goldfarb DS: Evolutionary specialization of the nuclear targeting apparatus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:13738-13742. 17. ··

28. Bayliss R, Littlewood T, Stewart M: Structural basis for the ·· interaction between FxFG nucleoporin repeats and importin  in nuclear trafficking. Cell 2000, 102:99-108 This structural study reveals for the first time the mode of binding of FG motifs to an importin. Mutation of residues on  that form the FG-binding site results in reduced nuclear protein import. Comparison of this  structure with those in a complex with the IBB cargo [15··] and with RanGTP [25··] shows conformational changes in the latter case that might be of functional importance. 29. Rout MP, Aitchison JD, Suprapto A, Hjertaas K, Zhao Y, Chait BT: The ·· yeast nuclear pore complex: composition, architecture, and transport mechanism. J Cell Biol 2000, 148:635-651. This manuscript provides a comprehensive overview of the composition and molecular architecture of the yeast NPC. All proteins present in a highly enriched NPC fraction were identified by mass spectrometry. After determining which of these proteins were bona fide nucleoporins, the position and the stoichiometry of each nucleoporin within the NPC was determined. A `Brownian affinity gating' mechanism for translocation of macromolecules across the NPC is presented. 30. Ribbeck K, Görlich, D: Kinetic analysis of translocation through ·· nuclear pore complexes. EMBO J 2001, 20:1320-1330. A kinetic analysis of translocation of various substrates through NPCs is presented in this manuscript. It is shown that the translocation capacity of the NPC is extremely high, with a single NPC allowing up to 1000 translocation events per second. Based on this kinetic analysis a `dynamic sieve model' for NPC translocation is proposed. One important finding of this study is that high affinity interactions between nucleoporins and the translocation substrate are dispensable for NPC passage. 31. Stewart M, Kent HM, McCoy AJ: Structural basis for molecular recognition between nuclear transport factor 2 (NTF2) and the GDP-bound form of the Ras-family GTPase Ran. J Mol Biol 1998, 277:635-646. 32. Bachi A, Baun IC, Rodrigues JP, Panté N, Ribbeck K, von Kobbe C, Kutay U, Wilm M, Görlich D, Carmo-Fonseca M, Izaurralde E: The Cterminal domain of TAP interacts with the nuclear pore complex and promotes export of specific CTE-bearing RNA substrates. RNA 2000, 6:136-158. 33. Herold A, Suyama M, Rodrigues JP, Braun IC, Kutay U, Carmo · Fonseca M, Bork P, Izaurralde E: TAP/NXF1 belongs to a multigene family of putative RNA export factors with a conserved modular architecture. Mol Cell Biol 2000, 20:8996-9008. In this paper, it is shown that human TAP and yeast Mex67p belong to an evolutionarily conserved family of proteins with a modular domain organization (see Figure 3). The crystal structure of the amino-terminal domain of TAP is described in [43]. The predicted folding of the NTF2-like domain and the NPC-binding domain is described in [44]. 34. Katahira J, Strässer K, Podtelejnikov A, Mann M, Jung JU, Hurt E: The · Mex67p-mediated nuclear mRNA export pathway is conserved from yeast to human. EMBO J 1999, 18:2593-2609. This manuscript shows that human TAP is associated with a small subunit p15 (also known as NXT), a protein related to NTF2. The observation that

Nucleocytoplasmic transport enters the atomic age Conti and Izaurralde

319

TAP/p15 heterodimers support growth of a yeast strain carrying a mex67 mtr2 double knockout provides strong evidence for a functional conservation of these proteins. 35. Bear J, Tan W, Zolotukhin AS, Tabernero C, Hudson EA, Felber BK: Identification of novel import and export signals of human TAP, the protein that binds to the CTE element of the type D retrovirus mRNAs. Mol Cell Biol 1999, 19:6306-6317. 36. Strawn LA, Shen T, Wente SR: The GLFG region of Nup116p and Nup100p serve as binding sites for both Kap95p and Mex67p at the nuclear pore complex. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:6445-6452. 37. Santos-Rosa H, Moreno H, Simos G, Segref A, Fahrenkrog B, Panté N, Hurt E: Nuclear mRNA export requires complex formation between Mex67p and Mtr2p at the nuclear pores. Mol Cell Biol 1998, 18:6826-6838.

a conserved interaction with CAN/Nup159p. EMBO J 1999, 18:4332-4347. These three manuscripts [47·­49·] show that a DEAD-box RNA helicase known as Dbp5 is essential for mRNA nuclear export in S. cerevisiae and plays a role in this process in higher eukaryotes. The helicase is mainly cytoplasmic but a fraction of the protein is recruited to the cytoplasmic fibrils of the NPC by a direct interaction with the nucleoporin CAN/Nup159p. Although, RNA helicases are implicated in all steps of RNA metabolism, including splicing and translation, Dbp5 is the first helicase shown to play a direct role in mRNA nuclear export. 50. Hentze MW, Kulozik AE: A perfect message: RNA Surveillance a nonsense-mediated decay. Cell 1999, 96:307-310. 51. Le Hir H, Moore MJ, Maquat LE: Pre-mRNA splicing alters mRNP ·· composition:evidence for stable association of proteins at exonexon junctions. Genes Dev 2000, 14:1098-1108. See annotation [52··]. 52. Le Hir H, Izaurralde E, Maquat LE, Moore MJ: The spliceosome ·· deposits multiple proteins 20-24 nucleotides upstream of mRNA exon-exon junctions. EMBO J 2000, 19:6860-6869. These two manuscripts [51··,52··] show that the spliceosome deposits a multiprotein complex at exon­exon junctions. Components of this complex are proteins that have been individually shown to associate preferentially with spliced mRNAs. These proteins are Y14, REF/Aly, RNPS1, SRm160 and DEK, and these are described in references [53­58]. A role of this complex in mRNA nuclear export is suggested by the observation that some of its components bind to TAP directly or indirectly. 53. Kataoka N, Yong J, Kim VN, Velazquez F, Perkinson RA, Wang F, · Dreyfuss G: Pre-mRNA splicing imprints mRNA in the nucleus with a novel RNA-binding protein that persists in the cytoplasm. Mol Cell 2000, 6:673-682. See annotation [52··]. Zhou Z, Luo M-J, Strasser K, Katahira J, Hurt E, Reed R: The protein Aly links pre-messenger-RNA splicing to nuclear export in metazoans. Nature 2000, 407:401-405. See annotation [52··]. 55 · McGarvey T, Rosonina E, McCracken S, Li Q, Arnaout R, Mientjes E, Nickerson AJ, Awrey D, Greenblatt J, Grosveld G, Blencowe BJ: The acute myeloid leukemia-associated protein DEK forms a splicingdependent intercation with exon-product complexes. J Cell Biol 2000, 150:309-320. See annotation [52··]. 56. Stutz F, Bachi A, Doerks T, Braun IC, Séraphin, Wilm M, Bork P, · Izaurralde E: REF, an evolutionarily conserved family of hnRNP-like proteins, interacts with TAP/Mex67p and participates in mRNA nuclear export. RNA 2000, 6: 638-650. See annotation [58·]. Sträer K, Hurt E: Yra1p, a conserved nuclear RNA-binding protein, interacts directly with Mex67p and is required for mRNA export. EMBO J 2000, 19: 410-420. See annotation [58·]. 58. Rodrigues JP, Rode M, Gatfield D, Blencowe BJ, Carmo-Fonseca M, · Izaurralde E: REF proteins mediate the export of spliced and unspliced mRNAs from the nucleus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:1030-1035. References [56­58] show that an RNA-binding protein known as Yra1p in S. cerevisiae and Aly in mouse is essential for mRNA nuclear export in yeast and is also implicated in this process in higher eukaryotes. It is not yet known whether the metazoan proteins are essential. [56] shows that Yra1p and Aly belong to an evolutionarily conserved family of proteins, having more than one member per species. These proteins are collectively called REFs. 59. Luo M-J, Reed R: Splicing is required for rapid and efficient mRNA export in metazoans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:14937-14942. 60. Huang Y, Steitz JA: Splicing factors SRp20 and 9G8 promote the nucleocytoplasmic export of mRNA. Mol Cell 2001, in press. 61. Brodsky A, Silver PA: Pre-mRNA processing factors are required for nuclear export. RNA 2000, 6:1737-1749. 62. Aitchison JD, Rout MP: The road to ribosomes. Filling potholes in the export pathway. J Cell Biol 2000, 151:F23-F26 63. Komeili A, O'Shea EK: Nuclear transport and transcription. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2000, 12:355-360. 57. · 54 ·

38. Segref A, Sharma K, Doye V, Hellwig A, Huber J, Lührmann R, Hurt E: Mex67p, a novel factor for nuclear mRNA rexport binds to both + poly(A)+ RNA and nuclear pores. EMBO J 1997, 16:3256-3271. 39. Tan W, Zolotukhin AS, Bear J, Patenaude DJ, Felber BK: The mRNA ·· export in C. elegans is mediated by Ce-NXF-1, an ortholog of human TAP/NXF1 and S. cerevisiae Mex67p. RNA 2000, 6:1762-1772. This manuscript provides for the first time direct evidence of an essential role for a metazoan NXF protein in mRNA nuclear export. The essential role of the S. cerevisiae orthologue Mex67p in mRNA nuclear export was already demonstrated in 1997 [38]. 40. Braun IC, Herold A, Rode M, Conti E, Izaurraldo E: Overexpression of TAP/p15 heterodimers bypasses nuclear retention and stimulates nuclear mRNA export. J Biol Chem 2001, in press and available at www.jbc.org. 41. Grüter P, Tabernero C, von Kobbe C, Schmitt C, Saavedra C, Bachi A, · Wilm M, Felber BK, Izaurralde E: TAP, the human homologue of Mex67p, mediates CTE-dependent RNA export from the nucleus. Mol Cell 1998, 1:649-659. This manuscript shows that human TAP is recruited by the constitutive transport element (CTE) of simian type D retroviruses to promote export of their genomic RNA. This provided the first evidence for a role of TAP in RNA nuclear export. 42. Kang Y, Cullen BR: The human TAP protein is a nuclear mRNA export factor that contains novel RNA-binding and nucleocytoplasmic transport sequences. Genes Dev 1999, 13:1126-1139. 43. Liker E, Fernandez E, Izaurralde E, Conti E: The structure of the mRNA nuclear export factor TAP reveals a cis arrangement of a non-canonical RNP domain and an LRR domain. EMBO J 2000, 19:5587-5598. 44. Suyama M, Doerks T, Braun IC, Sattler M, Izaurralde E, Bork P: A novel domain reveals details of the TAP/p15 interaction in nuclear export. EMBO reports 2000, 1:53-58. 45. Black BE, Lévesque L, Holaska JM, Wood TC, Paschal, B: Identification of an NTF2-related factor that binds RanGTP and regulates nuclear protein export. Mol Cell Biol 1999, 19:8616-8624. 46. Sträer K, Baler J, Hurt E: Binding of the Mex67p/Mtr2p heterodimer to FXFG, GLFG, and FG repeat nucleoporins is essential for nuclear mRNA export. J Cell Biol 2000, 150:695-706. Tseng SS-I, Weaver PL, Hitomi M, Tartakoff AM, Chang .-H: Dbp5p, + a cytosolic RNA helicase, is required for poly(A)+ RNA export. EMBO J 1998, 17:2651-2662. See annotation [49·]. 48. Snay-Hodge C, Colot H, Goldstein AL, Cole CN: Dbp5p/Rat8p is a · yeast nuclear pore-associated DEAD-box protein essential for RNA export. EMBO J 1998, 17:2663-2676. See annotation [49·]. 49. Schmitt C, von Kobbe C, Bachi A, Panté N, Rodrigues JP, · Boscheron C, Rigaut G, Wilm M, Séraphin B, Carmo-Fonseca M, Izaurralde E: Dbp5, a DEAD box-protein required for mRNA export, is recruited to the cytoplasmic fibrils of Nuclear Pore Complex via 47. ·

