Matrix Biology Vol. 15/1997, pp. 555- 565 © 1997by GustavFischerVerlag

(z-Helical Coiled-Coil Oligomerization Domains in Extracellular Proteins
RICHARD A. K A M M E R E R
Department of Biophysical Chemistry, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland

Abstract
Subunit oligomerization of many proteins is mediated by ix-helical coiled-coil domains. 3,4-Hydrophobic heptad repeat sequences, the characteristic feature of the coiled-coil protein folding motif, have been found in a wide variety of gene products including cytoskeletal, nuclear, muscle, cell surface, extracellular, plasma, bacterial, and viral proteins. Whereas the majority of coiledcoil structures is represented by intracellular (x-helical bundles that contain two polypeptide chains, examples of extracellular coiled-coil proteins are fewer in number. Most proteins located in the extracellular space form three-stranded ix-helical assemblies. Recently, five-stranded coiled coils have been identified in thrombospondins 3 and 4 and in cartilage oligomeric matrix protein, and the formation of a heterotetramer has been observed in in vitro studies with the recombinant asialoglycoprotein receptor oligomerization domain. Coiled-coil domains in laminins and probably also in tenascins and thrombospondins are responsible for the formation of tissue-specific isoforms by selective oligomerization of different polypeptide chains. Key words: ¢~-helical coiled-coil oligomerization domain, amphipatic ix-helix, heptad repeat, hydrophobic channel, isoforms, knobs-into-holes packing, pentamer, trimer, SP-D-lung surfactant protein D, CD-circular dichroism, NMR-nuclear magnetic resonance Introduction A characteristic feature of the extracellular matrix is that most of its components are large complex glycoproteins that often consist of repeating sequence motifs. These socalled modular proteins contain a remarkable variety of structurally autonomous domains. Related domains are frequently found in several different extracellular proteins. Although the modules are frequently functionally independent, cooperativity between different or repeating domains has also been observed (Engel, 1996). An important aspect of the extracellular organization is that many of its components assemble into heterotypic and homotypic multimers. In many cases, multimerization involves ix-helical coiledcoil domains. Ix-Helical coiled coils are simple structures 1Abbreviations used: ASGP, asialoglycoprotein; CMP, cartilage matrix protein; COMP, cartilige oligomeric matrix protein; CRD, carbohydrate-recognition domain; LN, laminin; MBP, mannan binding protein; TN, tenascin; TSP,thrombospondin. that are stabilized by hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions between ct-helices. Two to five right-handed amphipatic ix-helices wrap around each other in a slight left-handed supercoil to remove their apolar residues from the aqueous medium. The left-handed superturn of the coiled coil is the consequence of the small difference between the 3.5 residue average periodicity in the linear distribution of hydrophobic residues compared to 3.6 residues per turn in a regular idealized (,-helix. Hence, coiled-coil proteins can be characterized by a heptad repeat of seven residues denoted a to g (Hodges et al., 1972; McLachlan and Stewart, 1975; Cohen and Parry, 1990), in which the a and d positions are occupied predominantly by hydrophobic residues, whereas polar amino acids are generally found elsewhere. The apolar residues form the hydrophobic interface between the helices. The structure is stabilized by the packing of "knobs" formed by the hydrophobic side chains of one helix into "holes" formed by the spaces between side chains of neighboring helices (Crick, 1953). Although the hydrophobic interactions seem to represent the major driving

556

R.A. Kammerer core and is approximately parallel to the Cc~-C0~ vector at the bottom of the facing hole formed by the spaces between the side chains of the residues at a' and g' sites. At this position, a ]3-branched residue efficiently packs in the center of the structure. In contrast, perpendicular packing is observed at d positions (Fig. 2B): the Cot-C]3 vector of the core residue is directed roughly perpendicular to the d'Cot-e'Cix vector of the adjacent helix. In this case the ~' carbon atom projects out of the hydrophobic core, but the 8 atom moves back into the cavity, resulting in excellent geometric complementarity between symmetry-related side chains. Notably, a [3-branched amino acid cannot be accomodated in this position unless it adopts a thermodynamically unfavorable rotamer. Trimers (Fig. 1B) show different arrangements of a and d core residues in which the corresponding Cct-C]3 vectors of the side chains form an acute angle with the a'Cc(-g'Cc~ and d'Co~-e'Cc~ vectors, respectively, of the neighboring helices (Fig. 2, C and D; Harbury et al., 1994). Consistent with these structural patterns, the oligomer interface in trimers contains a more even distribution of hydrophobic side chains at the a and d positions. Dimers can tolerate large hyrophilic residues at a positions because the polar atoms of the residue's side chain point out of the hydrophobic core and are solvent-accessible. In a trimeric structure, these atoms would probably be buried. In contrast, trimeric coiled coils are enriched in glutamine at the a sites. The different distributions of polar residues indicate that the polarity is not the only determinant of oligomer specification and, as with the hydrophobic amino acids, the complementarity of the side chain shape with the distinct structures of dimers and trimers must also be important. Residues in positions e and g of the heptad repeat flank the core residues at a and d sites in the coiled coil. Consequently, amino acids at the e and g sites may influence the oligomerization specification of coiled-coil structures. Compared to the corresponding sites in dimers, the e and g positions of trimers are enriched in hydrophobic residues and depleted of hydrophilic residues (Conway and Parry, 1991; Woolfson et al., 1995). These observations are consistent with the extension of the hydrophobic interface of trimers, relative to that of dimers, to partially include the e and g sites (Harbury et al., 1994). Limited information is available on the principles that determine the specificity of four-stranded coiled coils (Fig. 1C), and nothing is known about the determinants that govern the formation of five-stranded R-helical bundles (Fig. ID), since few of these structures have been characterized (Harbury et al., 1993; Fairman et al., 1995, 1996; Friedman et al., 1995; Malashkevich et al., 1996). In contrast to the differences between two- and three-stranded coiled coils, the differences between four- and five-stranded coiled coils are less pronounced and more subtle (Malashkevich et al., 1996). This suggests that the determinants dis-

force for the stabilization of coiled-coil structures (Harbury et al., 1993), ionic interactions between the side chains of different helices are considered relevant to stability, orientation, and stoichiometry of coiled coils (Monera et al., 1993, 1994; Krylov et al., 1994; Zhou et al., 1994a, 1994b). A characteristic feature of coiled-coil domains in extracellular proteins is that they can be either three- or fivestranded, as exemplified by the laminins (LNs) and cartilige oligomeric matrix protein (COMP), respectively. As an exception to this rule, the isolated oligomerization domain of the asialoglycoprotein (ASGP) receptor was shown to fold into a heterotetramer Bider et al., 1996. In many cases, the oligomeric structures are composed of identical subunits, as for example in COMP, cartilage matrix protein (CMP), the tenascins (TNs), or the members of the thrombospondin (TSP) gene family. In other proteins like fibrinogen or LNs, the association of different gene products to heterotypic assemblies is an essential feature. Multimeric extra cellular complexes are frequently stabilized by disulfide bonds between the subunits. In contrast to their intracellular counterparts, extracellular coiled-coil domains are therefore frequently flanked by pairs of closely-spaced cysteine residues that are involved in interchain disulfide bonds. In the last few years, some extracellular coiled-coil oligomerization domains have been characterized, and they are reviewed here.

Oligomerization States of Coiled Coils
Although all coiled coils share the characteristic 3,4-hydrophobic repeat pattern, they can form helical structures with different oligomerization states (Fig. 1). Parallel, fivestranded coiled coils and two-, three-, and four-stranded c~helical bundles with parallel and antiparallel helices have been described, with the most prominent classes being parallel dimers and trimers (for review, see Lupas, 1996a). The diversity of coiled-coil structures suggests that features superimposed on the heptad repeat pattern must account for the different oligomerization states. The residues at the a and d positions exert a major influence on oligomer selection. Crucial roles in oligomer specification are played by leucine and the [3-branched residue isoleucine (Harbury et al., 1993). Dimers (Fig. IA) are favored by sequences enriched in isoleucine at the a sites and leucine at d. At the same time, isoleucine is strongly depleted at the d positions of dimers. The preferences for specific amino acids at the core positions of coiled coils can be explained by differences in packing geometry in these structures. Crystal structures of dimers revealed two types of packing, termed parallel and perpendicular (Harbury et al., 1993). The residues at the a positions of two-stranded coiled coils display parallel packing (Fig. 2A): the Co~-C[3 vector (knob) of the hydrophobic residue points out of the

Extracellular Coiled-Coil D o m a i n s

557

A

C

B

D

G @ @ @
Fig. 1. Schematic helical wheel representations of parallel two-stranded (A), three-stranded (B), four-stranded (C), and five-stranded (D) coiled-coil oligomerization domains seen from their N-terminal ends. Heptad positions are indicated by lowercase letters. The tetramer and the pentamer structures both contain a large axial cavity. The channel in the tetramer varies from 1.0 to 1.3 ]k (Harbury et al., 1993) and therefore excludes water molecules (radius 1.4 ]k). In contrast, several water molecules were found along the pore of the pentamer. This finding is consistent with the larger diameter of the channel, which varies from 2 to 6 ]k due to the constrictions of the a and d layers (Malashkevich et al., 1996).

558

R.A. Kammerer

A

B

surface area is buried in the tetramer and the pentamer than in the dimer. Compared to the side chains of isolated helices, residues at the a, d, e, and g positions of the tetramer and pentamer are substantially buried; residues at the b and c sites are partially buried in the tetramer and substantially buried in the pentamer; only the f positions remain completely exposed in both structures. The residues at the b and c positions flank those at the e and g sites of the hydrophobic core in the tetramer and the pentamer. Consequently, the type of amino acid at these sites may influence the stability of the structures.

Identification of Coiled-Coil Sequences

C

D

Fig. 2. Comparison of the packing geometries at coiled-coil interfaces. In dimers, the residues at the a sites show parallel packing (A), and perpendicular packing (B) is observed at the d positions. The packing types are reversed in tetramers and pentamers (not shown). In contrast, trimers show an intermediate arrangement of their core residue side chains termed acute packing (C and D).

criminating between the two oligomerization states may be similar. The side chain packing between pairs of helices in the tetramer and the pentamer shows considerable geometric similarity to the packing of the dimer. However, the local packing geometries at the a and d positions are reversed. In tetrameric and pentameric coiled coils, packing at the a level resembles that at the d level of dimers and vice versa. More

Two computer search routines frequently used to analyze protein sequences for coiled-coil propensities, COILS version 2.2 and PAIRCOIL, are both based on an algorithm developed by Parry (1982). COILS version 2.2 (Lupas, 1996b) represents an extension of the original program described by Lupas et al. (1991). It is available at http://ulrec3.unil.ch on the World Wide Web (WWW), or it can be downloaded with additional documentation by anonymous FTP from the Coils/vms folder of the server FTP.BIOCHEM.MPG.DE. The program compares a given sequence to databases of known two-stranded coiled-coil sequences and derives a similarity score. The updated version allows the use of three scanning window sizes (14, 21, and 28 residues) and two scoring matrices. The MTK matrix is described by Lupas et al. (1991) and is derived from the sequences of myosins, tropomyosins, and keratins. MTIDK represents a new coiled-coil sequence profile derived from myosins, paramyosins, tropomyosins, intermediate filaments I to V, desmosomal proteins, and kinesins. Differences between the two matrices include better resolution between globular and coiled-coil proteins, fewer high-scoring segments in globular proteins, and higher specificity for two-stranded coiled-coil structures. In addition, the core residues can be weightened 2.5 times to put an increased emphasis on the continuity of the 3,4-hydrophobic repeat. COILS version 2.2 is specific for solvent-exposed left-handed coiled coils. PAIRCOIL (Berger et al., 1996) is interactively available at http://ostrich.lcs, mit.edulcgi-bin/score on the WWW, or it can be obtained upon request by e-mail at paircoil@theory.lcs.mit.edu. The program detects coiledcoil regions by using pairwise residue correlations obtained from a database of known two-stranded coiled coils. The database was constructed from coiled-coil sequences including myosins, paramyosins, tropomyosins, and intermediate filaments. PAIRCOIL uses a fixed scanning window size of 28 residues and reliably predicts parallel two-stranded coiled coils containing more than four heptad repeats.

Extracellular Coiled-Coil Domains

559

Coiled-Coil Structures in Extracellular Matrix Proteins
The distinctive repetitive pattern of the heptad repeat provides a characteristic for the identification of coiled-coil regions from the primary sequence of a protein both by visual inspection and by computer programs. Short stretches of (x-helix comprising three to six continuous heptad repeats have been discovered in TNs (for review, see Erickson, 1993), CMP (Hauser and Paulsson, 1994), COMP (Efimov et al., 1994), the TSP gene family (Sottile et al., 1991; Laherty et al., 1992; Efimov et al., 1994), and the collectins (Hoppe and Reid, 1994). Intermediate regions of coiled-coil structure have been identified in fibrinogen (Doolittle et al., 1978), in the macrophage scavenger receptor (Kodama et al., 1990), and in the extracellular stalk region in the low affinity receptor for IgE FcERII/CD23 and other membrane-bound members of the C-type superfamily, including the ASGP receptor and the B-cell differentiation antigen Lyb-2 (CD 72) (Beavil et al., 1992). Long coiled-coil domains are found in LNs (600 residues in polypeptide chains of 2000 residues; for review, see Timpl and Brown, 1994), and an extensive stretch of ct-helix was found in the Kupffer cell receptor (Beavil et al., 1992). In addition, coiled-coil regions have also been predicted for vertebrate apolipoproteins A, B, and C, human complement-associated protein SP-40, mouse fibrinogen-like protein, mouse and human amyloid A4 protein, rat amyloidogenic glycoprotein, human histidine-rich protein, rat and hamster sulfated glycoprotein, rat sialoprotein, chicken cell-surface B-G protein, mouse tumor-transplantation antigen P91A, yeast BIK1 cell fusion protein, a bovine calcium-binding 63 kDa bone protein, and human endothelial cell multimerin. This list is incomplete, and the databases certainly contain more examples of cell surface, extracellular, and plasma proteins that contain heptad repeats. The heptad repeats in LN, the macrophage scavenger receptor, the ASGP receptor, and human mannan binding protein (MBP) are not perfect and are interrupted by breaks known as "skip residues" or "stutters" (Brown et al., 1996). Many of these discontuinities are found in the long arm of LNs. In addition, in LN [3 chains, the seven-residue pattern is interrupted by the short cysteine-rich loop (x. TNs and the members of the TSP gene family differ from the other classes of multimeric matrix proteins in that their assembly domains are located at the N-terminal ends of the corresponding polypeptide chains. In contrast to the other coiled-coil proteins, heterotypic assemblies are known for the LNs, fibrinogen, and the ASGP receptor. The multimeric complexes are frequently stabilized by disulfide bonds between the subunits. In contrast to their intracellular counterparts, extracellular coiled-coil domains are therefore frequently flanked by pairs of closely-spaced cysteine residues that are involved in interchain disulfide bonds.

Characterization of Extracellular Coiled-Coil Domains
This section gives an overview of the activities that have been undertaken to characterize extracellular coiled-coil domains. Cartilage matrix protein / matrilin I (CMP) CMP is a major component of different cartilages and consists of a disulfide-linked homotrimer. CMP binds to aggrecan but is also found in other tissues (Asz6di et al., 1996). Recently, Haudenschild et al. (1995) analyzed the oligomerization properties of CMP using two different mutants: a mini-CMP consisting of the Von Willebrandt factor A2 domain and the heptad repeat-containing C-terminal extension domain, and a heptad-less full-length CMP. In addition, a number of mutations affecting C-terminal cysteine residues were generated within the full-length, the mini-, and the heptad-less CMPs. The mutational analysis indicated that the seven-residue repeats are necessary for CMP trimerization and that the two cysteins flanking the N-terminal end of the coiled coil are both necessary and sufficient to form intermolecular disulfide bonds between the subunits. Independently, Beck et al. (1996) structurally characterized a synthetic peptide comprising the heptad repeat-containing segment without the two cysteins and obtained results which were consistent with the conclusions of Haudenschild et al. (1995). C-type lectins Heptad repeats were recently found in a classical C-type lectin, the hepatic ASGP receptor (Beavil et al., 1992). The native molecule is a non-covalent heterooligomer, composed of two homologous polypeptide chains, that recognizes desialylated serum glycoproteins for endocytosis and lysosomal degradation. Bider et al., (1996) produced the heptad repeat-containing polypeptide segments connecting the transmembrane anchor with the carbohydrate-recognition domain (CRD) in E. coli and confirmed by CD spectroscopy that both peptides can assume cx-helical conformation. Oxidative crosslinking of N-terminal cysteines indicated that the isolated peptides form homotrimers and homotetramers, respectively. Upon mixing, covalent heterotetramers were found with a preferred stoichiometry of 2:2. Collectins contain short three-stranded coiled-coil regions between their collagen triple helix and the CRD (Hoppe and Reid, 1994). Members of the coUectin family include the serum proteins MBP, collectin-43, bovine conglutinin, and the lung surfactant proteins A (SP-A) and D (SP-D). Collectins play a role in first line defense against microorganisms by recognizing a wide variety of saccharides. Recent crystal structures of fragments of human and

560

R.A. Kammerer coiled-coil region (Paulsson et al., 1985; Hunter et al., 1990, 1992). Fragment 25k was identified as a disulfidelinked heterodimeric coiled coil of [~1 and 71 chains corresponding approximately to the 100 C-terminal residues of each chain (Paulsson et al., 1985). After dissociation by urea, the E8 chains readily reassembled into (x-helical coiled-coil structures to yield stable [3y heterodimers - or, after the addition of the c~1 chain fragment, into (x13~/heterotrimers (Hunter et al., 1990, 1992). These structures were biochemically and ultrastructurally indistinguishable from native E8. Each E8 chain comprises approximately 250 residues of the C-terminal end of the coiled-coil domain, and the (xl chain contains in addition three globular G domains. These results led to the following studies, which addressed questions of LN assembly by using synthetic peptides, recombinant polypeptide chain fragments, and the()retical analysis. Nomizu et al. (1992) designed a disulfide-linked heterotrimeric segment of LN 1 comprising the C-terminal end of the coiled-coil region, using three synthetic peptides A (32met), B1 (30-mer), and B2 (33-mer). They studied the conformation of these peptides by CD spectroscopy and found a content of 30-40 % helicity for B1-B1 homodimers, B1B2 heterodimers and A-BI-B2 heterotrimers. Although CD melting profiles demonstrated that the heterotrimer was considerably more stable than the heterodimer, it should be noted that in the native molecule the LN cd chain is not disulfide-bonded to the [~7 heterodimer in the C-terminal end. Various mixing experiments with synthetic peptides comprising two 51 -mers from the 131 and 71 subunits and a 55-mer from (x2 produced preferentially 137 heterodimers and (x137 heterotrimers with thermal stabilities similar to those of the E8 fragment or intact laminin (Nomizu et al., 1994). The authors proposed a molecular mechanism for I.N assembly (Nomizu et al., 1996): [37 heterodimer is preferentially formed and creates an acidic pocket, which provides a less stable structure due to repulsions between negatively charged side chains. Subsequentl B a basic residue in the (x2 chain interacts specifically with the acidic pocket, which results in a more stable three-stranded coiled-coil structure. Utani et al. (1994, 1995) identified specific sequences in 131, 71, and 0~2 subunits critical for LN assembly. Site-directed mutagenesis studies suggested that charged amino acid residues within these short sequences were important for the specific formation of two- and three-stranded coiled-coil structures. Kammerer et al. (1995) studied the specificity for chain recognition and selection with combinations of recombinant polypeptide chain fragments corresponding in size to the 25k fragment. We found high degrees of (x-helicity and high thermal stabilities for 137heterodimers and [31 homoassociates. The results of the recombinant 6~' heterodimer were consistent with the data of the biochemically isolated 25k fragment. In contrast to the above studies, an incomplete addition of the (xl chain to the

rat MBP (Sheriff et al., 1994; Weis and Drickamer, 1994) as well as characterization by CD, NMR, and crosslinking studies of recombinant peptides of SP-D (Hoppe et al., 1994) - confirmed that these heptad repeat-containing neck regions fold into parallel three-stranded (x-helical coiled-coil structures. A trimeric (x-helical structure was also found for a clostripain fragment representing the neck peptide of rat MBP, as judged by CD spectroscopy and crosslinking studies (Weis and Drickamer, 1994). The low affinity receptor for IgE FcERII/CD23 is a type II integral membrane protein with an extracellular C-terminal sequence homologous to C-type animal lectins. Mutant FcERII/CD23 that has a disruption of the (x-helical coiled coil was shown to have a single low-affinity interaction for IgE consistent to the monomer (Bartlett et al., 1995).

Fibrinogen
The heterotypic three-stranded coiled-coil domain in fibrinogen was detected as early as 1978 (Doolittle et al.). Fibrinogen is a soluble plasma protein which is converted to fibrin, the end product of the blood coagulation cascade, after thrombin cleavage. Proteolysis allows the fibrin monomers to self-associate to the fibrin clot. Plasmin digests of fibrinogen produce two major fragments, termed fragment E and fragment D. Polypeptide chain fragments obtained by limited proteolysis of fragment D showed contents of (x-helicity of 72 % and 82 % (Litvinovich et al., 1995). These values, together with sequence analysis, strongly supported and confirmed a coiled-coil structure for this region of the molecule. Rao et al. ( 1991 ) obtained a structure at 18 A resolution from frozen-hydrated crystals of proteolytically modified fibrinogen by combining cryoelectron microscopy and X-ray crystallography. Interestingly, the coiled-coil region of the molecule could be visualized in the structure.

Laminins (LNs)
LNs are a family of glycoproteins in which three different polypeptide chains are connected by a coiled-coil domain comprising approximately 600 residues per chain. These major components of basement membranes have a large repertoire of diverse biological activities, including promotion of cell adhesion, differentiation and growth, and participation in the formation of supramolecular networks. To date, ten LN isoforms have been identified, with ten genetically distinct chains (for review, see Timpl and Brown, 1994). This diversity has raised the question of how the chains recognize one another and how they are selected and assembled into native LN molecules. Studies with biochemically isolated fragments (E8 and 25k) derived from limited elastase digest of the most well-characterized LN, which is LN 1, indicated that the assembly of the heterotrimeric molecule starts at the C-terminal end of the (x-helical

Extracellular Coiled-Coil Domains ~ ' heterodimer was observed. This finding suggested that the recombinant fragments did not contain all the information needed to fold into a stable heterotrimer. Moreover, deletion of the proposed assembly site from the C-terminal part of the y1 chain fragment (Utani et al., 1994) did not confirm the exsistence of such a site and was not sufficient to abolish heterodimerization. These rather controversial resuits suggest that LN assembly may be far more complicated than anticipated. Beck et al. (1993) analyzed the sequences of LN chains in an effort to relate them to hydrophobic and ionic interaction potential. Whereas the number of hydrophobic interactions was very high and was similar for all chain combinations, the number of ionic interactions directly resembled the interaction potential observed in in vitro experiments. Predictions from the calculation of ionic interaction potentials for the (x-helical oligomerization domain of LN chains suggested that identical or homologous chains should not be able to form stable coiled-coil structures. Antonsson et al. (1995) investigated the influence of the disulfide bond in the recombinant ~ ' heterodimer (Kammerer et al., 1995) and compared alkylated and oxidized heterodimers. The enthalpy of transition was found to be the same for both processes, suggesting that in a coiled coil the disulfide bond has a linking function without an influence on enthalpic stabilization.

561

COMP is a glycoprotein synthesized by chondrocytes in cartilage. The biological functions of the molecule remain elusive. Recent studies, however, suggested an important function of the molecule in bone metabolism (Briggs et al., 1995; Hecht et al., 1995). Mutations in exon 17B of COMP cause pseudoachondroplasia, a well characterized dwarfing disease. Most of the mutations delete or change a well-conserved aspartic acid residue within the calciumbinding type 3 repeats. These data indicate an essential role for calcium binding in COMP structure and function. Structural characterization of a recombinant fragment comprising the oligomerization domain of COMP, using biophysical and biochemical methods, suggested that assembly of the native molecule involves the formation of a parallel five-stranded (x-helical coiled coil (Efimov et al., 1994). Recently, Malashkevich et al. (1996) solved the crystal structure of the recombinant oligomerization domain at 2 A resolution (see below).

Crystal Structures
Three-stranded coiled coils
Recent crystal structures of the human and rat MBPs polypeptide chain fragments have emphasized that the trimeric positioning of the CRDs is achieved by a threestranded (x-helical coiled-coil domain (Sheriff et al., 1994; Weis and Drickamer, 1994). The X-ray high resolution structure of rat MBP, including the coiled-coil domain, is shown in the mini-review by Kishore et al., 1997.

Thrombospondins (TSPs) and cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP)
Members of the TSP family include TSP1 and TSP2, which both form homotrimers (Sottile et al., 1991; Laherty et al., 1992), and TSP3, TSP4, and COMP, that associate into homopentameric assemblies (M6rgelin et al., 1992; Lawler et al., 1995; Qabar et al., 1995). The presence of heptad repeat-containing segments was only recently discovered in these proteins (Sottile et al., 1991; Laherty et al., 1992; Efimov et al., 1994). Consistent with their oligomerization states, homologous coiled-coil domains are found in TSP1 and TSP2 on the one hand and TSP3, TSP4, and COMP on the other. TSP1 is a 450-kDa glycoprotein that has been implicated in cell adhesion, growth and migration. Sottile et al. (1991) identified the cysteine residues involved in TSP trimerization by analysis of proteolytic fragments derived from truncated mutants and full-length TSP. After changing these cysteine residues to glycine, the mutant protein was still efficently secreted by COS cells, but only a minor portion of the molecules was found in the form of disulfide-bonded trimers. The authors therefore concluded that assembly of native TSP1 involves the formation of a three-stranded orhelical coiled-coil structure which is stabilized by disulfide bonds. In addition, studies by O'Rourke et al. (1992) suggested a heteroassociation for TSP1 and TSP2 (see section on function of coiled-coil oligomerization domains).

Five-stranded coiled coils
Five 46-residue chains comprising amino acids Asp28 to Gly72 of the rat COMP sequence (Fig. 3B) form a parallel five-stranded coiled-coil structure with an average length of 73 ]i and an average diameter of 30 _A (Fig. 3A; Malashkevich et al., 1996). The chains are predominantly folded into right-handed (x-helices that are wrapped around each other in a slight left-handed supercoil. Four residues, including the two cysteines involved in intermolecular disulfide bonds between the subunits, are in a ~-turn conformation. This chain direction reversal brings Cys71 into a position favorable for disulfide bond formation with Cys68 of a neighboring helix, resulting in the formation of a ring of disulfide bonds. The pentamer interface shows "knobs"-into-"holes" packing between the helices (Crick, 1953). "Knobs" formed by the hydrophobic side chains at the a, d, e, and g positions pack into "holes" formed by the spaces between side chains at positions a'-g', d'-e', c'-d', and a'-b', respectively, of the adjacent subunit (Fig. 1D). Whereas only the f positions remain completly exposed, the a, b, c, d, e, and g positions are substantially buried, which confirms the major role of hydrophobic interactions in maintaining the stability of the structure. Relatively few polar interactions between helices

562

R. A. Kammerer

A

Functions of Coiled-Coil Oligomerization Domains
The principal function of coiled-coil domains that becomes immediately apparent is the oligomerization of individual subunits in a given multimeric protein. Oligomerization generates multivalency, provides high internal concentrations of functional sites, and allows the clustered domains to function in a concerted manner. Both the globular heads of complement component Clq and the C-type lectin domains, for example, show increased avidity upon multivalent binding to target surfaces coated with their respective ligands, antibody and carbohydrate. However, there is only very limited information currently available that compares the single subunit with the oligomeric protein. Coiled-coil domains in LNs - and probably also in TNs and the TSP gene family - are responsible for chain selection, a process that is important for the formation of tissuespecific isoforms. The existence of homologous chains in TNs and TSPs has raised the question of whether these molecules always form homotypic assemblies or whether heterotypic combinations exist - for example, molecules with chain composition (TSP1)2TSP2 or (TSP2)2TSP1. Based on the location and the spacing of the two flanking cysteine residues that are involved in the connection of subunits by interchain disulfide bonds, disulfide-linked heterotypic assemblies could form between TSP1 and TSP2, TSP3 and TSP4, COMP and TSP3, COMP and TSP4, and between the TNs. O'Rourke et al. (1992) co-expressed TSP1 and TSP2 in human epithelial 293 cells to address this important issue. The observation that polyclonal antibodies specific for TSP1 or TSP2 could precipitate both forms indicated that TSP1 and TSP2, when co-expressed, are able to form heterotrimers. Heterotrimeric molecules involving both TSP1 and TSP2 chains could increase the structural diversity of the TSPs. For example, the TSP1 heparin binding domain has a number of important functions, including being a potent chemotaxin for melanoma and endothelial cells, and the binding site for syndecan, a proteoglycan receptor for TSP. Homotrimeric TSP2 has a lower affinity for heparin than homotrimeric TSPI. Thus, the heparin affinity could be modulated by the expression of TSP as homoor heterotrimers. However, the finding of distinct tissuespecific locations during mouse development by both immunofluorescence and in situ hybridization strongly suggests that homotrimeric molecules predominate. Nothing is known of heteroassemblies formed by the other members of the TSP gene family or by the TNs. TSP3 and TSP4 are both expressed in the nervous system (Qabar et al., 1994). TN-C and TN-R are both very prominent in brain (for review, see Erickson, 1993) and may therefore accumulate at similar locations. Some information concerning the determinants specific for isoform formation and the existence of recognition and nucleation sites is provided by the experiments with LNs (see section on LNs).

B
a COMP (27-72) d a d a d a d a d a d GDL APQMLRE LQETNAA LQDVREL LRQQVKE ITFLKNT VMECDAC G

Fig. 3. (A) Ribbon representation of the crystal structure of the COMP oligomerization domain seen perpendicular to the pentamer axis with its N-terminal end pointing down. Each helix makes about one third of a helical turn over the length of the structure. (B) Amino acid sequence of the coiled-coil domain of rat COME Heptad repeats are shown as blocks, and heptad positions a and d are indicated by lowercase letters.

are found in the coiled coil. A prominent one is the circular ring of hydrogen bonds formed by the amide groups of Gln54. The amide group of Asn41 is hydrogen-bonded to the carboxyl group of Glu36 and the hydroxyl group of Thr40 of a neighboring chain. Site-directed mutagenesis studies (R.A. Kammerer and J. Engel, unpublished) suggest an important role of Asn41 in the formation of the pentamer. The tendency to fold into a pentamer was significantly decreased in mutant chains where Asn was replaced by Leu, and instead the formation of a tetramer was favored. The hydrophobic cavity in the coiled coil which is filled with water molecules is the most unusual feature of the structure and has never been observed in any of the previously studied coiled-coil structures. It is lined almost exclusively with aliphatic side chains, with the exception of the ring of glutamines at position 54. The diameter of the pore varies from 2 to 6 A due to the constrictions formed by the side chains of the residues at the a and d sites. Despite differences in biological activities and lack of clear homology, a surprising similarity was observed between the COMP crystal strucure and the structural model proposed for the calcium-selective ion channel in phospholamban (Arkin et al., 1994). A channel function of COMP appears unlikely and has not been demonstrated. The question of whether the oligomerization domain has diverged from some pentameric ion channel at an early stage of evolution while retaining some rudimentary properties, or whether similar structures have evolved independently for different purposes, remains open.

Extracellular Coiled-Coil Domains Several lines of evidence suggest that coiled-coil domains contain binding sites for other domains of the same protein or other proteins. LN fragment E8 contains major sites that are responsible for LN-cell interactions. Deutzmann et al. (1992) showed that removal of more than half of the N-terminal portion of the coiled-coil domain did not affect cell attachment, which is mediated by the integrin ct6131 or spreading, although neurite-promoting activity was reduced. However, more extensive degradation of the coiled coil resulted in loss of cell spreading activity, and only weak attachment was observed to an cz chain fragment containing the globular domains and a short stretch of m-helix. The crystal structures of rat and human MBP revealed strong hydrophobic interactions between apolar contact point residues in the coiled-coil domain and the CRDs of a neighboring subunit (Sheriff et al., 1994; Weis and Drickamer, 1994). The IKVAV peptide derived from the C-terminal coiled-coil region of the LN ¢tl chain shows binding activity to a variety of cell types (Yamada, 1991). However, Brandenberger et al. (1996) showed convincingly that the activity of such potential binding sites is strongly dependent on the structural context. A recombinant randomly-coiled peptide from the LN [52 chain containing the three-residue sequence Leu-Arg-Asp inhibited outgrowth by chick motoneurons. In contrast, the recombinant, mutant oligomerization domain in CMP which folds into a three-stranded coiled coil as the original peptide, but contained the tripeptide sequence, showed no activity in inhibiting outgrowth. The association of three right-handed m-helices in collectins, and probably also in the macrophage scavenger receptor in a parallel and unstaggered left-handed superhelix, can serve as the nucleation site for the formation of a righthanded staggered collagen superhelix of left-handed helices (Hoppe et al., 1994). In addition, coiled-coil structures may also be regarded as rod-like spacer elements that separate individual domains.

563

Acknowledgements

I am grateful to Dr. J. Engel for his generous support and his critical comments on the manuscript. I thank Dr. V.N. Malashkevich for figure preparation, T. Schulthess for critical reading of the manuscript, and Dr. M. Steinmetz for helpful suggestions. This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant 3.100-27768.88 to J6rgen Engel).

References

Antonsson, P., Kammerer, R.A., Schulthess, T., H~inisch, G. and Engel, J.: Stabilization of the (x-helical coiled-coil domain in laminin by C-terminal disulfide bonds. J. Mol. Biol. 250: 74-79, 1995. Arkin, I.T., Adams, ED., MacKenzie, K.R., Lemmon, M.A., Briinger, A.T. and Engelman, D.M.: Structural organization of the pentameric transmembrane cx-helices of phospholamban 0~ cardiac ion channel. E M B O J. 13: 4757-4764, 1994.

Asz6di, A., Hauser, N., Studer, D., Paulsson, M., Hiripi, L. and B6sze, Z.: Cloning, sequencing and expression analysis of mouse cartilage matrix protein cDNA. Eur. J. Biochem. 236: 970-977, 1996. Bartlett, W.C., Kelly, A.E., Johnson, C.M. and Conrad, D.H.: Analysis of murine soluble FcERII sites of cleavage and requirements for dual-affinity interaction with IgE. J. lmmunoI. 154: 4240-4246, 1995. Beavil, A.J., Edmeades, R.L., Gould, H.J. and Sutton, B.J.: (x-Helical coiled-coil stalks in the low-affinity receptor for IgE (FcERII/CD23) and related C-type lectins. Proc. Natl. Aead. Sci. USA 89: 753-757, 1992. Beck, K., Dixon, T.W., Engel, J. and Parry, D.A.D.: Ionic interactions in the coiled-coil domain of laminin determine the specificity of chain assembly./. Mol. Biol. 231: 311-323, 1993. Beck, K., Gambee, J.E., Bohan, C.A. and B~ichinger, H.P.: The Cterminal domain of cartilage matrix protein assembles into a triple-stranded c~-helical coiled-coil structure..1. Mol. Biol. 256: 909-923, 1996. Berger, B., Wilson, D.B., Wolf, E., Tonchev, T., Milla, M. and Kim, ES.: Predicting coiled coils by use of pairwise residue correlations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92: 8259-8263, 1995. Bider, M. D., Wahlberg, J. M., Kammerer, R. A. and Spiess, M.: The oligomerization domain of the asialoglycoprotein receptor preferentially forms 2:2 hetero-tetramers in vitro. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 31996-32001, 1996. Brandenberger, R., Kammerer, R. A., Engel, J. and Chiquet, M.: Native chick laminin-4 containing the [~2 chain (s-laminin) promotes axon growth. J. Cell Biol. 135: 1583-1592, 1996. Briggs, M.D., Hoffman, S.G.M., King, L.M., Olsen, A.S., Mohrenweiser, H., Leroy, J.G., Mortier, G.R., Rimoin, D.L., Lachman, R.S., Gaines, E.S., Cekleniak, J.A., Knowlton, R.G. and Cohn, D.H.: Pseudoachondroplasia and multiple epiphyseal dysplasia due to mutations in the cartilage oligomeric matrix protein gene. Nat. Genet. 10: 330-336, 1995. Brown, J.H., Cohen, C. and Parry, D.A.D.: Heptad breaks in c~helical coiled coils: stutters and stammers. Proteins 26: 134-145, 1996. Cohen, C. and Parry, D.A.D.: (x-Helical coiled-coils and bundles: how to design an ix-helical protein. Proteins 7: 1-15, 1990. Conway, J.E and Parry, D.A.D.: Three-stranded Ix-fibrous proteins: the heptad repeat and its implications for structure. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 1.3: 14-16, 1991. Crick, EH.C.: The packing of 0~-helices: simple coiled-coils. Acta Crystallogr. 6: 689-697, 1953. Deutzmann, R., Aumailley, M., Wiedemann, H., Pysny, W., Timpl, R. and Edgar, D.: Cell adhesion, spreading and neurite stimulation by laminin fragment E8 depends on maintenance of secondary and tertiary structure in its rod and globular domain. Eur. J. Biochem. 191: 513-522, 1990. Doolittle, R.E, Goldbaum, D.M. and Doolittle, L.R.: Designation of sequences involved in the "coiled-coil" interdomainal connections in fibrinogen: construction of an atomic scale model. J. Mol. Biol. 120: 311-325, 1978. Efimov, V.P., Lustig, A. and Engel, J.: The thrombospondin-like chains of cartilage oligomeric matrix protein are assembled by a five-stranded 0t-helical bundle between residues 20 and 83. FEBS Lett. 341: 54-58, 1994. Engel, J.: Domain organization of modular extracellular matrix proteins and their evolution. Matrix Biol. 15: 295-299, 1996. Erickson, H.P.: Tenascin-C, tenascin-R and tenascin-X: a family of talented proteins in search of functions. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 5: 869-876, 1993. Fairman, R., Chao, H.-G., Mueller, L., Lavoie, T.B., Shen, L., No-

564

R . A . Kammerer Lupas, A., Van Dyke, M. and Stock, J.: Predicting coiled coils from protein sequences. Science 252:1162-1164, 1991. Lupas, A.: Coiled coils: new structures and new functions. TIBS 21: 375-382, 1996a. Lupas, A.: Prediction and analysis of coiled-coil structures. Meth. Enzymol. 266: 513-525, 1996b. Malashkevich, V.N., Kammerer, R.A., Efimov, V.P., Schulthess, T. and Engel, J.: The crystal structure of a five-stranded coiled coil in COMP: a prototype ion channel? Science 274: 761-765, 1996. McLachlan, A.D. and Stewart, M.: Tropomyosin coiled-coil interactions: evidence for an unstaggered structure. J. Mol. Biol. 98: 293-304, 1975. Monera, O.D., Zhou, N.E., Kay, C.M. and Hodges, R.S.: Comparison of antiparallel and parallel two-stranded 0t-helical coiledcoils. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 19218-19227, 1993. Monera, O.D., Kay, C.M. and Hodges, R.S.: Electrostatic interactions control the parallel and antiparallel orientation of c~-he)ical chains in two-stranded c~-helical coiled-coils. Biochemistry 33: 3862-3871, 1994. M6rgelin, M., Heinegfird, D., Engel, J. and Paulsson, M.: Electron microscopy of native cartilage oligomeric matrix protein purified from the swarm rat chondrosarcoma reveals a five-armed structure. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 6137-6141, 1992. Nomizu, M., Utani, A., Shiraishi, N., Yamada, Y. and Roller, P.P.: Synthesis and conformation of the trimeric coiled-coil segment of laminin. Int. J. Peptide Protein Res. 40: 72-79, 1992. Nomizu, M., Otaka, A., Utani, A., Roller, P.P. and Yamada, Y.: Assembly of synthetic laminin peptides into a triple-stranded coiled-coil structure. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 30386-30392, 1994. Nomizu, M., Utani, A., Beck, K., Otaka, A., Roller, P.P. and Yamada, Y.: Mechanism of laminin chain assembly into a triplestranded coiled-coil structure. Biochemistry ,3,5: 2885-2893, 1996. O'Rourke, K.M., Laherty, C.D. and Dixit, V.M.: Thrombospondin 1 and thrombospondin 2 are expressed as both homo- and heterotrimers. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 24921-24924, 1992. Paulsson. M., Deutzmann, R., Timpl, R., Dalzoppo, D., Odermatt, E. and Engel, J.: Evidence for coiled-coil c~-helical regions in the long arm of laminin. E M B O J . 4: 309-316, 1985. Parry, D.A.D.: Coiled-coils in 0t-helix-containing proteins: analysis of the residue types within the heptad repeat and the use of these data in the prediction of coiled-coils in other proteins. Biosci. Rep. 2: 1017-1024, 1982. Qabar, A.N., Lin, Z., Wolf, EW., O'Shea, K.S., Lawler, J. and Dixit, V.M.: Thrombospondin 3 is a developmentally regulated heparin binding protein. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 1262-1269, 1994. Qabar, A., Derick, L., Lawler, J. and Dixit, V.: Thrombospondin 3 is a pentameric molecule held together by interchain disulfide linkage involving two cysteine residues. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 12725-12729, 1995. Rao, S.P., Poojary, M.D., Elliott, B.W., Melanson, L.A., Oriel, B. and Cohen, C.: Fibrinogen structure in projection at 18 ,~, resolution. Electron density by coordinated cryo-electron microscopy and X-ray crystallography. J. Mol. Biol. 222: 89-98, 1991. Sheriff, S., Chang, C.Y. and Ezekowitz, R.A.B.: Human mannosebinding protein carbohydrate recognition domain trimerizes through a triple {x-helical coiled-coil. Nat. Struct. Biol. 1: 789-794, 1994. Sottile, J., Selegue, J. and Mosher, D.E: Synthesis of truncated amino-terminal trimers of thrombospondin. Biochemistry' ,30: 6556-6562, 1991. Timpl, R. and Brown, J.C.: The laminins. Matrix Biol. 14: 275-281, 1994.

votny, J. and Matsueda, G.R.: Characterization of a new fourchain coiled-coil: influence of chain length on stability. Protein Sci. 4: 1457-1469, 1995. Fairman, R., Chao, H.-G., Lavoie, T.B., Villafranca, J.J., Matsueda, G.R. and Novotny, J.: Design of heterotetrameric coiled coils: evidence for increased stabilization by Glu-Lys ÷ ion pair interactions. Biochemistry 35: 2824-2829, 1996. Friedman, A.M., Fischmann, T.O. and Steitz, T.A.: Crystal structure of lac repressor core tetramer and its implications for DNA looping. Science 268: 1721-1727, 1995. Harbury, P.B., Zhang, T., Kim, P.S. and Alber, T.: A switch between two-, three-, and four-stranded coiled coils in GCN 4 leucine zipper mutants. Science 262: 1401-1407, 1993. Harbury, P.B., Kim, P.S. and Alber, T.: Crystal structure of an isoleucine-zipper trimer. Nature 371: 80-83, 1994. Haudenschild, D.R., Tondravi, M.M., Hofer, U., Chen, Q. and Goetinck, P.E: The role of coiled-coil ix-helices and disulfide bonds in the stabilization of cartilage matrix protein subunits. J. Biol. Chem. 270:23 150-23154, 1995. Hauser, N. and Paulsson, M.: Native cartilage matrix protein (CMP). J. Biol. Chem. 269:25 747-25753, 1994. Hecht, J.T., Nelson, L.D., Crowder, E., Wang, Y., Elder, EEB., Harrison, W.B., Francomano, C.A., Prange, C.K., Lennon, G.G., Deere, M. and Lawler, J.: Mutations in exon 17B of cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) cause pseudoachondroplasia. Nat. Genet. 10: 325-329, 1995. Hodges, R.S., Sodek, J., Smillie, L.B.and Jurasek, L.: Tropomyosin: amino acid sequence and coiled-coil structure. Cold Spring Harbor Syrup. Quant. Biol. 37: 299-310, 1972. Hoppe, H.-J., Barlow, P.N. and Reid, K.B.M.: A parallel three stranded Ix-helical bundle at the nucleation site of collagen triple-helix formation. FEBS Lett. 344: 191-195, 1994. Hoppe, H.-J. and Reid, K.B.M.: Trimeric C-type lectin domains in host defence. Structure 2:1129-1133, 1994. Hunter, I., Schulthess, T., Bruch, M., Beck, K. and Engel, J.: Evidence for a specific mechanism of laminin assembly. Eur. J. Biochem. 188: 205-211, 1990. Hunter, I., Schulthess, T. and Engel, J.: Laminin chain assembly by triple and double stranded coiled-coil structures. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 6006-6011, 1992. Kammerer, R.A., Antonsson, P., Schulthess, T., Fauser, C. and Engel, J.: Selective chain recognition in the C-terminal c~-helical coiled-coil region of laminin. J. Mol. Biol. 250: 64-73, 1995. Kishore, U., Eggleton, P. and Reid, K.B.M.: Molecular organisation of carbohydrate recognition domains in animal lectins. Matrix Biol. 15: 583-592, 1997. Kodama, T., Freeman, M., Rohrer, L., Zabrecky, J., Matsudaira, P. and Krieger, M.: Type I macrophage scavenger receptor contains 0~-helicat and collagen-like coiled coils. Nature 343: 531-535, 1990. Krylov, D., Mikhailenko, I. and Vinson, C.: A thermodynamic scale for leucine zipper stability and dimerization specificity: e and g interhelical interactions. E M B O J. 13: 2849-2861, 1994. Laherty, C.D., O'Rourke, K., Wolf, EW., Katz, R., Seldin, M.E and Dixit, V.M.: Characterization of mouse thrombospondin 2 sequence and expression during cell growth and development. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 3274-3281, 1992. Lawler, J., McHenry, K., Duquette, M. and Derick, L.: Characterization of human thrombospondin-4. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 28092814, 1995. Litvinovich, S.V., Henschen, A.H., Kriegelstein, K.G., Ingham, K.C. and Medved, L.V.: Structural and functional characterization of proteolytic fragments derived from the C-terminal regions of bovine fibrinogen. Eur. J. Biochem. 229: 605-614, 1995.

Extracellular Coiled-Coil Domains Utani, A., Nomizu, M., Timpl, R., Roller, P.P. and Yamada, Y.: Laminin chain assembly. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 19167-19175, 1994. Utani, A., Nomizu, M., Sugiyama, S., Miyamoto, S., Roller, P.P. and Yamada, Y.: A specific sequence of the laminin c~2 chain critical for the initiation of heterotrimer assembly. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 3292-3298, 1995. Weis, W. I. and Drickamer, K.: Trimeric structure of a C-type mannose-binding protein. Structure 2: 1227-1240, 1994. Woolfson, D.N. and Alber, T.: Predicting oligomerization states of coiled coils. Protein Sci. 4: 1596-1607, 1995. Yamada, K.M.: Adhesive recognition sequences. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 12809-12812, 1991.

565

Zhou, N.E., Kay, C.M. and Hodges, R.S.: The net energetic contribution of interhelical electrostatic attractions to coiled-coil stability. Protein Eng. 7: 1365-1372, 1994a. Zhou, N.E., Kay, C.M. and Hodges, R.S.: The role of interhelical ionic interactions in controlling protein folding and stability. J. Mol. Biol. 237: 500-512, 1994b. Dr. Richard A. Kammerer, Department of Biophysical Chemistry, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 70, CH4056 Basel, Switzerland

Received November 26, 1996

