Molecular structures of coat and coat-associated proteins: function follows form
Tom J Brett1 and Linton M Traub2
Endocytic clathrin-coated vesicles arise through the deformation of a small region of plasma membrane encapsulated by a cytosol-oriented clathrin lattice. The coat assembles from soluble protomers in a rapid and highly cooperative process, and invagination is tightly linked to the selective enrichment of cargo molecules within the nascent bud. Recent structural and functional studies demonstrate that coat assembly, membrane deformation, local actin dynamics and the final scission event are intricately coupled, and begin to reveal how key multifunctional, modular proteins are responsible for this linkage. An emerging mechanistic theme is how sequential engagement of common interaction surfaces or network hubs can evict prior binding partners from the assembly zone to ensure vectorial progression of the coat assembly process.
Addresses 1 Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA 2 Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 3500 Terrace Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA Corresponding author: Traub, Linton M (traub@pitt.edu)

and gather molecules destined for delivery to an appropriate acceptor compartment. An overarching principle of vesicle-mediated membrane transport is that cargo selectivity -- the preferential clustering of designated molecules at the site of vesicle formation -- is governed by coat proteins. Numerous, compositionally distinct coats are now known; the components of the coat often define the intracellular sorting station, and contribute to both membrane deformation and local movement of the resulting transport intermediate following scission, in addition to overseeing the loading of cargo into the vesicle interior. Clathrin-coated vesicles, which assemble at the plasma membrane to ferry a diverse array of transmembrane constituents, extracellular ligands and nutrients into the cell interior, were the first to be described [1], and this remains the prototypical example of a sorting coat. The genesis of a coated vesicle, whether covered with clathrin (at the plasma membrane, trans-Golgi network, or on endosomes), COPI (on the Golgi), or COPII (at endoplasmic reticulum export sites), can be conceptualized as occurring in discrete, but temporally coupled, steps: recruitment and assembly of coat proteins, adaptors, and accessory proteins, accompanied by clustering of cargo/receptors; deformation of the underlying donor membrane; scission of the coated vesicle from the donor bilayer; and, finally, rapid uncoating and transport of the vesicle toward the acceptor membrane. Our understanding of the molecular basis of clathrin lattice assembly and sorting is the most advanced [2,3]. In this context, here we examine how new structural and functional information illuminates the role of the so-called accessory factors in AP-2 adaptor-mediated clathrin-coated vesicle formation at the cell surface and attests to the importance of the dendritic actin cytoskeleton in this process.

Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006, 18:395≠406 This review comes from a themed issue on Membranes and organelles Edited by Pietro de Camilli and Antonella de Matteis Available online 27th June 2006 0955-0674/$ ≠ see front matter # 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. DOI 10.1016/j.ceb.2006.06.014

Introduction
Intracellular compartmentalization is a defining feature of all eukaryotic cells. The evolution of distinct membranebounded organelles has allowed delegation and specialization of metabolic operations, macromolecule biosynthesis and degradation. Yet the obvious advantages of spatially and compositionally distinct, but necessarily interconnected, intracellular compartments can only be maintained if mechanisms exist to preserve the individual identity and form of the separate compartments in the face of ongoing membrane trafficking events. Vesiclemediated transport between defined membrane compartments is a fundamental and elegant solution to this problem. Typically, small, membrane-bound vesicles assemble at the cytosolic surface of a donor membrane
www.sciencedirect.com

Intertwined membrane deformation and clathrin coat assembly
The most noticeable feature of the assembled clathrin coat is the striking open geometric arrangement. Composed of three-legged triskelia, the pentagonal and hexagonal lattice forms when triskelia pack together on the plane of the membrane. The self-organizing properties of clathrin and the densely packed array of legs within the lattice [2,4] indicate that the assembling coat may operate as a mechanical scaffold for membrane deformation [5]. It has been proposed that the underlying adaptor protein epsin 1, which, along with AP-2 and several other endocytic proteins, links the clathrin to the bilayer surface, contributes to membrane bending as well by inserting an amphipathic a-helix into one leaflet of the bilayer [6].
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006, 18:395≠406

396 Membranes and organelles

Even so, extinguishing clathrin in cultured cells with siRNA duplexes still leaves identifiable endocytic assembly zones, which contain AP-2 and several other endocytic proteins, including epsin 1, intact. These zones display surprisingly unaltered dynamics, but are universally flat [5], implicating clathrin in promoting and/or stabilizing the curved state. What is clear is that, regardless of how the nascent coated bud invaginates, clathrin is unable to drive the final membrane fission step; the polyhedral clathrin coat is often interrupted or incomplete at the base of deeply invaginated buds. It is at this site that dynamin, a $100-kDa self-assembling GTPase, operates to liberate coated vesicles from the donor plasma membrane [7]; blocking dynamin function in vivo leads to dramatic accumulation of fully coated clathrin buds that fail to sever from the plasma membrane [8]. GTP-bound dynamin oligomerizes into a hollow spiral that enwraps the narrow base of the surface-attached bud, beneath the assembled clathrin coat [7,9]. Membrane fission is coupled to GTP hydrolysis as the spiral compacts in helical pitch and constricts in interior radius [10]. This conformational alteration was thought to be sufficient to mechanically sever the membrane constricted within the spiral, but time-resolved cryo-EM images disclose that membrane vesiculation does not, in fact, accompany helix compaction [10]. Now, new morphological data, based on innovative membrane tubule assays, reveal that the assembled dynamin helix also twists on GTP hydrolysis, and for tubules under tension the twisting completes the membrane severing action of dynamin [9]. In order for the mechanical twisting action to be propagated to the underlying membrane, the assembled dynamin spiral must associate physically with the bilayer. A modular phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P2)-binding pleckstrin homology (PH) domain is positioned adjacent to the N-terminal GTPase domain of dynamin, and PtdIns(4,5)P2 binding is necessary for dynamin function [11]. Phospholipase D (PLD) is intimately linked to PtdIns(4,5)P2 production through a positive feedback loop, wherein one product of PLDcatalyzed hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidic acid (PtdOH), acts as a cofactor for the type I phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinases (PIPKIs) [12]. Acidic phospholipids also contribute to concerted GTP hydrolysis and dynamin constriction and, because of the absence of a bulky head group, PtdOH accumulation at the base of a bud could aid in establishing the required high degree of negative membrane curvature. Recent evidence affirms that PLD seems to be important for dynamin function, but surprisingly not by promoting either PtdOH or PtdIns(4,5)P2 production. Instead, the GTP-bound GTPase domain of dynamin binds to the phox homology (PX) domain of PLD1 and -2 directly, and the PX domain acts as an intermolecular GTPase-activating protein (GAP) to promote GTP hydrolysis [13]. This effect of PLD does not require catalytic activity of the
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006, 18:395≠406

enzyme. The lipid specificity of both the PX and PH domains indicates that dynamin nucleotide hydrolysis occurs in a region of membrane rich in PtdIns(4,5)P2 but, importantly, the stoichiometry of PLD-dynamin reaction remains to be determined, as well as whether and how this meshes with the intrinsic intramolecular GAP activity of the assembled spiral. Ultrastructural work shows that dynamin is also found in flat clathrin lattices [14], so perhaps the PLD GAP activity plays some role in mobilizing this dispersed population to the base of the invaginating bud. Despite engaging PtdIns(4,5)P2, a lipid found predominantly within the cytosolic leaflet of the plasma membrane, stable deposition of dynamin at the bud site depends principally on the C-terminal proline-rich domain (PRD). This tract of $120 residues contains several tandemly arrayed or overlapping proline-based motifs that can dock transiently onto Src homology 3 (SH3) domains. SH3 domains are compact, $60-aminoacid modules that bind two general classes of PRD, depending on whether a critical basic residue is N(RXXPXXP; class I) or C-terminal (PXXPXR; class II) to the core PXXP motif [15]. Class I and -II motifs bind SH3 domains in opposite orientations because the basic (arginine) residue forms a critical salt bridge with specific acidic residues on the target SH3 domain. Although the core interactions are well defined structurally, SH3 domains are quite specific and determinants within the PRDs can add complexity. The SH3 domains of the endocytic proteins amphiphysin, endophilin, intersectin, and PACSIN/syndapin all bind to the dynamin PRD, potentially driving recruitment to endocytic sites. Two major isoforms of dynamin exist, dynamin 1 and dynamin 2, which differ in their activity and cell type distribution. Recent surface plasmon resonance studies uncover some key differences in their PRD interactions with endocytic SH3 domains [16]. For example, while amphiphysin binds a single site in the PRD of both dynamin 1 and dynamin 2 with high affinity, endophilin binds to two sites in each. The amphiphysin site competes with one of the endophilin sites such that, when amphiphysin is bound, endophilin only binds the second site. The second site shows tenfold lower affinity for endophilin when compared between dynamin 1 and dynamin 2, and is ablated by phosphorylation by Cdk5. Moreover, an intersectin SH3 domain binds to two sites in the PRD of dynamin 1 and only one site in dynamin 2 [16]. Collectively, differential binding of endocytic SH3 domains to the dynamin 1 or dynamin 2 PRDs may contribute to defined functions performed by each. Another example of a unique SH3 domain interaction in the endocytic system is that of CIN85, an adaptor protein containing three similar SH3 domains, with Cbl, an E3 ubiquitin ligase that downregulates surface expression of receptor tyrosine kinases (such as the EGF receptor) by
www.sciencedirect.com

Molecular structures of coat and coat-associated proteins Brett and Traub 397

ubiquitin-triggered internalization and subsequent lysosomal degradation. Initial binding studies indicated that the CIN85 SH3 domains bind a non-classical PXXXPR motif in Cbl [17], which is also found in other endocytic proteins that bind CIN85, such as HIP1R and synaptojanin 2B1, a phosphoinositide polyphosphatase [18]. Unexpectedly, recent structural studies show that the Cbl PRD containing this motif actually forms a ternary complex, binding to two CIN85 SH3 domains simultaneously, one in class I and the other in class II mode, thus allowing the Cbl PRD to cluster adaptors [19]. Moreover, in addition to the required distal basic residue, an arginine residue preceding the motif is also critical for the formation of these ternary complexes in solution. This suggests the sequence RXPXXXPR may denote an SH3 clustering motif, but further experimentation is required to confirm this. Collectively, these experiments highlight the importance of SH3 domain interactions in endocytosis and the need for detailed studies to decipher the precise determinants of SH3≠PRD interactions. Viruses have evolved with their hosts to utilize host cell machinery for the nefarious purpose of evading immune detection. Not surprisingly, one of the methods employed is to utilize host endocytic machinery to downregulate receptors that could lead to virus detection or which signal to recruit immune cells. One example of this is herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV1), which encodes a protein termed infected cell protein 0 (ICP0). ICP0 contains a PRD that binds to the SH3 domains of CIN85, forming ICP0≠ CIN85≠Cbl complexes, which downregulate EGF receptors from the surface of infected cells by targeting them for recycling or lysosomal degradation [20]. The EGF receptor is a prototypical receptor tyrosine kinase, so ICP0-mediated complexes can also be expected to downregulate receptors such as the Fas, IL-2, TNF and IFN-g receptors to aid immune avoidance, as Cbl regulates these receptors also. Interestingly, the region of the ICP0 PRD that binds to CIN85 contains the RXPXXXPR motif, suggesting that a single ICP0 molecule could bind at least two CIN85 molecules, which in turn could bind Cbl, leading to large clusters of ICP0≠CIN85≠Cbl complexes to drive efficient receptor downregulation.

BAR domain binds preferentially to inwardly curved membranes with an annular diameter of $22 nm. Correspondingly, BAR domains from oligophrenin and b-centaurin bind to synthetic liposomes in a manner dependent upon the extent of membrane curvature [21]. A subset of BAR domain proteins, identified by sequence analysis to contain an extra amphipathic a-helix N-terminal to the conserved BAR domain, bind liposomes independently of curvature because of this extra helix, which presumably inserts partially into the plasma membrane to induce the curvature required for optimal BAR domain engagement. These so-called N-BAR domains are found in amphiphysins, endophilins, BRAP and nadrins [21,22]. Thus, as BAR domain proteins are recruited to the assembling clathrin lattice, N-BAR-containing proteins can induce curvature via membrane insertion of the N-terminal amphipathic a-helix while the core BAR domain senses and stabilizes the mounting membrane curvature. There are some subtle differences between the overall fold of the amphiphysin and endophilin A1 BAR domain dimers, but a major disparity between the two is an insert within the first a1 helix of endophilin [23]. This breaks a1 into a1a and a1b segments, which in amphiphysin is a long uninterrupted a-helix. Two interesting features of the 30residue insert, which is phylogenetically conserved in endophilin family members, are first that it exits a1a on the concave surface, right in the center of the presumptive lipid interaction surface, and second that it is largely unstructured in the crystal [23]. The positioning of this flexible loop almost certainly affects the membrane-binding properties of the BAR domain. At a minimum, the optimal diameter of curved membrane binding surface is increased to $30 nm, but it is also possible that the polypeptide segment becomes ordered upon lipid engagement, and this may impinge upon membrane associations [23]. The different geometry of the endophilin BAR domain might then favor binding or deformation of membranes less curved than those preferred by amphiphysin; indeed, in vitro, the endophilin BAR domain generates lipid tubules with diameters of 20≠100 nm [22]. Supporting evidence for an early role for endophilin (in addition to an established role late in the budding process) is the appearance of earlystage, shallow coats as an arrested intermediate in antibody injected synapses [24], and the lack of synaptic vesicles and expansion of shallow hemispherical clathrin buds in Drosophila endophilin A mutants [25]. Dramatic tubulation of endocytic membrane templates is clearly not restricted to BAR domain proteins. A newly identified distant subfamily of BAR domain proteins also display this property. Exemplified by members of the PACSIN/syndapin, Toca/FBP17 and, in Drosophila, Nervous Wreck (Nwk) families, these proteins all contain at their N-terminus a BAR-like domain termed the EFC [26] or F-BAR [27] domain. Akin to their N-BAR counterparts, the EFC/F-BAR proteins possess strong
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006, 18:395≠406

Curvature-sensing/membrane-deforming protein domains
If SH3-domain proteins like endophilin and amphiphysin are responsible, in part, for placing dynamin around the base of surface-connected clathrin buds, how do they promote this deposition precisely? Both these modular proteins have N-terminal BAR (Bin, amphiphysin, Rvs) domains. The crystal structure of the amphiphysin BAR domain reveals a crescent-shaped anti-parallel, a-helical dimer with a high distribution of basic residues on the concave face and tips of the crescent [21]. Since the cytosolic leaflet of biological membranes is studded with acidic head groups, the architecture suggests that this
www.sciencedirect.com

398 Membranes and organelles

membrane deformation capabilities [26,27,28], and tubulation in vivo is enhanced by disruption of the cortical actin cytoskeleton [27]. Interestingly, almost all EFC/ F-BAR domain proteins contain a C-terminal SH3 domain that binds N-WASP, an actin-related protein 2/ 3 (Arp2/3) complex binder and activator that catalyzes actin polymerization and branching [26,27]. Correspondingly, recruitment of N-WASP decreases the membrane tubulating activity of EFC/F-BAR proteins [26]. These EFC/F-BAR-associated SH3 domains also bind dynamin [26,27], the GTPase involved in the fission step, whose recruitment also antagonizes membrane tubulation [27]. These effects are probably related to the dependence of dynamin-mediated scission on membrane tension [9], and such intimate coupling between the membrane deformation, fission and actin polymerization machineries by a single protein family implies the importance of closely coupled feedback between these systems for productive vesicle formation.

has been more controversial, mainly because clathrin mutations were previously reported to only show partial defects. However, recent live-imaging studies show clathrin is present at these endocytic cortical actin patches in yeast [34]. Additionally, the absence of clathrin delays and decreases the overall internalization of endocytic proteins from these patches [33]. Thus clathrin does play an important role in efficient endocytosis in yeast, so receptor-mediated endocytosis in yeast and mammalian cells may be more closely parallel than was once thought. A productive synergy between the actin and endocytic machineries obviously requires molecular connectors. A number of proteins that either interact with or regulate actin are components of the endocytic machinery, or are recruited to budding sites. Examples are actin-binding protein-1, cortactin, PACSIN, intersectin-1, myosin VI, N-WASP, Arp2/3 and HIP1R. Of these, HIP1R (Sla2p in S. cerevisae) is particularly intriguing. It consists of an Nterminal ANTH domain that binds to membrane phospholipids, a central coiled-coil region that mediates dimerization and binds clathrin light chain, and a C-terminal THATCH domain, which binds F-actin (Figure 1). The similar protein HIP1, which additionally binds clathrin heavy chain and the AP-2 adaptor, is able to heterodimerize with HIP1R through the central coiled-coil region. Thus, HIP1R interacts directly with major components of the clathrin-mediated endocytic machinery and binds Factin physically. Genetic deletion of Sla2p in yeast [31] and siRNA-mediated knockdown of HIP1R in mammalian cells [39] show that each protein is required for productive association of the actin and endocytic machinery. The crystal structure of the HIP1R THATCH domain core represents the first structure of an actin-binding module from an endocytic protein to be determined [40]. The HIP1R THATCH domain consists of a five-helix bundle, which contains the major actin-binding surface, followed by a C-terminal sequence-conserved a-helix (termed the latch) that mediates dimerization of THATCH domains (Figure 1). Dimerization via the latch is required for effective F-actin-binding by THATCH domains. Additionally, HIP1R THATCH domain mutants were identified that ablate actin binding. The interactions mediated by the HIP1/R/Sla2p coiled-coil region seem to be crucial also. Both HIP1 and HIP1R coiled-coil regions bind clathrin light chain and this interaction stimulates clathrin cage assembly in vitro [41,42]. For HIP1, this interaction seems to be necessary for targeting HIP1 to clathrin-coated pits and vesicles [42]. The homologous region of Sla2p also binds clathrin light chain, and yeast expressing a mutant Sla2p with this region deleted display delayed internalization of endocytic patches and irregular actin dynamics [33]. Thus HIP1R/Sla2p appears to require intact coiled-coil and THATCH-domain-mediated interactions for a productive linkage of the endocytic and actin machinery. In the future, cellular studies utilizing precisely designed mutants lacking single functions (e.g. HIP1R with nonwww.sciencedirect.com

Meshing actin dynamics with the clathrin coat
Growing evidence suggests the actin machinery plays a direct role in clathrin-mediated endocytosis in animal cells [29,30]. The actin cytoskeleton is a major component of the cell cortex, which scaffolds the plasma membrane. Thus it might be expected that membrane-deforming events require some communication between the two machineries (actin and endocytic) to proceed efficiently. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, this link is well established, as chemical or genetic disruption of the actin machinery potently inhibits receptor-mediated endocytosis. In animal cells, this link is becoming more firmly established. Time-resolved live-imaging studies in both yeast [31≠34] and animal cells [35≠37] using fluorescently tagged components of the endocytic and actin machineries have contributed to our understanding of the role actin plays in these events. In S. cerevisiae, dense meshes of actin at the cell periphery, termed cortical actin patches, colocalize with components of the endocytic machinery that are recruited at prescribed times [31,34]. Bursts of activity of the actin polymerization machinery, such as Arp2/3, Abp1p, Las17p (N-WASP) and actin, appear at these sites in concert with the disappearance of clathrin [35,38], suggesting that actin dynamics are involved in vesicle scission. Indeed, sophisticated imaging experiments using a combination of evanescent field and epifluorescence illumination along with halochromic cargo strongly indicate that actin polymerization aids the scission step [36]. Collectively, these studies indicate actin dynamics are involved in all steps of vesicle formation: assembly, invagination, scission and initial transport. Accordingly, disruption of actin dynamics using jasplakinolide or latrunculins prevents the formation of new clathrin-coated structures at the cell surface [37] and inhibits scission [36]. While actin has long been known to play a critical role in receptor-mediated endocytosis in yeast, a role for clathrin
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006, 18:395≠406

Molecular structures of coat and coat-associated proteins Brett and Traub 399

Figure 1

Interactions mediated by HIP1R/HIP1 homo- and heterodimers important to clathrin-mediated endocytosis. HIP1R and HIP1 have similar domain architectures but do not share all interactions with components of the endocytic machinery as shown in the schematic. Highlighted are the locations of the following motifs: AP-2-binding DPF and FXDXF; LLDLD-based clathrin box; and CIN85 SH3-binding PXXXPR. The THATCH domain is dissected into two components: the core and the latch. The core contains the major F-actin-binding surface, while the latch mediates dimerization of THATCH domains. The enlargement box shows the crystal structure of the HIP1R THATCH core, with the residues shown in red indicating positions where mutations decrease F-actin-binding ability.

actin-binding THATCH mutations) should aid in unraveling the exact role these interactions play in endocytosis. An appealing but incompletely substantiated model for the coordinated activity of EFC/F-BAR and (N-)BAR domain proteins, dynamin, HIP1R and branched actin in clathrin coat assembly, which is compatible with much structural, biophysical and biochemical data, is presented in Figure 2 and Box 1. It is also worth considering that static micrographs of clathrin-coated budding profiles positioned at the cell surface are perhaps somewhat misleading. Membrane tubules are now appreciated to be widely prevalent transport intermediates along both the biosynthetic/secretory and endosome/lysosome pathways. Occasionally, clathrin buds positioned at the tip of elongated, invaginated tubules are seen in EM thin sections. These may again be an in vivo manifestation of the dynamic balance between tubulation/actin polymerization and dynamin-mediated scission, and a similar balance between the cytoskeleton and fission machinery is possibly a general explanation for all intracellular transport tubules.

Integrated coat assembly and cargo selection
In addition to possibly entwining membrane curvature with actin dynamics, the EFC/F-BAR protein PACSIN 1
www.sciencedirect.com

may also play an important role in determining what constituents are packaged into a forming vesicle. At the postsynaptic membrane of mature glutamatergic terminals, the developmentally regulated NMDA receptor subunit NR3A is replaced with the NR2A subunit. PACSIN 1, a neuronally expressed protein, seems to play a vital role in this reconfiguration of NMDA receptors at developed dendritic spines [43]. The C-terminal cytosolic domain of the polytopic NR3A subunit binds physically to the two tandem Asp≠Pro≠Phe (NPF) triplets in PACSIN 1 (though not PACSIN 2), and appears to assemble endocytic machinery around NR3A, as immunoprecipitates of this NMDA subunit contain clathrin and dynamin as well [43]. Because NR3A-containing NMDA receptor endocytosis from perisynaptic regions into EEA1-positive endosomes is activity-dependent, PACSIN 1 could play a fundamental role in the alteration of functional NMDAR populations that occurs during synaptic development. Further, the binding of the PACSIN 1 SH3 to the dynamin PRD is reciprocally regulated by Cdk5-mediated phosphorylation and calcinuerin dephosphorylation. Since the establishment of the SH3≠PRD interaction seems to be the principal consequence of calcineurin dephosphorylation of the dynamin 1 PRD [44], perhaps this reflects the activity-dependence of NR3A uptake.
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006, 18:395≠406

400 Membranes and organelles
Figure 2

Schematic model for the participation of EFC/F-BAR and BAR domain proteins, actin, dynamin and HIP1R in endocytic clathrin-coated vesicle formation. For details, please see Box 1. Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006, 18:395≠406 www.sciencedirect.com

Molecular structures of coat and coat-associated proteins Brett and Traub 401

Box 1 A highly speculative model for EFC/F-BAR and N-BAR domain proteins coupling actin assembly with endocytic clathrincoated vesicle formation See Figure 2. Since overexpression of EFC/F-BAR proteins causes extensive tubulation of the plasma membrane [26,27,28], these proteins appear to be efficiently recruited to the cell surface and, consequently, we consider this membrane a major site of EFC/FBAR-domain protein action. EFC/F-BAR-domain members colocalize with areas of actin nucleation and with styryl-dye-tagged membrane internalization sites [27]. Further, since RNAi-mediated extinction of the EFC/F-BAR-domain proteins FBP17, CIP4 and Toca-1 diminishes the rate and extent of both transferrin [27] and EGF [26] uptake, these proteins are functionally connected to cargo internalization within clathrin-coated vesicles. The structural argument for EFC/F-BAR domain proteins possibly pioneering membrane curvature and focal actin polymerization derives from the structural relationship of the EFC and BAR domains. The three predicted a-helices in EFC/F-BAR domain proteins are longer than the helical counterparts in the BAR domain [27], and this increase in overall helix length and possible alterations in the packing angle at the dimer interface may result in a surface geometry that is more suited to a wider diameter tubule. Indeed, FBP17 produces tubules of $200 nm in diameter [26], and, in transfected cells, generates tubules >200 nm [28]. The SH3 domains of these EFC/F-BAR proteins, and PACSIN 1, recruit WASP [26]. As the force generated by Arp2/3-mediated branched actin nucleation is exerted on the assembling lattice, the ensuing invagination could change the diameter of the hemispherical membrane bud at the base. This decrease in annular diameter and increase in degree of negative curvature may no longer be optimal for binding of the initiator EFC/F-BAR domain protein(s). These, then, may exit, to be replaced by other structurally and functionally related EFC/F-BAR or BAR protein dimers with a concave geometry better suited to the remodeled membrane surface. This is supported by the observation in live cells that Rvs161 and Rvs167 (the S. cerevisiae homologues of amphiphysin) appear at clathrin-coated budding sites late in the vesicle formation process, presumably very late in the membrane deformation and scission stage [32]. The overall process may also be aided or orchestrated by the inherent capability of some of these crescent-shaped domains to drive membrane deformation/ tubulation directly. The latter process might be more consistent with the paucity of assembled actin polymers in close proximity to invaginating clathrin buds in deep-etch EM images. However, total internal reflection microscopy does reveal actin at clathrin-coated structures early in the assembly process [37], and when HIP1R is silenced by RNAi, dramatic Arp2/3 and actin assemblies accumulate at stalled clathrin bud sites [39]. Also, an earlier EFC/F-BAR-domain dependent step may be regulated by a small GTPase like Cdc42, which binds physically to Toca-1 or CIP4 in the GTP-bound form [59]. The bivalence of the anti-parallel EFC/BAR dimer allows the pair of SH3 domains to recruit N-WASP and/or dynamin through PRDbased associations. In the deeply invaginated, near-spherical state, an N-BAR protein like amphiphysin, which is optimized for a high degree of membrane curvature (small radius), will be preferred. Phosphorylation may also play a role here, as Cdk5 phosphorylation of the dynamin PRD precludes endophilin binding when amphiphysin is engaged [16]. There is an antagonistic relationship between dynamin binding and N-WASP-mediated actin assembly, due to competition for SH3 domain occupancy, so it appears very unlikely that extensive actin polymerization would occur in the region of the assembled dynamin¡GTP spiral. Instead, the available SH3 domains will be preferentially occupied by the dynamin PRD. Perhaps the edges of the polyhedral clathrin coat prevent deposition of EFC/F-BAR or N-BAR domain proteins at the base of the coat, above the dynamin polymer. But closer to the planar plasma membrane surface, SH3 domains associated with

membrane-tethered EFC/F-BAR proteins would be free to engage WASP. In this way, dendritic actin polymerization would be nucleated preferentially at the base of the invaginating bud, in good accord with live-cell data on endocytic cortical actin patches in the yeast S. cerevisiae [31,32]. The dynamic actin network would now generate force perpendicular to the membrane surface. This propulsive burst of actin polymerization is known to occur in S. cerevisiae [31,32], and has also been observed in mammalian cells, temporally coupled to dynamin concentration at the bud site [36≠38]. Furthermore, a temporally regulated succession of EFC/FBAR and N-BAR/BAR domain protein mixtures at the bud site as clathrin assembly proceeds might be one possible reason why it has been experimentally difficult to generally localize individual EFC/F-BAR/BAR domain proteins at bud sites in cells undergoing non-synchronized endocytosis at steady state. A similar phenomenon was initially observed at cortical actin patches in S. cerevisiae [31] until time-resolved imaging provided a detailed chronology of protein arrival and exit at these endocytic zones [31≠ 34]. In the hierarchical translocation model, to complex the mechanical activity of actin polymerization with the coated bud in order to provide the tension necessary for dynamin to execute successful scission [9], HIP1R acts as a linker polypeptide. The N-terminal ANTH domain associates with PtdIns(4,5)P2 on the bud bilayer, while clathrin is engaged by a central segment of HIP1R and assembled Factin via the THATCH domain. Importantly, unlike most conventional endocytic accessory proteins, HIP1R (and HIP1) bind to clathrin by engaging the light chain [41,42], which is positioned on the outer, membrane-distal surface of the assembled clathrin coat [4]. These combined interactions orient HIP1R appropriately so that actin filaments adjacent to the nascent vesicle can be contacted directly to connect the actin cytoskeleton to the assembled coat machinery. Alternatively, there are different types of clathrin-coated structures that form at the surface of mammalian cells, ranging from small (100≠ 200 nm) de novo-assembled puncta that bud and disappear leaving no trace [60], to extensive, stable, flat hexagonal clathrin arrays that are relatively immobile and which produce buds at peripheral regions [61]. Perhaps recruitment of different members of the EFC/F-BAR or N-BAR families dictates the biogenesis of these morphologically and dynamically discrete clathrin assembly zones.

Seemingly related, the EFC/F-BAR protein PACSIN 3 acts as a cargo modulator of TRPV4, a non-selective cation channel, with the C-terminal SH3 domain binding to a proline-rich region in the N-terminal region of the polytopic TRPV4 channel [45]. In this case, however, SH3 domain engagement causes TRPV4 to accumulate at the cell surface. The mechanistic basis for these opposing actions of PACSIN 1 and -3 remains to be clearly explained. Irrespective of the reason, having cargo selection tightly coupled with other critical assembly events may be required in specialized, highly responsive uses of clathrin-mediated endocytosis, such as synaptic vesicle recycling in neurons or regulation of ion channel surface density in reaction to ion influx. For the latter process, structural studies of the endophilin N-BAR domain suggest its direct involvement in Ca2+-regulated endocytic events [23]. Endophilin apparently binds directly to voltage-gated Ca2+ channels or dynamin in a calcium-dependent manner [46]; Ca2+ binding by endophilin is proposed to induce an autoinhibitory
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006, 18:395≠406

www.sciencedirect.com

402 Membranes and organelles

conformation. The structure of the endophilin N-BAR domain reveals several co-crystalized cadmium ions bound in typical Ca2+ coordination modes through sequence conserved residues [23], suggesting that the endophilin N-BAR domain is the Ca2+ binding module that regulates its autoinhibition.

Expansion of cargo-recognizing coat components
Cargo selection is more commonly governed by clathrin adaptors positioned between the clathrin lattice and the nascent vesicle membrane, with the heterotetrameric AP2 adaptor being the quintessential sorting adaptor. Yet recent work has definitively ascertained there is clear delegation of the sorting operations at clathrin assembly zones. A family of monomeric adaptors, collectively designated clathrin-associated sorting proteins (CLASPs), ensure efficient and non-competitive cargo loading. The majority of these CLASPs display the common feature of binding PtdIns(4,5)P2 through modular domains, like dynamin, PLD, and the EFC/F-BAR and N-BAR proteins [2]. Also, they interact with clathrin and AP-2 directly; typically, stretches of intrinsically disordered polypeptide harboring short interaction motifs (often in multiple copies) that bind the coat machinery dock transiently onto clathrin or the two independently folded appendages of the AP-2 complex [47]. Archetypal examples are the socalled LLDLD- and PWXXW-based clathrin- and W-box peptide motifs, respectively, which engage separate surfaces of the clathrin N-terminal domain b-propeller [48], and the DP[FW], FXDXF and WXXF motifs, which interact with the AP-2 a appendage [2,49]. Two CLASPs -- b-arrestin and the autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia (ARH) protein -- are notable as they exhibit extreme selectivity for the AP-2 b2 appendage over the a [50]. b-arrestins regulate the internalization of ligand-activated G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), while ARH is a phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB) domain protein that decodes the FXNPXY sorting signal found in the LDL receptor. A 20-residue sequence utilized by ARH to specifically engage the b2 appendage platform subdomain displays homology to the segment of b-arrestin that binds to AP-2 [50,51]. The crystal structure of a b2 appendage≠ARH peptide complex uncovers two intriguing facts. First, unlike all the known a appendage peptide ligands, which contact a in an extended conformation [49], the ARH peptide engages the b2 platform in an a-helical conformation [50]. Three anchor side chains aligned on one face of the helix occupy complementary pockets in the b2 appendage platform subdomain (Figure 3) and display an affinity 10≠50-fold higher than a-appendage ligands. There is a similar a-helical induced fit of the related barrestin sequence upon binding the b2 appendage platform [51]. Second, this comparable region in b-arrestin plays a vital role in maintaining the inactive, basal conformation of the CLASP.
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006, 18:395≠406

b-arrestin is composed of two adjacent concave b-sandwich domains linked by an unusual polar core [52,53]. At the domain≠domain interface, a cluster of charge-complementary side chains form a delicate intramolecular electrostatic network that maintains the two domains in a basal `closed' conformation. Beyond the two folded b-sandwich domains, much of the $60 amino acid C-terminal segment of b-arrestin is disordered; only a small region, which completely encompasses the b2 appendage-binding sequence, is structured [52,53] (Figure 3). But unlike the a-helical conformation it adopts upon binding the AP-2 b2 appendage [50,51], this region engages the N-terminal domain in what is termed a b-sheet augmentation with the b1 strand of b-arrestin [54]. During GPCR activation, the receptor is rapidly phosphorylated as a prelude to b-arrestin engagement. The incoming receptor-associated phosphates disrupt the b-arrestin polar core and the resulting conformational alterations dissolve the baugmentation [53], liberating the AP-2 binding sequence. Thus, b-arrestins undergo a GPCR-activation-dependent conformational switch from b-strand to a-helix that facilitates linkage of GPCRs to the clathrin coat machinery for downregulation [50,51] (Figure 3). This explains why arrestin remains soluble in the absence of GPCR stimulation and subsequent phosphorylation [55,56], even though a clathrin box motif is located within the unstructured Cterminal region [52]. Despite this intrinsic, activity-relieved regulatory clamp on b-arrestin, an additional layer of regulation appears to operate intracellularly. Like other CLASPs, b-arrestins bind PtdIns(4,5)P2, and a basic patch in the concave surface of the C-terminal b-sandwich domain is implicated in this interaction [52,57] (Figure 3). The b-arrestins actually bind inositol 1,2,3,4,5,6-hexakisphosphate (InsP6) with higher affinity ($50 nM) than phosphoinositides [57], and in InsP6-soaked b-arrestin 1 crystals, the Cterminal-domain patch, composed of four lysine and one arginine residue, indeed binds InsP6 [58]. Somewhat unexpectedly, the same InsP6 molecule is also contacted by an electropositive surface on the N-terminal domain of an adjacent b-arrestin 1 in the crystal lattice [58]. The binding site on the N-terminal domain is $20-fold weaker than the PtdIns(4,5)P2-binding C-terminal-domain binding site, but both cooperate to generate b-arrestin oligomers in solution [58]. Since intracellular InsP6 concentrations are in the 10≠100 mM range, this could be an additional factor maintaining b-arrestins in a reservoir cytosolic pool. It will be intriguing to see whether GPCR activation perhaps leads to acute reduction in InsP6 concentration, favoring mobilization of b-arrestin monomers.

Privileged interaction surfaces for cargo capture?
The AP-2 b2 appendage also has a second independent interaction surface, positioned on the sandwich
www.sciencedirect.com

Molecular structures of coat and coat-associated proteins Brett and Traub 403

Figure 3

The AP-2 b2 appendage interaction hub. The crystal structure of the b2 appendage with the a-helical ARH peptide bound to the platform subdomain and a phenylalanine-containing short peptide associated with the sandwich subdomain interaction surface. Engagement of the platform by b-arrestin will preclude ARH binding and vice versa. Similarly, at the sandwich site, clathrin binding evicts eps15, as well as amphiphysin and AP180. Productive association of b-arrestin with the b2 platform requires prebinding of a phosphorylated GPCR to release the cognate binding peptide, which then adopts the required a-helical conformation.

subdomain [50,51] (Figure 3). This site is the major surface contacted by numerous endocytic binding partners, including amphiphysin, eps15 and AP180/CALM. Two structural investigations [50,51] concur that clathrin engagement can supersede b2-appendage interactions with other binding partners, but the studies differ in molecular details of how the clathrin triskelion ejects b2 appendage partners and via which interaction surface. Still, despite this discrepancy, it is clear that overall this provides a mechanism to temporally regulate associations at the developing bud and to control the placement of individual components within the polymerizing lattice. As extensive packing of clathrin triskelia forms the polyhedral coat, only endocytic proteins that can still associate with AP-2 and/or clathrin in the presence of the dominant AP-2≠clathrin interaction will remain within the lattice interior. Other b2-appendage-binding components will be relegated to the clathrin-poor perimeter of the coat
www.sciencedirect.com

[50]. Thus, detailed structural information on protein≠ protein interactions involving the principal hubs of the coat protein network, AP-2 and clathrin, is beginning to clarify how differential positioning can occur in time and space. The capability of the b2 appendage to differentially recognize and position discrete binding partners reveals the versatility of the appendage fold as an interaction scaffold, and suggests that the b2 appendage platform might represent a privileged contact site to ensure efficient uptake of designated cargo, like activated GPCRs, even while constitutive endocytosis continues [50].

Conclusions
As the compendium of structural features of the components involved in clathrin-mediated endocytosis becomes more complete, we can utilize the molecular information to understand the overall process more coherently. Obviously, a significant long-term challenge is to obtain
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006, 18:395≠406

404 Membranes and organelles

a complete structural description of all stages of the coat assembly and sorting process. In the meanwhile, the available structural information allows us to chart how central interaction hubs engage numerous, often unrelated partners. Given the complex web of interactions established during the budding process, it is now critical to understand the fine dynamics of the protein≠protein network in order to appreciate and further dissect how the coat progressively assembles in only a minute or two, effectively avoiding catastrophic aggregation or inappropriate protein placement.

11. Vallis Y, Wigge P, Marks B, Evans PR, McMahon HT: Importance of the pleckstrin homology domain of dynamin in clathrinmediated endocytosis. Curr Biol 1999, 9:257-260. 12. Doughman RL, Firestone AJ, Anderson RA: Phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinases put PI4,5P2 in its place. J Membr Biol 2003, 194:77-89. 13. Lee CS, Kim IS, Park JB, Lee MN, Lee HY, Suh PG, Ryu SH:  The phox homology domain of phospholipase D activates dynamin GTPase activity and accelerates EGFR endocytosis. Nat Cell Biol 2006, 8:477-484. Describes the intriguing observation that the PX domain of PLD1 and PLD2 operates as an intermolecular GAP for dynamin. 14. Damke H, Baba T, Warnock DE, Schmid SL: Induction of mutant dynamin specifically blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation. J Cell Biol 1994, 127:915-934. 15. Mayer BJ: SH3 domains: complexity in moderation. J Cell Sci 2001, 114:1253-1263. 16. Solomaha E, Szeto FL, Yousef MA, Palfrey HC: Kinetics of Src homology 3 domain association with the proline-rich domain of dynamins: specificity, occlusion, and the effects of phosphorylation. J Biol Chem 2005, 280:23147-23156. 17. Kowanetz K, Szymkiewicz I, Haglund K, Kowanetz M, Husnjak K, Taylor JD, Soubeyran P, Engstrom U, Ladbury JE, Dikic I: Identification of a novel proline-arginine motif involved in CIN85-dependent clustering of Cbl and down-regulation of epidermal growth factor receptors. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:39735-39746. 18. Kowanetz K, Husnjak K, Holler D, Kowanetz M, Soubeyran P, Hirsch D, Schmidt MH, Pavelic K, De Camilli P, Randazzo PA et al.: CIN85 associates with multiple effectors controlling intracellular trafficking of epidermal growth factor receptors. Mol. Biol. Cell 2004, 15:3155-3166. 19. Jozic D, Cardenes N, Deribe YL, Moncalian G, Hoeller D, Groemping Y, Dikic I, Rittinger K, Bravo J: Cbl promotes clustering of endocytic adaptor proteins. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2005, 12:972-979. 20. Liang Y, Kurakin A, Roizman B: Herpes simplex virus 1 infected cell protein 0 forms a complex with CIN85 and Cbl and mediates the degradation of EGF receptor from cell surfaces. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005, 102:5838-5843. 21. Peter BJ, Kent HM, Mills IG, Vallis Y, Butler PJ, Evans PR, McMahon HT: BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature: the amphiphysin BAR structure. Science 2003, 303:495-499. 22. Farsad K, Ringstad N, Takei K, Floyd SR, Rose K, De Camilli P: Generation of high curvature membranes mediated by direct endophilin bilayer interactions. J Cell Biol 2001, 155:193-200. 23. Weissenhorn W: Crystal structure of the endophilin-A1 BAR  domain. J Mol Biol 2005, 351:653-661. This study reveals that a 30-amino acid insert within the endophilin BAR domain is likely to have functional ramifications for membrane binding and deformation. 24. Ringstad N, Gad H, Low P, Di Paolo G, Brodin L, Shupliakov O, De Camilli P: Endophilin/SH3p4 is required for the transition from early to late stages in clathrin-mediated synaptic vesicle endocytosis. Neuron 1999, 24:143-154. 25. Guichet A, Wucherpfennig T, Dudu V, Etter S, Wilsch-Brauniger M, Hellwig A, Gonzalez-Gaitan M, Huttner WB, Schmidt AA: Essential role of endophilin A in synaptic vesicle budding at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction. EMBO J 2002, 21:1661-1672. 26. Tsujita K, Suetsugu S, Sasaki N, Furutani M, Oikawa T,  Takenawa T: Coordination between the actin cytoskeleton and membrane deformation by a novel membrane tubulation domain of PCH proteins is involved in endocytosis. J Cell Biol 2006, 172:269-279. This and [27] are parallel studies recognizing that the previously identified FCH domain is, in fact, the N-terminal segment of a larger a-helical domain weakly related to the BAR domain. Like the BAR domain, this dimeric fold promotes massive membrane tubulation in vitro and in vivo, www.sciencedirect.com

Acknowledgements
T.J.B. would like to thank Daved Fremont for support from NIH grant GM62414-04. L.M.T. is supported by an NIH R01 DK53249 grant and an AHA Established Investigator Award (0540007N).

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:  of special interest  of outstanding interest 1. 2. Roth TF, Porter KR: Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte of the mosquito Aedes aegypti. J Cell Biol 1964, 20:313-332. Edeling MA, Smith C, Owen D: Life of a clathrin coat: insights from clathrin and AP structures. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006, 7:32-44. Robinson MS: Adaptable adaptors for coated vesicles. Trends Cell Biol 2004, 14:167-174. Fotin A, Cheng Y, Sliz P, Grigorieff N, Harrison SC, Kirchhausen T, Walz T: Molecular model for a complete clathrin lattice from electron cryomicroscopy. Nature 2004, 432:573-579.

3. 4.

5. 

Hinrichsen L, Harborth J, Andrees L, Weber K, Ungewickell EJ: Bending a membrane: how clathrin affects budding. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:8715-8720. Careful use of clathrin RNAi to examine whether endocytic adaptors like epsin 1 can drive membrane curvature and invagination in the absence of an overlying polymeric clathrin scaffold. Because endocytic zones are flat in clathrin-depleted cells, it is concluded that clathrin plays an important role in membrane invagination. 6. Ford MG, Mills IG, Peter BJ, Vallis Y, Praefcke GJ, Evans PR, McMahon HT: Curvature of clathrin-coated pits driven by epsin. Nature 2002, 419:361-366. Praefcke GJ, McMahon HT: The dynamin superfamily: universal membrane tubulation and fission molecules? Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2004, 5:133-147. Shupliakov O, Low P, Grabs D, Gad H, Chen H, David C, Takei K, De Camilli P, Brodin L: Synaptic vesicle endocytosis impaired by disruption of dynamin-SH3 domain interactions. Science 1997, 276:259-263.

7.

8.

9. 

Roux A, Uyhazi K, Frost A, De Camilli P: GTP-dependent twisting of dynamin implicates constriction and tension in membrane fission. Nature 2006, 441:528-531. Dynamic imaging of synthetic liposomes discloses that dynamin can only sever membranes effectively when the polymeric spiral is under tension. Microtubule motor drawn-out, dynamin-coated lipid tubules fragment while untethered membranes supercoil. It is elegantly shown the dynamin spiral twists upon GTP hydrolysis, and this appears to be an integral component of the mechanochemical activity of the enzyme.

10. Danino D, Moon KH, Hinshaw JE: Rapid constriction of  lipid bilayers by the mechanochemical enzyme dynamin. J Struct Biol 2004, 147:259-267. Time-resolved cryo-EM shows that despite constriction and compaction of the polymeric dynamin spiral upon concerted GTP hydrolysis, the entrapped membrane bilayer does not fragment or vesiculate. Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006, 18:395≠406

Molecular structures of coat and coat-associated proteins Brett and Traub 405

and since endocytic proteins harboring this domain also contain an SH3 domain at the C-terminal end, they couple to both dynamin and actin via WASP. This family of membrane deforming proteins seem to be important coordinators of dynamin and actin at the bud site to ensure productive budding of vesicles. 27. Itoh T, Erdmann KS, Roux A, Habermann B, Werner H,  De Camilli P: Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F-BAR proteins. Dev Cell 2005, 9:791-804. See annotation to [26]. 28. Kamioka Y, Fukuhara S, Sawa H, Nagashima K, Masuda M, Matsuda M, Mochizuki N: A novel dynamin-associating molecule, formin-binding protein 17, induces tubular membrane invaginations and participates in endocytosis. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:40091-40099. 29. Engqvist-Goldstein AE, Drubin DG: Actin assembly and endocytosis: from yeast to mammals. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2003, 19:287-332. 30. Merrifield CJ: Seeing is believing: imaging actin dynamics at single sites of endocytosis. Trends Cell Biol 2004, 14:352-358. 31. Kaksonen M, Sun Y, Drubin DG: A pathway for association of receptors, adaptors, and actin during endocytic internalization. Cell 2003, 115:475-487. 32. Kaksonen M, Toret CP, Drubin DG: A modular design for the clathrin- and actin-mediated endocytosis machinery. Cell 2005, 123:305-320. 33. Newpher TM, Lemmon SK: Clathrin is important for normal actin dynamics and progression of Sla2p-containing patches during endocytosis in yeast. Traffic 2006, 7:574-588. 34. Newpher TM, Smith RP, Lemmon V, Lemmon SK: In vivo dynamics of clathrin and its adaptor-dependent recruitment to the actin-based endocytic machinery in yeast. Dev Cell 2005, 9:87-98. 35. Merrifield CJ, Feldman ME, Wan L, Almers W: Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrincoated pits. Nat Cell Biol 2002, 4:691-698. 36. Merrifield CJ, Perrais D, Zenisek D: Coupling between clathrincoated-pit invagination, cortactin recruitment, and membrane scission observed in live cells. Cell 2005, 121:593-606. 37. Yarar D, Waterman-Storer CM, Schmid SL: A dynamic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Mol Biol Cell 2005, 16:964-975. 38. Merrifield CJ, Qualmann B, Kessels MM, Almers W: Neural Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome Protein (N-WASP) and the Arp2/3 complex are recruited to sites of clathrin-mediated endocytosis in cultured fibroblasts. Eur J Cell Biol 2004, 83:13-18. 39. Engqvist-Goldstein AE, Zhang CX, Carreno S, Barroso C, Heuser JE, Drubin DG: RNAi-mediated Hip1R silencing results in stable association between the endocytic machinery and the actin assembly machinery. Mol Biol Cell 2004, 15:1666-1676. 40. Brett TJ, Legendre-Guillemin V, McPherson PS, Fremont DH:  Structural definition of the F-actin-binding THATCH domain from HIP1R. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2006. The authors report the crystal structure of the HIP1R THATCH domain, which directly binds F-actin. This study also identifies HIP1R THATCH residues important for F-actin binding, thus providing a solid framework for investigating the role of HIP1R-mediated F-actin binding in clathrinmediated endocytosis. 41. Chen CY, Brodsky FM: Huntingtin-interacting protein 1 (Hip1) and Hip1-related protein (Hip1R) bind the conserved sequence of clathrin light chains and thereby influence clathrin assembly in vitro and actin distribution in vivo. J Biol Chem 2005, 280:6109-6117. 42. Legendre-Guillemin V, Metzler M, Lemaire JF, Philie J, Gan L, Hayden MR, McPherson PS: Huntingtin interacting protein 1 (HIP1) regulates clathrin assembly through direct binding to the regulatory region of the clathrin light chain. J Biol Chem 2005, 280:6101-6108. www.sciencedirect.com

43. Perez-Otano I, Lujan R, Tavalin SJ, Plomann M, Modregger J,  Liu XB, Jones EG, Heinemann SF, Lo DC, Ehlers MD: Endocytosis and synaptic removal of NR3A-containing NMDA receptors by PACSIN1/syndapin1. Nat Neurosci 2006, 9:611-621. The Asn≠Pro≠Phe (NPF) peptide repeats located within the flexible linker between the EFC/F-BAR and SH3 domains of PACSIN 1 are shown to bind and specifically regulate the endocytosis of the NMDA receptor NR3A subunit as the synapse developmentally matures. 44. Anggono V, Smillie KJ, Graham ME, Valova VA, Cousin MA, Robinson PJ: Syndapin I is the phosphorylation-regulated dynamin I partner in synaptic vesicle endocytosis. Nat Neurosci 2006, 9:752-760. 45. Cuajungco MP, Grimm C, Oshima K, D'Hoedt D, Nilius B, Mensenkamp AR, Bindels RJ, Plomann M, Heller S: PACSINs bind to the TRPV4 cation channel: PACSIN 3 modulates the subcellular localization of TRPV4. J Biol Chem 2006, in press. 46. Chen Y, Deng L, Maeno-Hikichi Y, Lai M, Chang S, Chen G, Zhang JF: Formation of an endophilin-Ca2+ channel complex is critical for clathrin-mediated synaptic vesicle endocytosis. Cell 2003, 115:37-48. 47. Dafforn TR, Smith CJ: Natively unfolded domains in endocytosis: hooks, lines and linkers. EMBO Rep 2004, 5:1046-1052. 48. Miele AE, Watson PJ, Evans PR, Traub LM, Owen DJ: Two distinct interaction motifs in amphiphysin bind two independent sites on the clathrin terminal domain b-propeller. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2004, 11:242-248. 49. Brett TJ, Traub LM, Fremont DH: Accessory protein recruitment motifs in clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Structure (Camb) 2002, 10:797-809. 50. Edeling MA, Mishra SK, Keyel PA, Steinhauser AL, Collins BM,  Roth R, Heuser JE, Owen DJ, Traub LM: Molecular switches involving the AP-2 b2 appendgae regulate endocytic cargo selection and clathrin coat assembly. Dev Cell 2006, 10:329-342. This and a synchronous paper [51] are structural investigations of the binding surfaces upon the AP-2 b2 appendage. Two contact sites, one on the platform and one on the sandwich subdomain, are identified and the cognate peptide ligand motifs defined. The data also provide a plausible explanation for how protein≠protein interactions can be switched as clathrin coat assembly progresses. 51. Schmid EM, Ford MG, Burtey A, Praefcke GJ, Peak Chew SY, Mills  IG, Benmerah A, Mcmahon HT: Role of the AP2 b-appendage hub in recruiting partners for clathrin coated vesicle assembly. PLoS Biol 2006, in press. See annotation to [50]. 52. Milano SK, Pace HC, Kim YM, Brenner C, Benovic JL: Scaffolding functions of arrestin-2 revealed by crystal structure and mutagenesis. Biochemistry 2002, 41:3321-3328. 53. Gurevich VV, Gurevich EV: The molecular acrobatics of arrestin activation. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2004, 25:105-111. 54. Harrison SC: Peptide-surface association: the case of PDZ and PTB domains. Cell 1996, 86:341-343. 55. Santini F, Gaidarov I, Keen JH: G protein-coupled receptor/ arrestin3 modulation of the endocytic machinery. J Cell Biol 2002, 156:665-676. 56. Scott MG, Benmerah A, Muntaner O, Marullo S: Recruitment of activated G protein-coupled receptors to pre-existing clathrin-coated pits in living cells. J. Biol. Chem. 2002, 277:3552-3559. 57. Gaidarov I, Krupnick JG, Falck JR, Benovic JL, Keen JH: Arrestin function in G protein-coupled receptor endocytosis requires phosphoinositide binding. EMBO J. 1999, 18:871-881. 58. Milano SK, Kim YM, Stefano FP, Benovic JL, Brenner C: Nonvisual  arrestin oligomerization and cellular localization are regulated by inositol hexakisphosphate binding. J Biol Chem 2006, 281:9812-9823. Co-crystals of b-arrestin 1 with InsP6 reveal two electropositive contact surfaces, positioned on the concave surface of either the N- or C-terminal domains. Mutagenesis shows both sites are required for formation of barrestin 1 oligomers and b-arrestin 1≠b-arrestin 2 hetero-oligomers. It is Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006, 18:395≠406

406 Membranes and organelles

proposed that InsP6-induced oligomerization could buffer the cytosolic barrestin pool in the inactive state as the low-affinity site on the N-terminal domain overlaps a GPCR interaction surface. 59. Ho HY, Rohatgi R, Lebensohn AM, Le M, Li J, Gygi SP, Kirschner MW: Toca-1 mediates Cdc42-dependent actin nucleation by activating the N-WASP-WIP complex. Cell 2004, 118:203-216.

60. Ehrlich M, Boll W, Van Oijen A, Hariharan R, Chandran K, Nibert ML, Kirchhausen T: Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin-coated pits. Cell 2004, 118:591-605. 61. Bellve KD, Leonard D, Standley C, Lifshitz LM, Tuft RA, Hayakawa A, Corvera S, Fogarty KE: Plasma membrane domains specialized for clathrin-mediated endocytosis in primary cells. J Biol Chem 2006, 281:16139-16146.

Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006, 18:395≠406

www.sciencedirect.com

