doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2008.07.022

J. Mol. Biol. (2008) 382, 692­707

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Allochromatium vinosum DsrC: Solution-State NMR Structure, Redox Properties, and Interaction with DsrEFH, a Protein Essential for Purple Sulfur Bacterial Sulfur Oxidation
John R. Cort 1,2 , Ute Selan 3 , Andrea Schulte 3 , Frauke Grimm 3 , Michael A. Kennedy 4 and Christiane Dahl 3 
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99352, USA Washington State University, Tri-Cities, Richland, WA 99354, USA Institut für Mikrobiologie und Biotechnologie, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Meckenheimer Allee 168, D-53115 Bonn, Germany
4 Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Miami University, Oxford, OH 45056, USA 3 2 1

Received 6 May 2008; received in revised form 7 July 2008; accepted 8 July 2008 Available online 16 July 2008

Sequenced genomes of dissimilatory sulfur-oxidizing and sulfate-reducing bacteria containing genes coding for DsrAB, the enzyme dissimilatory sulfite reductase, inevitably also contain the gene coding for the 12-kDa DsrC protein. DsrC is thought to have a yet unidentified role associated with the activity of DsrAB. Here we report the solution structure of DsrC from the sulfur-oxidizing purple sulfur bacterium Allochromatium vinosum determined with NMR spectroscopy in reducing conditions, and we describe the redox behavior of two conserved cysteine residues upon transfer to an oxidizing environment. In reducing conditions, the DsrC structure is disordered in the highly conserved carboxy-terminus. We present multiple lines of evidence that, in oxidizing conditions, a strictly conserved cysteine (Cys111) at the penultimate position in the sequence forms an intramolecular disulfide bond with Cys100, which is conserved in DsrC in all organisms with DsrAB. While an intermolecular Cys111-Cys111 disulfide-bonded dimer is rapidly formed under oxidizing conditions, the intramolecularly disulfide-bonded species (Cys100-Cys111) is the thermodynamically stable form of the protein under these conditions. Treatment of the disulfidic forms with reducing agent regenerates the monomeric species that was structurally characterized. Using a band-shift technique under nondenaturing conditions, we obtained evidence for the interaction of DsrC with heterohexameric DsrEFH, a protein encoded in the same operon. Mutation of Cys100 to serine prevented formation of the DsrC species assigned as an intramolecular disulfide in oxidizing conditions, while still allowing formation of the intermolecular Cys111-Cys111 dimer. In the reduced form, this mutant protein still interacted with DsrEFH. This was not the case for the Cys111Ser and Cys100Ser/Cys111Ser mutants, both of which also did not form protein dimers. Our observations highlight the central importance of the carboxy-terminal DsrC cysteine residues and are consistent with a role as a sulfur­substrate binding/transferring protein, as well as with an electron-transfer function via thiol­disulfide interchanges.
© 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Edited by M. F. Summers

Keywords: dissimilatory sulfite reductase; DsrC; sulfur oxidation; NMR solution structure; anoxygenic phototrophic sulfur bacteria

*Corresponding author. E-mail address: ChDahl@uni-bonn.de. Abbreviations used: NOE, nuclear Overhauser enhancement; NOESY, NOE spectroscopy; HMQC, heteronuclear multiple quantum coherence; HSQC, heteronuclear single quantum coherence; 3D, three-dimensional; TCEP, Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride; TOCSY, total correlated spectroscopy.

Introduction
In phototrophic sulfur-oxidizing bacteria, dissimilatory sulfite reductase (DsrAB, a tetramer composed of two  subunits and two  subunits) acting in reverse is believed to oxidize sulfide to sulfite to generate electrons for photosynthetic CO2 reduction.1­3 Very importantly, the enzyme is not vital for

0022-2836/$ - see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Structure, Redox Properties and Interactions of A. vinosum DsrC

693

the oxidation of externally added sulfide. Instead, it has been shown for the purple sulfur bacterium Allochromatium vinosum that "reverse" sulfite reductase is essential for the oxidation of periplasmic sulfur globules formed as intermediates during growth on sulfide and thiosulfate.3 Sulfide as a substrate for the cytoplasmatically localized sulfite reductase is currently proposed to be generated by reduction of a perthiolic compound that serves as a carrier of sulfur from the periplasm into the cytoplasm.4­6 In sulfatereducing bacteria and archaea, where sulfate is the terminal electron acceptor in anaerobic respiration, DsrAB catalyzes the reduction of sulfite to sulfide.7 All organisms with dsrAB also have the gene for DsrC--in some instances within the same operon as dsrAB and other dsr genes, and in other cases distant from dsrAB.4,8­11 Preparations of DsrAB isolated from sulfate-reducing bacteria have been reported to contain bound DsrC; for this reason, it has been called the -subunit of dissimilatory sulfite reductase.12,13 In other preparations of sulfite reductase, DsrC did not appear to be present.14 Along this line, direct interaction between DsrAB and DsrC from the phototrophic purple sulfur bacterium A. vinosum has not been reported, although all three genes occur in a large cluster, dsrABEFHCMKLJOPNRS.2,3 Some genes in this cluster, most notably dsrEFH, are specific for sulfur-oxidizing bacteria containing DsrAB and do not occur in sulfate-reducing prokaryotes.5,9,10 DsrEFH and also DsrC homologues are found in bacteria lacking DsrAB, including Escherichia coli and many other Gammaproteobacteria. In E. coli, the DsrEFH homologue TusBCD interacts with the DsrC homologue TusE in a sulfur relay system during 2-thiouridine biosynthesis.15 The crystal structure of A. vinosum DsrEFH has been determined and shows that it is a hexamer containing two of each subunit.16 Recently, specific transfer of sulfur to Cys78 of A. vinosum DsrE by E. coli cysteine desulfurase IscS was experimentally verified (submitted). Together, these findings indicate that sulfur transfer reactions involving DsrEFH and possibly also DsrC may be important during sulfur oxidation. On the other hand, DsrEFH and DsrC from A. vinosum were both copurified with the membrane protein complex DsrMKJOP.2 This observation, together with sequence similarities between DsrK and the catalytic subunit of archaeal heterodisulfide reductase, has led to the suggestion that DsrK transfers electrons to or from DsrC via thiol­ disulfide interchanges.2,7,17 All DsrC sequences contain a strictly conserved Cys residue at the penultimate position in the carboxy-terminus (Fig. 1). Other residues at the carboxy-terminus are highly conserved, and the NMR structure of DsrC from the archaeon Pyrobaculum aerophilum showed these residues to be disordered,18 suggesting that this region interacts with other proteins, as otherwise there would be no selective pressure against random mutations at these positions. DsrC sequences from organisms containing DsrAB, but not those bacteria lacking DsrAB (E. coli is an example for the latter), inevitably have an

additional conserved Cys in the sequence (at a distance of 10 residues). The possible interaction of the two cysteines is suggested in the crystal structure of DsrC from the sulfate-reducing archaeon Archaeoglobus fulgidus, in which some molecules in the lattice have only 3.63 Å separation between the sulfur atoms of the two Cys residues.19 In our effort to attribute functions to the proteins encoded at the A. vinosum dsr locus and to clarify the dsr-encoded sulfur oxidation pathway, we not only collected structural information on DsrC via NMR but also studied disulfide bond formation within and between protein monomers for wild-type DsrC, as well as for mutant DsrC proteins lacking conserved cysteine residues. Furthermore, we obtained definite proof for interaction between DsrC and DsrEFH, and show that this interaction is strictly dependent on the penultimate cysteine of DsrC.

Results
Chemical shift assignments and structure Backbone amide 15N and 1H, 13C and 1H, carbonyl 13C, and side-chain 13C, 15N, and 1H chemical shift assignments were 97% complete over residues 2­112. Apart from residue M1, the only commonly assigned side-chain atoms lacking assignments were Pro28 13C, Lys71 13C, Lys79 1H and 13C, and Ser84 1H and 13C . Amide 15N and 1H assignments were missing for Glu44, Lys79, Ser84, and Cys111. All 13C shifts were assigned, and Ser85 1H was the only unassigned  proton. Chemical shifts were deposited in BioMagResBank (Madison, WI) with accession no. BMRB-6518. A total of 1570 nuclear Overhauser enhancement (NOE) distance restraints were extracted from the NOE spectroscopy (NOESY) spectra and used together with 74 dihedral restraints and 70 H-bond restraints (2 restraints per H-bond) to generate an ensemble of 20 structures. The backbone (C, N, C) r.m.s.d. to the average structure over residues 3­108 was 0.68 Å. Additional structure statistics are shown in Table 1. For the ensemble of structures, 96.9% of residues 3­108 occur in the most favored or additionally allowed region of the Ramachandran plot, according to PROCHECK. The structure was deposited in Protein Data Bank with accession no. 1YX3. Description of the structure The A. vinosum DsrC tertiary structure consists of a two-strand -hairpin occurring at the amino-terminus, followed by five helices that form an adjoining orthogonal bundle encircling the fifth helix (Fig. 2a and b). The conserved carboxy-terminal residues exit the bundle from the end of the fifth helix, forming a flexible arm. Mapping of the calculated electrostatic potential on the molecular surface showed a positively charged region of the structure centered around helices 3 and 4 that includes the point of exit

694
Structure, Redox Properties and Interactions of A. vinosum DsrC Fig. 1. Multiple sequence alignment of DsrC/TusE sequences. Sequences are grouped according to whether the host organism's genome has tusBCD but lacks dsrAB, has dsrEFH and dsrAB (Sox; sulfur oxidizers), or lacks dsrEFH but has dsrAB (Sre; sulfate or sulfite reducers). These groupings correspond well to those seen in the phylogenetic tree cladogram, with the exception that DsrC sequences from Pyrobaculum species were grouped more closely with sequences from dsrEFH-containing sulfur oxidizers, rather than with sulfate-reducing bacteria. Below the sequence alignment are the full organism names and corresponding database accession numbers for each sequence. Positions of secondary structure elements in A. vinosum DsrC are indicated above its sequence. Residue insertions specific to sulfate reducers or TusBCD/DsrEFH-containing organisms are marked with asterisks (*) and gray shading, respectively. C-terminal residues specific for DsrAB-containing sulfur oxidizers or sulfate reducers are identified with yellow shading. The invariant penultimate cysteine is shaded black.

Structure, Redox Properties and Interactions of A. vinosum DsrC Table 1. Structural statistics for the 20-member ensemble of A. vinosum DsrC structures
Distance restraints Total 1570 Intraresidue 447 Sequential 335 Medium range (1 b i - j b 5) 333 Long range 455 Hydrogen bonds 2*35 Dihedral angle restraints Total 74  37  37 1 0 Total restraints 1714 Restraints per restrained residue (106 residues) 16.2 Restraints, long range, per residue (106 residues) 4.3 Average restraint violations per structure Distance restraints (all N0.0 Å) 33.8 ± 3.5 Maximum violation (Å) 0.04 Dihedral restraints (all N0.00) 0.65 ± 0.67 Maximum violation (°) 0.58 r.m.s.d. to average structures (Å) Residues 3­108 (106 residues) 0.68 Backbone atoms (N, C, C) All heavy atoms 1.17 Residues 5­44,52­93 (101 residues; 78­82 loops excluded) 0.61 Backbone atoms (N, C, C) All heavy atoms 1.09 Ramachandran (PROCHECK): residues 3­108 inclusive (106 residues); 20 structures Most favored region (%) 83.3 Additionally allowed region (%) 13.6 Generously allowed region (%) 1.7 Unallowed region (%) 1.4

695

Comparative analysis to similar structures As expected, the structure of A. vinosum DsrC is quite similar to that of two archaeal DsrC structures determined previously: the NMR structure of P. aerophilum DsrC18 and the X-ray structure of Ag. fulgidus DsrC.19 A. vinosum DsrC has 40% and 46% sequence identity to these other two DsrCs, respectively. Structure similarity searches with Dali21 identify only other DsrC proteins as matches to the entire structure. Superpositions of these structures' C atoms with those of A. vinosum DsrC using pairwise Dali indicated reasonable similarity: C atoms of the P. aerophilum structure superimpose with an r.m.s.d. of 2.9 Å over 104 residues with a Z-score of 12.0, while the Ag. fulgidus structure superimposes with an r.m.s.d. of 1.9 Å over 106 residues with a Z-score of 15.4 (Fig. 3). Among the structures of the three DsrC proteins from different organisms, the most variable regions are a helix­turn­helix-like structural motif between helices 3 and 4, and the segment connecting helices 1 and 2 (Fig. 1). These regions are the sites with the most sequence variation due to residue insertions and deletions. Between helices 1 and 2, Ag. fulgidus DsrC has a five-residue insertion that forms a loop at the end of helix 1, while P. aerophilum DsrC has a tworesidue insertion that forms part of a bulge in the connecting segment; this insertion is shared only with DsrC from other Pyrobaculuum species and is not present in DsrC sequences from sulfate reducers. In the region around helices 3 and 4, P. aerophilum DsrC and homologues from sulfite- or sulfatereducing organisms have seven fewer residues than DsrC proteins form sulfur-oxidizing bacteria and bacteria lacking dsrAB genes. Notably all organisms that have the seven-residue insertion (which is eight residues in Chlorobium sp.) also have dsrEFH genes or their homologue tusBCD (Fig. 1). These groups correspond to dsrAB-containing sulfur oxidizers (the dsrEFH group) or to bacteria lacking dsrAB that have the dsrC and dsrEFH homologues tusE and tusBCD. A single exception to this pattern is Ag. fulgidus DsrC, which has a sixresidue insertion in this region, but the insertion sequence is not similar to the other sequences in the group. This seven-residue insertion that is found in DsrC from all sulfur oxidizers and in TusE manifests itself structurally in A. vinosum DsrC as a longer helix 3 and as extra turn residues prior to helix 4, when compared to the P. aerophilum DsrC structure. Because of differences in the turn, the relative orientations of helix 4 in the two proteins are somewhat different in the global superposition (Fig. 3). In A. vinosum DsrC, the insertion provides four additional lysine residues, making that part of the surface markedly positively charged (Fig. 2c). Other sequences have fewer lysine residues in the insertion, although one (K81) is strictly conserved in all DsrC sequences that have the insertion. In general, however, sequence conservation within the insertion is lower than elsewhere in the proteins. The Ag.

of the carboxy-terminal arm from the globular protein structure (Fig. 2c). Furthermore, conserved residue Cys100 is partially buried within this region. Carboxy-terminal tail dynamics Interpretation of the observation of disorder at the carboxy-terminus in the P. aerophilum DsrC NMR structure was confounded by the presence of a carboxy-terminal eight-residue hexa-His purification tag, which could have disrupted native interactions at the carboxy-terminus in a way that caused the disorder in this region.18 To alleviate this concern, the A. vinosum DsrC construct had its His tag placed at the amino-terminus of the protein, away from the carboxy-terminus. One-bond amide heteronuclear NOE data (not shown) were qualitatively smaller than the average value for the rest of the protein, excluding two residues at the aminoterminus. These data indicate greater mobility in the carboxy-terminus beginning at residue 106. Random coil chemical shifts and the absence of long-range correlations in NOESY spectra for the carboxyterminal residues also imply greater mobility in this part of the protein. Somewhat greater backbone mobility may also occur in the segment between helices 3 and 4, indicated by fewer NOESY peaks, more unobserved resonances, and sharper resonance lines. The effects of these characteristics can be seen as increased disorder in the structure superposition of the NMR ensemble (Fig. 2b).

696

Structure, Redox Properties and Interactions of A. vinosum DsrC

Fig. 2. DsrC ribbon structures, ensemble stereoview, electrostatic surface, and structural map of conserved residues. (a) Ribbon cartoon of A. vinosum DsrC. The amino-terminus is blue, and the carboxy-terminus is red. The amino-terminal hexa-His tag is not shown.  helices and  strands are labeled. Positions of cysteines are shown. Only a single conformation of the dynamic carboxy-terminal segment (residues 107­112) is shown. (b) Stereoview of A. vinosum DsrC ensemble. The amino-terminus is in blue, and the carboxy-terminus is in red. The amino-terminal hexa-His tag is not shown. (c) Molecular surface colored by electrostatic potential. Red and blue colors correspond to units of -1 and + 1 kbT/ ec. The perspectives are related by a 180° rotation about the y-axis. The left view is the same as in Fig. 3a and b. (d) ConSurf20 depiction of sequence conservation in the DsrC/TusE multiple-sequence alignment mapped onto the A. vinosum DsrC structure. For reference, numbered ribbon cartoon structures appear to the right of each ConSurf map. The upper structures are rotated 90° about the y-axis from the orientation in Fig. 3a, so as to look directly upon the carboxyterminus. Lower structures are rotated 180° again about the y-axis. Darker, warmer colors indicate greater residue conservation.

fulgidus DsrC, whose sequence seems to be in a class by itself, has a five-residue insertion that differs from the other insertion sequences. However, the Ag. fulgidus DsrC structure is similar to the A. vinosum structure in this region, despite the limited sequence similarity, as it is elsewhere in the structure where sequence is more conserved. Mapping conserved residues onto the structure of A. vinosum DsrC shows that the conserved residues on the surface cluster at the side of the protein on which the carboxy-terminal arm exits the globular

structure. This pattern holds whether all DsrC and TusE sequences are included in the alignment used for the mapping, or whether subgroups of sequences clustered in the manner described above are used. Of course, subgroups have greater similarity to each other, so additional patches of conserved surfaceexposed residues are seen, but they still appear for the most part on the same side of the protein. An exception to this is seen in the insertion sequence of DsrC from sulfur oxidizers and in TusE centered around helices 3 and 4 that is absent in DsrC from

Structure, Redox Properties and Interactions of A. vinosum DsrC

697

Fig. 3. Superposition of DsrC structures A. vinosum (1YX3; rainbow), P. aerophilum (1JI8; wheat), and Ag. fulgidus (1SAU; gray).

sulfate/sulfite reducers; conserved residues in this insertion occur at the top of the protein structure as depicted, and the conserved lysine residue (Lys81) is found on the opposite side of the protein. The DsrC fold was first observed in P. aerophilum DsrC18 and, at the time of writing, has only been observed in other DsrC proteins. However, as noted previously for P. aerophilum DsrC,18 the substructure centered around helices 3 and 4 is found to be strikingly similar to the DNA-binding domains of bacterial transcriptional regulatory proteins; in A. vinosum DsrC, for example, the backbone N, C, and C atoms of 48 residues spanning helices 2, 3, and 4 in A. vinosum DsrC superimpose on a structurally similar portion of the DNA-binding domain of the TetR/CamR family repressor protein EthR22 from Mycobacterium tuberculosis with an r.m.s.d. of 2.2 Å. Disulfide bond formation in oxidizing conditions In the presence of a reducing agent (1 mM Tris(2carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP)), recombinant DsrC eluted from gel filtration on Sephadex G75 at a volume corresponding to the monomeric recombinant protein (14,638 Da). In contrast, two peaks at 29 and 14.6 kDa, corresponding to dimeric and monomeric DsrC, were observed in the absence of a reducing agent. SDS-PAGE under reducing conditions yielded a single band of 14.6 kDa for both fractions (not shown), indicating that dimerization of DsrC in the absence of a reducing agent was due to formation of a disulfide bond between two DsrC monomers. When dimeric DsrC was prepared for SDS-PAGE by boiling in nonreducing buffer in the absence of the alkylating agent iodoacetamide (Fig. 4a, lane 1), the intensity of the

29-kDa band decreased significantly in comparison with samples in which free cysteine had been alkylated before boiling (Fig. 4b, lane 1). This observation can be explained by the assumption that free cysteine residues not engaged in disulfide bonds resolved the preexisting interprotein disulfide upon incubation at elevated temperatures. When these free cysteine residues are alkylated, they are no longer able to resolve the disulfide (Fig. 4b, lane 1). Treatment with excess reducing agent after alkylation of dimeric DsrC resulted in the monomeric protein (Fig. 4c, lane 1) and provided final proof for the existence of an interprotein disulfide. To assess the role of each individual conserved cysteine residue in disulfide bond formation and resolution, we generated mutated DsrC with either one or both Cys100 and Cys111, replaced by serine. When both cysteines were replaced, all proteins behaved as a monomer in size exclusion chromatography and upon SDS-PAGE analysis (Fig. 4a, lane 4), proving that disulfide bond formation is the sole reason for dimerization of DsrC. In the absence of Cys111, the native protein also behaved exclusively as a monomer, but part of it was turned into a Cys100-Cys100 dimer after boiling under nonreducing conditions (Fig. 4a, lane 3). However, alkylation with iodoacetamide prevented formation of this bond (Fig. 4b, lane 3). When Cys100 was turned into a serine, almost all of the native protein was present as a dimer, obviously due to Cys111-Cys111 disulfide bond formation. This dimer was no longer transformed into a monomer upon nonreductive SDS-PAGE due to the lack of possible resolving Cys100 residues (lane

Fig. 4. SDS-PAGE analysis with nonreducing sample buffer of wild-type and mutated DsrC proteins purified under aerobic conditions in the absence of reducing agent. Lane 1, wild-type DsrC dimeric; lane 2, DsrC Cys100Ser dimeric; lane 3, DsrC Cys111Ser monomeric; lane 4, DsrC Cys100Ser/Cys111Ser monomeric. (a) Proteins as isolated. (b) Proteins pretreated with iodoacetamide, leading to alkylation of free cysteine residues. (c) Proteins reduced with 2-mercaptoethanol after treatment with iodoacetamide.

698

Structure, Redox Properties and Interactions of A. vinosum DsrC

Fig. 5. 1 H­ 15 N HSQC NMR spectra of DsrC in oxidizing conditions. (a) Reduced DsrC. (b) Aged 2 weeks under air. (c) Oxidized by addition of  20 mM H2O2 to reduced DsrC. (d) After 48 h in  20 mM H2O2. In (b) and (d), non-uniform peak appearance suggests partially disordered structure, although some peaks remain unchanged. In (c) versus (a), slight upfield 15N shift of V112 peak indicates rapid Cys111-Cys111 disulfide bond formation. Similarity of (b) and (d) shows that the oxidized state is reached by air or by H2O2 oxidation. Re-reduction of the oxidized state with DTT yields spectra indistinguishable from (a).

2 in Fig. 4a and b). Summarizing these experiments, it appears that DsrC purified in the absence of reducing agents has a strong tendency to form dimers by disulfide bond formation involving the carboxyterminal cysteine residue at position 111. Cysteine 100 is not involved in intermolecular disulfide bonds. Disulfide bond formation of DsrC molecules was further analyzed by NMR. We initially observed that a small volume (b1 mL) of ca 1 mM DsrC in NMR buffer stored for several weeks at 4 °C in a 15-mL conical tube displayed dramatically different 1 H­15N heteronuclear single quantum coherence (HSQC) spectra before and after this period of aging

(Fig. 5). No precipitate was observed in the tube, nor was degradation of the protein apparent in SDSPAGE gels. However, addition of 5 mM DTT apparently restored this sample to its original state, as the resulting 1H­15N HSQC spectrum was identical with the original. We duplicated this behavior by incubating a reduced sample with hydrogen peroxide (ca 10­30 mM or 0.02­0.05 wt.%) and by monitoring the changes in its 1 H­ 15 N HSQC spectrum over time (Fig. 5). Initially, only the peaks for the residues Thr109 and Val112 were perturbed (Fig. 5c). Subsequently, other peaks moved or acquired a scratchy, distorted appearance,

Fig. 6. 1H­15N HSQC spectra of DsrC and mutants. (a) Native DsrC (green) and DsrC Cys100Ser/Cys111Ser (blue) in reducing conditions showing the effects of introducing Cys mutations. Shifts in peaks are due to neighbor effects near mutated residues. (b) DsrC Cys111Ser with DTT (blue) and without DTT (red; not visible because there is no change in the spectra and they are underneath the blue peaks). (c) DsrC Cys100Ser with DTT (blue) and without DTT (red). Changes occur around residue Cys111 due to disulfide formation, and at Ala63 (see the text).

Structure, Redox Properties and Interactions of A. vinosum DsrC

699

while others remained unchanged. The spectra of H2O2-treated DsrC after 48 h (Fig. 5d) and 120 h (not shown) were very similar to the one originally obtained from a sample stored for weeks under air (Fig. 5b). NMR spectroscopy of DsrC mutant proteins in oxidizing conditions Chemical shift dispersion and line widths of peaks in the 1H­15N HSQC spectra of DsrC mutants are similar to that seen for the native protein. Superposition of the spectra of mutant DsrC proteins with native DsrC shows that changes are localized to sequence neighbors and proximal residues in the tertiary structure (Fig. 6). These results indicate that the mutant proteins are properly folded. Following on the observation that addition of hydrogen peroxide to reduced native DsrC produced changes in the NMR spectra identical with those seen when solutions of the protein sat for many days under air, H2O2 (approximately 0.05% vol/vol) was used to accelerate protein disulfide formation in DsrC cysteine mutants. Resulting changes in amide 1H and 15 N chemical shifts relative to the shifts observed in reducing conditions were used to infer local perturbations in the chemical environment around specific residues caused by the oxidizing environment. In the Cys100Ser mutant, changes in amide 1 H­15N HSQC peaks for residues Ala63, Thr109, and Val112 were observed. This is similar to what is seen initially in native DsrC. Residue 110 is proline, and lacking an amide proton therefore does not yield a peak in this experiment. The 1H­15N HSQC peak for Cys111 is not observed for native DsrC, presumably due to intermediate conformational exchange at this residue, and a Ser111 peak is also not observed in this mutant. These observations suggest formation of an intermolecular disulfide between Cys111 residues of two molecules, forming a dimer of two independent domains connected by a flexible linker. In the disulfide dimer state, this linker must perturb residue Ala63, which is adjacent to the point at which the polypeptide chain exits the globular portion of the protein near the carboxyterminus at residue Pro106. There is no evidence for interaction between the two globular domains other than at Ala63 and in the linker itself. Unlike native DsrC, however, upon aging over time, no further changes in the spectra are observed, suggesting that the absence of Cys100 in this mutant precludes the substantial changes seen in the 1H­15 N HSQC spectra of native DsrC as the protein ages in oxidizing conditions that result from slow intramolecular disulfide bond formation (Fig. 5). With the Cys111Ser mutant, there is no evidence of intermolecular dimer formation via a Cys100-Cys100 disulfide between two protein molecules. Presumably, this is because Cys100 is not located on an exposed convex surface of the protein, and its thiol cannot approach the Cys100 thiol of another DsrC molecule. Likewise, in the Cys100Ser/Cys111Ser double mutant, there is no evidence in the 1H­15N

HSQC spectrum for any effect from hydrogen peroxide; the spectrum is identical with that of the mutant protein in reducing conditions. Biological significance of DsrC In order to determine the importance of DsrC for oxidative sulfur metabolism in A. vinosum, we attempted an in-frame deletion of the gene. This method has repeatedly been used for the specific inactivation of individual dsr genes in this purple sulfur bacterium.10,23 However, the A. vinosum mutant lacking dsrC turned out to be genetically unstable and could neither be stably maintained in liquid culture on media containing malate as electron donor and carbon source nor be kept in the presence of reduced sulfur compounds. These findings indicate that DsrC is indispensable in A. vinosum even in the absence of reduced sulfur compounds. It should be noted that dsrC, which resides amidst other dsr genes, is constitutively transcribed from its own promoter located in the dsrF-coding region.3 As a consequence, formation of DsrC is not turned off in A. vinosum strain 21D carrying an -interposon in the dsrB gene located upstream of dsrC.2,3 In contrast to the mutant carrying an in-frame deletion of dsrC, the latter strain is viable and genetically stable. Our interpretation is furthermore supported by the observation that an A. vinosum mutant lacking dsrE, dsrF, and dsrH exhibits the same genetic instability as the dsrC deletion strain, most probably due to removal of the dsrC promoter in dsrF. In contrast, a strain lacking solely dsrE is viable and genetically stable, albeit it is completely unable to oxidize intracellular sulfur (Frauke Grimm and Christiane Dahl, unpublished data). In summary, our analyses of mutant strains underline the eminent importance of DsrC in central metabolic pathways of A. vinosum, but on their own do not allow to pinpoint a function restricted to oxidative sulfur metabolism. DsrC interactions with DsrEFH An important role and specific function of DsrC in oxidative sulfur metabolism is indicated by the copurification of A. vinosum DsrC with DsrAB, DsrKJ, DsrE, DsrF, and DsrH, all of which are encoded in the immediate vicinity.2 The proteins DsrE, DsrF, and DsrH form an 222-structured heterohexamer and share sequence similarity with TusB (formerly YheL), TusC (formerly YheM), and TusD (formerly YheN) from E. coli, respectively.3,15 Conserved Cys78 of A. vinosum DsrE corresponds to the active cysteines of the structurally characterized E. coli TusD24 and also to the related homooligomeric E. coli protein YchN.25 Furthermore, DsrC exhibits sequence similarities with the E. coli protein TusE (formerly YccK). It has been shown that within a sulfur relay system involved in thiouridine biosynthesis, the TusBCD complex directly accepts a sulfur atom from the protein TusA in a TusE-dependent manner and that TusBCD is a common interaction partner of TusE in E. coli.15 Together, all these findings

700

Structure, Redox Properties and Interactions of A. vinosum DsrC

suggested that A. vinosum DsrC might specifically interact with DsrEFH. We assessed that possibility by using a band-shift technique under non-denaturing conditions. The native proteins were preincubated in binding buffer. After dilution with sample buffer, proteins were separated by native polyacrylamide electrophoresis. Indeed, two additional shifted bands were clearly identified after incubation of wild-type DsrC and DsrEFH. These bands migrated more slowly than DsrEFH alone. Although it is likely that the slower-migrating bands are due to formation of a higher-molecular-weight complex, we currently cannot completely exclude that conformational changes of DsrEFH induced by DsrC led to altered migration of DsrEFH in polyacrylamide gels. The amount of slower-migrating DsrEFH was dependent on the amount of DsrC added. As shown in Fig. 7a, titration of 100 pmol of DsrEFH with DsrC in the range of 20­ 200 pmol steadily increased the intensity of the additional bands, with the faster-migrating DsrEFH appearing first. The intensity of the additional bands even increased at optimum concentrations of the reducing agent TCEP (25 M) at which the original DsrEFH band was completely transformed into the slower-migrating forms (Fig. 7b). Complex formation between DsrC and DsrEFH was also assessed using NMR spectroscopy. Peaks in the 1H­15N HSQC spectrum recorded on a 1:1 mixture of 13C,15N-labeled DsrC and unlabeled DsrEFH had substantially broader linewidths over-

all compared to the same experiment recorded on DsrC alone (Fig. 6), aside from mobile amides near the N-terminus and in Asn and Gln residues. This is consistent with an increased rotational correlation time in DsrC due to formation of a high-molecular-weight complex with DsrEFH. Chemical shifts of most peaks did not change appreciably, but approximately 15 backbone amide peaks disappeared, suggesting the presence of a specific interface with DsrEFH rather than non-specific binding or aggregation. In a final set of experiment, we tested whether the interaction of DsrEFH and DsrC was dependent on the presence of the conserved DsrC cysteine residues (Fig. 7c). It clearly appeared that Cys111 is absolutely required for the interaction, as interacting bands are not formed when Cys111 alone or both Cys111 and Cys100 are mutated to Ser. The interaction is not prevented by removal of Cys100.

Discussion
Conserved residues in the unstructured carboxy-terminus suggest functional importance Carboxy-terminal residues in all DsrC sequences are highly conserved, including an invariant cysteine (Cys111 in A. vinosum DsrC) at the penultimate position, suggesting some functional importance for

Fig. 7. The ability of DsrC to interact with DsrEFH was determined by band-shift assays. (a) One 100 pmol of DsrEFH were incubated with increasing amounts of wildtype DsrC monomer in a total volume of 60 L under the conditions specified in Materials and Methods. In this series of experiments TCEP was not added. Increasing amounts of DsrC produced an additional band migrating between DsrEFH and the wild-type DsrC monomer. A DsrE2F2H2:DsrC molar ratio of 2:1 and lower led to the formation of a second distinct retarded band. Both retarded bands increased in intensity upon an increase in DsrC concentration. The intensity of the original DsrEFH band decreased concomitantly. (b) Effect of reducing agent (TCEP) on the formation of additional bands in band-shift assays. Upon addition of 25 M TCEP, 100 pmol of DsrE2F2H2 is completely retrieved in two shifted bands in the presence of 200 pmol of monomeric DsrC. Higher concentrations of TCEP decrease shifted band intensities. (c) Band-shift assay of DsrEFH with wild-type and mutant DsrC proteins. 100 pmol of DsrEFH were incubated with 200 pmol of the respective DsrC protein in the presence of 25 M TCEP, as described in Materials and Methods. Lane 1, shifted bands are clearly visible for wild-type DsrC and DsrC Cys100Ser, but not present in samples with DsrC Cys111Ser and DsrC Cys100Ser/Cys111Ser.

Structure, Redox Properties and Interactions of A. vinosum DsrC

701

these residues.18 In the NMR structure of P. aerophilum DsrC, residues in the carboxy-terminus from 104 to 111 were found to be disordered, although the presence of a carboxy-terminal hexa-His tag meant that the disorder could have been caused by the disruption of the native structure by the hexa-His tag. The A. vinosum DsrC construct had a hexa-His tag at the amino-terminus instead, yet a similar disorder was observed in residues 106­112, suggesting that the lack of structure in these conserved residues is real. Disordered structure in conserved residues implies that they become structured during interactions with other proteins; otherwise, there would be no selective pressure to maintain specific residues at each position. Invariant conservation of the penultimate cysteine residue (Cys111) in this tail implies that it is essential to the function of DsrC. Moreover, conservation of another cysteine (Cys100) in all dsrAB-containing organisms argues for its importance as well. This cysteine is occluded by the carboxy-terminal arm at its point of exit from the globular portion of the protein. In the crystal structure of Ag. fulgidus DsrC, the carboxy-terminal arm adopts a conformation that places the penultimate cysteine sulfur atom almost within bonding distance of the other cysteine sulfur; as the last 10 amino acids are identical in A. vinosum DsrC, the same conformation should be possible in this protein as well. The localization of conserved residues from elsewhere in the sequence around these conserved structural characteristics also suggests that the carboxy-terminal arm and its surroundings are the "active site" of DsrC. Native DsrC in oxidizing conditions first forms a kinetic disulfide dimer, then a thermodynamic monomeric disulfide species Our NMR spectroscopic studies of native DsrC and DsrC mutants show that an intermolecular disulfide bond between Cys111 residues in two DsrC monomers rapidly forms in oxidizing conditions. Cysteine 111 is the penultimate residue on the disordered carboxy-terminal arm of DsrC, and disulfide bond formation between unhindered thiols in these conditions is not unexpected. This intermolecular disulfide is resolved over time by displacement of one Cys111 sulfur by the Cys100 sulfur in the other molecule, yielding an intramolecular disulfide between Cys100 and Cys111. Mutation of Cys100 to serine halts breakage of the intermolecular Cys111-Cys111 disulfide-linked dimer. The intramolecular disulfide that forms in native DsrC can be reduced and subsequently reoxidized again in the same fashion. The oxidized intramolecular Cys100-Cys111 disulfide form of DsrC appears to be less structured or fluxional, as many peaks in the 1H­15N HSQC spectrum acquire a scratchy appearance with irregular line shapes or weaker peak intensities (Fig. 5). The reduced form can easily be regenerated by treatment with DTT or TCEP. Evidence for both stages of disulfide bond formation was also seen in studies monitored by SDS-

PAGE as well, and blocking of free Cys100 thiols by iodoacetamide following formation of the intermolecular disulfide dimer prevented subsequent resolution to the intramolecular Cys100-Cys111 disulfide monomer. The viability of such a disulfide is also suggested by the close proximity of Cys100 and Cys111 sulfur atoms in some molecules of the asymmetric unit of the Ag. fulgidus DsrC crystal structure.19 It should, however, be noted that the distance of these two cysteines is bigger than a typical disulfide S­S bond distance. The intramolecular Cys100-Cys111 disulfide must be the thermodynamically stable oxidation state of DsrC, suggesting the possibility that it is not incidental, but actually physiologically important, for DsrC to function in sulfur oxidizers and sulfate reducers as part of a redox cycle that is not necessary in bacteria that only use DsrC (TusE) to transfer sulfur for ribonucleotide modification and therefore lack Cys100. Presence of a seven-residue insertion in S-oxidizer DsrC and TusE sequences is correlated with the presence of DsrEFH or TusBCD While the substantial overall similarity in all DsrC/TusE sequences is notable, in one region, DsrC from dsrAB-containing sulfur-oxidizing bacteria is more similar to TusE than to DsrC from sulfate-reducing bacteria. In particular, DsrC from these groups shares a seven- to eight-residue insertion around helices 3 and 4. Residues flanking the insertion are also conserved within the two groups and are different in sulfate-reducing bacteria (Fig. 1). A more distant residue in the sequence, Asp48, displays a similar pattern of conservation (Asp or Glu) and is located on helix 2, where it abuts residues in the insertion sequence in lysine-rich helix 3. Because both groups of organisms contain dsrEFH or tusBCD genes, the presence of the insertion itself and the sequence similarity within the insertion may reflect a common mode of interaction between DsrC and DsrEFH in A. vinosum and other sulfur oxidizers with dsrAB, and between TusE and TusBCD in E. coli and other organisms that contain tusBCD and tusE but lack dsrAB. Additional work will be needed to determine whether residues in the insertion constitute a DsrEFH interaction motif, or whether the insertion serves a different purpose. As was noted above, the structure adopted by the insertion sequence and surrounding residues resembles the DNA-binding domains of some bacterial transcriptional regulatory proteins; the significance, if any, of this resemblance is unclear. Sequence conservation of two cysteines in all DsrAB-containing organisms (sulfate/sulfite reducers and sulfur oxidizers) argues for a role of both in DsrC function Other sequence positions in DsrC exhibit residuetype conservation among both sulfur-oxidizing bacteria and sulfate-reducing prokaryotes that is

702

Structure, Redox Properties and Interactions of A. vinosum DsrC

not present in organisms lacking dsrAB. Most strikingly, sequences from these two groups contain, in addition to the penultimate cysteine (Cys111), an invariant cysteine (Cys100 in A. vinosum DsrC) that is not present in DsrC (TusE) sequences from bacteria lacking dsrAB. A similar concordance is found for Thr109 and Gly110, which are invariant in sulfate reducers and sulfur oxidizers, but are replaced with Val, Ala, or Ser (for Thr109) and with Lys, Arg, or Asn (for Gly110) in bacteria lacking DsrAB. In the crystal structure of Ag. fulgidus DsrC, the equivalent of Gly110 (Gly113) adopts a backbone conformation that is not possible for other residues, thereby allowing the carboxy-terminal arm to bend back towards the protein and to put the cysteine sulfur atoms in close proximity.19 While the invariant cysteine next to the carboxy-terminal residue found in both DsrC sequences from dsrAB-containing organisms and in TusE sequences from other bacteria is certain to be significant, conservation of the second cysteine in all dsrAB-containing organisms is also likely to be meaningful. Thus, while TusE appears to function as a carrier of sulfur atoms via a persulfide at the penultimate cysteine, the second conserved cysteine in DsrC argues for the possible (additional) involvement of both conserved cysteines in an intramolecular disulfide bond. The observation that such an intramolecular disulfide forms easily in vitro does not prove its relevance but--together with other evidence such as the conformational implications of the conserved residue Gly110--supports the idea that capability for intramolecular disulfide formation is built into the sequence and structure and is therefore functionally significant. Proposed models of DsrC and DsrEFH function in sulfur-oxidizing bacteria Observations of thiol­disulfide interconversion in dimeric and monomeric forms of DsrC, together with the identification of a DsrC­DsrEFH interaction, suggest possible models for the function of these proteins in sulfur-oxidizing bacteria. The apparent supercomplex between DsrC, DsrEFH, DsrAB, and membrane-bound DsrMKJOP,2 together with the similarity between the DsrK component of the membrane complex and heterodisulfide reductase, suggests that perhaps DsrC is the "bacterial heterodisulfide," 5,6 analogous to the archaeal heterodisulfide formed by oxidized coenzymes M and B during methanogenesis.26 Assuming that DsrAB operates in a reverse role from its function in sulfate-reducing prokaryotes, and that DsrC interacts transiently with DsrAB, DsrC could function as a carrier of electrons generated from DsrAB-catalyzed oxidation of sulfide to the membrane complex DsrMKJOP. DsrAB would reduce DsrC during sulfide oxidation; DsrMKJOP would oxidize it. However, a specific role for DsrEFH in sulfur oxidizers in such scenario is not really obvious. One possibility could be that it assists DsrMKJOP in some way, perhaps to accelerate interconversion of DsrC Cys111-Cys111 dimers and intramolecular Cys100-Cys111 disulfide

(producing one reduced DsrC as well). Alternatively, DsrEFH could protect DsrC­DsrC intermolecular disulfide or DsrC intramolecular disulfide from reduction by the cytosol during transit from DsrMKJOP back to DsrAB. The possibilities discussed above do not take into account that DsrEFH and DsrC might well be proteins involved in a sulfur relay system just as it is firmly established for the related proteins in E. coli.15 Purple sulfur bacteria of the family chromatiaceae, like A. vinosum, produce sulfur stored in periplasmic sulfur globules as an obligate intermediate during the oxidation of sulfide and thiosulfate.3 Currently, a model that implies transport of sulfur from the periplasmic sulfur globules to the cytoplasm via a perthiolic carrier molecule (RSSH in Fig. 8) is promoted.4­6 As illustrated in Fig. 8, DsrEFH could act as the cytoplasmic acceptor for the persulfide sulfur via its conserved probable active site cysteine (Cys78 of DsrE). In analogy to the related E. coli proteins, DsrC may accept a sulfur atom from DsrE. Now, two possibilities are feasible: (1) The persulfide sulfur could be reductively released as a substrate for sulfite reductase by formation of a disulfide between the two conserved cysteine residues of DsrC (note the difference from E. coli TusE, which has only one conserved carboxy-terminal cysteine). Sulfide is a likely substrate for sulfite reductase operating in the oxidizing direction, as it has been established as a product of sulfite reductases from sulfate-reducing prokaryotes. Binding of DsrC to DsrAB could stimulate reductive sulfide release by forcing the carboxy-terminal arm to adopt a conformation placing the Cys100 and Cys111 thiols in close proximity, such as that seen in the Ag. fulgidus DsrC X-ray structure. This would enable the Cys100 thiol to displace SH - from the Cys111 persulfide, resulting in an intramolecular Cys100Cys111 disulfide. (2) DsrC could act as an even more direct substrate-donating molecule to sulfite reductase by presenting sulfur bound to its flexible carboxy-terminal arm immediately to the active site of DsrAB. Tight complex formation between DsrAB and DsrC, as would be necessary for such a reaction, has already been described for several sulfate reducers.12,13 DsrC would then leave sulfite reductase carrying a sulfonate group. From there, sulfite could be reductively released as the final product of the reaction sequence by formation of a Cys100-Cys111 disulfide. Such a scenario is reasonable as the long-known reaction of disulfide bonds with sulfite, according to the equation RS - SR + 2 2 SO3 -  RS - + RS - SO3 - , 27,28 is fully reversible at pH values above 7.0­7.5 when the concentration of RSH is higher than that of RS - . Cysteine 100 occupies a positively charged region of DsrC created by nearby conserved basic residues (Lys97, Arg101, and Lys107) that could stabilize a negatively charged thiolate or thiosulfonate anion during sulfur oxidation in the DsrAB-bound state. DsrC would finally have to be restored as an acceptor for the next sulfur atom in a so far unknown manner involving a disulfide-reducing

Structure, Redox Properties and Interactions of A. vinosum DsrC

703

Fig. 8. Models of DsrC function during sulfur oxidation in A. vinosum integrating probable sulfur transfer functions of DsrEFH and DsrC. (a) Release of free sulfide as a substrate for sulfite reductase is suggested. (b) DsrC is proposed to act as a substrate donor for sulfite reductase and to release sulfite via disulfide formation. See Discussion for detailed explanation.

enzyme. DsrL, a protein exhibiting NADH:acceptor oxidoreductase reductase activity in vitro and carrying a thioredoxin-like Cys-X2-Cys motif 2 (Y. Lübbe and C. Dahl, unpublished), is a possible candidate for this reaction. In the models depicted in Fig. 8, the specific presence of DsrEFH only in sulfur oxidizers is evident: it is necessary for delivery of the sulfur originally deposited in periplasmic (as in Chromatiaceae or chemotrophic sulfur oxidizers such as Beggiatoa) or extracellular sulfur globules (as in Ectothiorhodospiraceae or green sulfur bacteria) to DsrC and, finally, to sulfite reductase. In sulfate-reducing prokaryotes, DsrEFH is obsolete, and disulfidic DsrC could directly react with sulfite and could then present oxidized substrate to sulfite reductase. A disadvantage of the model discussed here is that it currently cannot explain how electrons gained by the action of sulfite reductase in sulfur oxidizers are further transmitted into membrane-bound electron-transport chains.

was overproduced with an amino-terminal His tag in E. coli BL21(DE3). Point mutations were introduced into dsrC via gene splicing by overlap extension29 using standard PCR with Pfu DNA polymerase (Fermentas, St. Leon-Rot) and pETCEX as template. For the Cys100Ser exchange, two fragments were amplified with the following primers: for the first fragments T7ProPr (5-TAATACGACTCACTATAGGG-3) and CEXSer100rev (5-GAAACGGGACGCCTGCTT-3), and for the second fragments CEXSer100for (5-AAGCAGGCGTCCCGTTCC-3) and CEXrev (5GTCTTCAAGAATTCTCATGTT-3). Both fragments were used as templates for amplification of the complete dsrC gene carrying the desired point mutation. In this step, T7ProPr and CEXrev served as primers. The resulting fragment was restricted with NdeI and BamHI and cloned into pET15b, resulting in plasmid pETCEXSer100. The Cys111Ser exchange was performed accordingly using primers CEXSer111rev (5-ATCCGCTTAGACGGAGCCGGTCGG-3) and CEXSer111for (5-CCGACCGGCTCCGTCTAAGCGGAT-3). For the construction of the double mutation, plasmid pETCEXSer100 was used as the template for introduction of the Cys111Ser mutation using primers CEXSer111 rev and CEXSer111for. The sequences of all mutated dsrC genes were verified by nucleotide sequencing. Construction of an in-frame deletion of dsrC in A. vinosum The in-frame deletion of dsrC was achieved by utilizing the gene splicing by overlap extension PCR,29 using the following primers: CXbaf1 (5-TCAACGAGTCTAGATATCAGCATCAGGCGTC-3), Crev1 (5-CTCGTCCGCTTAGACATCGACTTCGATCGT-3), Cfor1 (5-ACGATCG AAGTCGATGTCTAAGCGGACGAG-3), and CXbar1 (5-CGCACTTGTCTAGAGCGTCCATGTAGACGC-3). An XbaI restriction site was introduced into the 5 and 3 ends of the final deletion framing PCR fragment. The PCR

Materials and Methods
Cloning of dsrC and site-directed mutagenesis For PCR amplification of dsrC with chromosomal A. vinosum DNA as the template, CEXf (5-AGGAAGATTCATATGGCCGACACGAT-3) and CEXr (5-CCGGACGCGGATCCGCTTAGACGCA-3) were used as primers (underlined portions of the two primers indicate restriction sites of NdeI and BamHI, respectively). After digestion with NdeI plus BamHI, the gene was cloned into pET15b (Novagen), resulting in plasmid pETCEX, and the protein

704

Structure, Redox Properties and Interactions of A. vinosum DsrC following experiments were recorded: 1H­15N HSQC, H­13C HSQC, HNCACB, CBCACONNH, HNCO, CC (TOCSY)-NNH, HC-TOCSY-NNH, HCCH-TOCSY, 3D 15 N NOESY (mixing time, 150 ms), 3D simultaneous 13 C­15N NOESY (mixing time, 125 ms), four-dimensional 13 C­13C HMQC-NOESY-HMQC (mixing time, 125 ms), HNHA, and aromatic ring side-chain correlation experiments (HBCBCG-CDHD/-CEHE-aro). All pulse sequences were from Lewis Kay (University of Toronto). Amide proton exchange was monitored by acquiring 1 H­15N HSQC spectra following dissolution of a lyophilized protein sample in D2O. Stereospecific Leu and Val side-chain assignments were obtained from a 1H­13C HSQC experiment recorded on the sample prepared from cells grown on 5% U­13C glucose/95% unenriched glucose.33 The 1H­15N HSQC spectra recorded on the DsrC + DsrEFH complex were collected with shortened delays (1/2JHN = 2.3 ms) and long experiment times ( 20 h) to overcome losses due to relaxation. The raw data and pulse sequences used have been deposited in the BioMagResBank. Data were processed with Felix (MSI) and analyzed with Felix and Sparky.
1

amplicons were cloned into the XbaI site of the mobilizable suicide vector pK18mobsacB.30 The resulting plasmid pK18mobsacBC was transferred into A. vinosum Rif50, and gene exchange was achieved and verified as described by Lübbe et al.23 Growth of A. vinosum strain was examined in batch culture, as described by Prange et al.31 Preparation of samples for NMR Competent cells (Novagen) were transformed by 42 °C heat shock and plated on LB agar media containing 50 g/ mL carbenecillin. Colonies from plates were used to inoculate two 4 mL volumes of M9 minimal media made with 15NH4Cl and U­13C glucose (2 g/L). The medium also contained 10 M Fe3 + and trace metals. The 4-mL cultures were grown overnight at 37 °C with shaking and then used to inoculate two 40-mL starter cultures. These cultures were allowed to grow to mid-log phase, then each was added to 450 mL of media in 2 L flasks. These were grown until OD600 = 0.6, then 130 mg of IPTG was added to each flask (final concentration ca 1.1 mM IPTG), and the temperature was lowered to 30 °C for 8 h until cells were harvested by centrifugation and frozen. The wet weight yield of cells totaled 4.2 g. Cells were thawed and resuspended in Ni2 + column loading buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole). The cell suspension was passed several times through a French press. Lysed cells were centrifuged for 12 min at 19,000g to remove insoluble cell material. Protamine sulfate (12.5 mg in 1 mL of buffer) was added to precipitate nucleic acids. The supernatant was subjected to ultracentrifugation for 1 h (308,000g at rmax), then loaded onto a 10 mL bed-volume Ni2 +-NTA (Qiagen) gravity column equilibrated with loading buffer. Bound protein was washed with 50 mL of load buffer, then removed with elute buffer containing 400 mL of imidazole. Upon elution, 2 mM -mercaptoethanol was added to each fraction. Fractions containing protein were concentrated from 10 mL to 2.5 mL in a Centriprep-3 concentrator, then exchanged into NMR buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.6 at 25 °C, 500 mM NaCl, and 10 mM DTT) on a PD-10 column. The protein in NMR buffer was concentrated further to 1 mM in a Centricon-3 device, and D2O (10% vol/vol) and NaN3 (0.02% wt/vol) were added. NMR samples (250 L) were placed in Shigemi NMR tubes; the remaining unused DsrC protein in NMR buffer (ca 1 mL) was stored in a 15-mL plastic conical tube. NMR samples of DsrC mutants Cys100Ser, Cys111Ser and Cys100Ser/Cys111Ser were prepared using the same protocol as for native DsrC. The DsrC + DsrEFH complex was prepared for NMR by combining approximately equimolar amounts of 13C,15Nlabeled DsrC and unlabeled DsrEFH, then concentrating the mixture 10-fold in a Centricon-30 ultrafiltration device to separate the majority of any excess or unbound DsrC (12 kDa) from the complex (ca 90 kDa). The resulting sample (ca 0.05 mM) was free of precipitate. NMR spectroscopy NMR experiments were conducted at the Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory of the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (Richland, WA). Backbone and sidechain correlation experiments were collected on Varian Inova 600 and Unity 600 instruments. Three-dimensional (3D) NOESY experiments were collected on a Varian Inova 800. The four-dimensional NOESY experiment was collected on a Varian Inova 600. Data were collected at 25 °C using standard triple-resonance pulse sequences.32 The

Calculation of structural ensemble and analysis of the ensemble NOESY cross-peaks were picked using restricted peak picking in Sparky and were automatically assigned and given upper distance bounds by AutoStructure.34 These NOE distance restraints had uniform lower bounds of 1.8 Å and upper bounds of either 2.8, 3.2. 4.0, or 5.0 Å. Amide 1H­15N HSQC cross-peaks still present 30 min after dissolution of a lyophilized sample in D2O were used to derive hydrogen bond restraints with bounds of 1.8­ 2.5 Å for the HN­O distance and with bounds of 2.8­3.5 Å for the N­O distance, provided preliminary structural ensembles clearly indicated the correct acceptor atom. Dihedral restraints for  were derived from the HNHA experiment35 and TALOS,20 and had bounds of - 55 ± 30° for helical residues with J b 5 Hz, and -120 ± 50° for extended residues with J N 7.5 Hz. Dihedral restraints for  had values of -47 ± 30° for helical residues and 140 ± 50° for extended residues.  restraints derived from TALOS were added only for residues in helices and  sheets, and only after consideration of amide  NOE ratios (HNi-HAi versus HNi-HAi-1),  carbon chemical shifts, and evident secondary structure propensities in preliminary ensembles of structures. Preliminary structures were calculated with AutoStructure,34 and the resulting list of assigned NOEs was manually edited during refinement to remove nonrestraining restraints and to correct errors caused by misassigned chemical shifts. The resulting distance restraints, together with the manually derived dihedral restraints, were used to generate a set of 30 structures with Xplor-NIH36 using distance geometry and simulated annealing. The routines dg_sub_embed, dg_full_embed, and dgsa were used as provided, except that, in dgsa, an initial temperature of 2000 K was used, with 30,000 high-temperature steps and 200,000 cooling steps. Sum averaging was used for methyl groups and methylene proton pairs. A final refinement in explicit water was performed in CNS.37 Twenty (out of 30 total) structures were selected to form the final ensemble on the basis of

 http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/home/sparky

Structure, Redox Properties and Interactions of A. vinosum DsrC minimal restraint violations and energies. A. vinosum DsrC is the target OP4 of the Northeast Structural Genomics Consortium. Sequence and structure analyses All amino acid sequences were obtained from GenBank. PSI-BLAST was used with default parameters to generate the protein sequence family.38 ClustalW was used to generate multiple-sequence alignment.39 ConSurf was used to visualize the structural distribution of conserved residues.40 The structural ensemble was analyzed with PROCHECK-NMR.41 Surface electrostatic features of the protein were examined using APBS42 with PyMOL.43 Structure similarity searches using Dali44 were conducted using the residues 3­108 of the first structure from the ensemble as a representative structure for similarity searching. Pairwise structure comparisons were performed with DaliLite.45 Purification of recombinant Dsr proteins and band-shift assay DsrEFH and wild-type and mutated DsrC proteins were overproduced in and purified from E. coli BL21(DE3) as described earlier.2,16 Unless specified otherwise, combinations of recombinant proteins (100 pmol of DsrEFH and varying amounts of wild-type or mutated DsrC) were incubated for 1 h at room temperature in a final volume of 60 L containing 10 L of buffer (5 mM Hepes pH 7.8, 0.1 M KCl, and 0.01% Tween 20) and 25 M TCEP. A volume of 20 L per lane of these reaction mixtures was mixed with sample loading buffer (4× 100 mM 4morpholinepropanesulfonic acid pH 6.8, 40% glycerol, and 0.001% bromophenol blue), separated by native electrophoresis in 7.5% polyacrylamide gels, and stained with Coomassie blue. SDS-PAGE analysis and thiol blocking with iodoacetamide SDS-PAGE was performed in 15% gels in the absence of a reducing agent in accordance with the standard protocol of Laemmli.46 Per lane, 0.5­1 g of protein was applied. Nonreducing sample buffer (2×) contained 100 mM Tris­ HCl (pH 6.8), 4% SDS, 0.001% bromophenol blue, and 20% glycerol. Thiol blocking was achieved by incubation of protein samples in the presence of 10 mM iodoacetamide for 2 h at 30 °C. Reduction of such samples was performed by addition of 2-mercaptoethanol to a final concentration of 20 mM. Samples were then mixed with an equivalent volume of nonreducing sample buffer and analyzed by SDS-PAGE as described above. Accession code The structure was deposited in the Protein Data Bank with accession no. 1YX3.

705

Acknowledgements
NMR spectra were acquired at the Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory (a national scientific user facility sponsored by the US Department of Energy, Office of Biological and Environmental Research) located at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and operated for Department of Energy by Battelle (contract KP130103). This work was supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft grants Da 351/ 3-4 and Da 351/3-5 to C.D. J.R.C. and M.A.K. acknowledge support from the National Institutes of Health Protein Structure Initiative (grant P50-GM62413-02).

References
1. Schedel, M., Vanselow, M. & Trüper, H. G. (1979). Siroheme sulfite reductase from Chromatium vinosum. Purification and investigation of some of its molecular and catalytic properties. Arch. Microbiol. 121, 29­36. 2. Dahl, C., Engels, S., Pott-Sperling, A. S., Schulte, A., Sander, J., Lübbe, Y. et al. (2005). Novel genes of the dsr gene cluster and evidence for close interaction of Dsr proteins during sulfur oxidation in the phototrophic sulfur bacterium Allochromatium vinosum. J. Bacteriol. 187, 1392­1404. 3. Pott, A. S. & Dahl, C. (1998). Siroheme­sulfite reductase and other proteins encoded in the dsr locus of Chromatium vinosum are involved in the oxidation of intracellular sulfur. Microbiology, 144, 1881­1894. 4. Frigaard, N.-U. & Dahl, C. (2008). Sulfur metabolism in phototrophic sulfur bacteria. Adv. Microb. Physiol., 54, in press. 5. Grimm, F., Franz, B. & Dahl, C. (2008). Thiosulfate and sulfur oxidation in purple sulfur bacteria. In Microbial Sulfur Metabolism (Dahl, C. & Friedrich, C. G., eds), pp. 101­116, Springer, Heidelberg. 6. Dahl, C. (2008). Inorganic sulfur compounds as electron donors in purple sulfur bacteria. In Sulfur in Phototrophic Organisms (Hell, R., Dahl, C., Knaff, D. B. & Leustek, T., eds), pp. 289­317, Springer, New York. 7. Matias, P. M., Pereira, I. A. C., Soares, C. M. & Carrondo, M. A. (2005). Sulphate respiration from hydrogen in Desulfovibrio bacteria: a structural biology overview. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 89, 292­329. 8. Karkhoff-Schweizer, R. R., Bruschi, M. & Voordouw, G. (1993). Expression of the -subunit gene of desulfoviridin-type dissimilatory sulfite reductase and of the - and -subunit genes is not coordinately regulated. Eur. J. Biochem. 211, 501­507. 9. Mussmann, M., Richter, M., Lombardot, T., Meyerdierks, A., Kuever, J., Kube, M. et al. (2005). Clustered genes related to sulfate respiration in uncultured prokaryotes support the theory of their concomitant horizontal transfer. J. Bacteriol. 187, 7126­7137. 10. Sander, J., Engels-Schwarzlose, S. & Dahl, C. (2006). Importance of the DsrMKJOP complex for sulfur oxidation in Allochromatium vinosum and phylogenetic analysis of related complexes in other prokaryotes. Arch. Microbiol. 186, 357­366. 11. Loy, A., Duller, S. & Wagner, M. (2008). Evolution and ecology of microbes dissimilating sulfur compounds: insights from siroheme sulfite reductase. In Microbial Sulfur Metabolism (Dahl, C. & Friedrich, C. G., eds), pp. 46­59, Springer, Heidelberg.

 A structure validation report is available at www. nesg.org

706

Structure, Redox Properties and Interactions of A. vinosum DsrC 27. Cecil, R. & Wake, R. G. (1962). Reactions of inter- and intra-chain disulphide bonds in proteins with sulphite. Biochem. J. 82, 401­406. 28. Bailey, J. L. & Cole, R. D. (1959). Studies on the reaction of sulfite with proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 234, 1733­1739. 29. Horton, R. M. (1995). PCR mediated recombination and mutagenesis: SOEing together tailor-made genes. Mol. Biotechnol. 3, 93­99. 30. Schäfer, A., Tauch, A., Jäger, W., Kalinowski, J., Thierbach, G. & Pühler, A. (1994). Small mobilizable multi-purpose cloning vectors derived from the Escherichia coli plasmids pK18 and pK19: selection of defined deletions in the chromosome of Corynebacterium glutamicum. Gene, 145, 69­73. 31. Prange, A., Engelhardt, H., Trüper, H. G. & Dahl, C. (2004). The role of the sulfur globule proteins of Allochromatium vinosum: mutagenesis of the sulfur globule protein genes and expression studies by realtime RT PCR. Arch. Microbiol. 182, 165­174. 32. Cavanagh, J., Fairbrother, W. J., Palmer, A. G. I. & Skelton, N. J. (1996). Protein NMR Spectroscopy, Principle and Practice. Academic Press, San Diego. 33. Neri, D., Szyperski, T., Otting, G., Senn, H. & Wütrich, K. (1989). Stereospecific nuclear magnetic resonance assignments of the methyl groups of valine and leucine in the DNA-binding domain of the 434 repressor by biosynthetically directed fractional 13C labeling. Biochemistry, 28, 7510­7516. 34. Huang, Y. J., Moseley, H. N., Baran, M. C., Arrowsmith, C., Powers, R., Tejero, R. et al. (2005). An integrated platform for automated analysis of protein NMR structures. Methods Enzymol. 394, 111­141. 35. Vuister, G. W. & Bax, A. (1993). Quantitative J correlation: a new approach for measuring homonuclear three-bond J(HNH) coupling constants in 15 N-enriched proteins. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 115, 7772­7777. 36. Schwieters, C. D., Kuszewski, J. J., Tjandra, N. & Clore, G. M. (2003). The Xplor-NIH NMR molecular structure determination package. J. Magn. Reson. 160, 65­73. 37. Linge, J. P. & Nilges, M. (1999). Influence of nonbonded parameters on the quality of NMR structures: a new force field for NMR structure calculation. J. Biomol. NMR, 13, 51­59. 38. Altschul, S. F., Madden, T. L., Schäffer, A. A., Zhang, J., Zhang, Z., Miller, W. & Lipman, D. J. (1997). Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res. 25, 3389­3402. 39. Chenna, R., Sugawara, H., Koike, T., Lopez, R., Gibson, T. J., Higgins, D. G. & Thompson, J. D. (2003). Multiple sequence alignment with the Clustal series of programs. Nucleic Acids Res. 31, 3497­3500. 40. Glaser, F., Pupko, T., Paz, I., Bell, R. E., Bechor-Shental, D., Martz, E. & Ben-Tal, N. (2003). ConSurf: identification of functional regions in proteins by surfacemapping of phylogenetic information. Bioinformatics, 19, 163­164. 41. Laskowski, R. A., MacArthur, M. W., Moss, D. S. & Thornton, J. M. (1993). PROCHECK--a program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 26, 283­291. 42. Baker, N. A., Sept, D., Joseph, S., Holst, M. J. & McCammon, J. A. (2001). Electrostatics of nanosystems: application to microtubules and the ribosome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 98, 10037­10041.

12. Pierik, A. J., Duyvis, M. G., van Helvoort, J. M. L. M., Wolbert, R. B. G. & Hagen, W. R. (1992). The third subunit of desulfoviridin-type dissimilatory sulfite reductases. Eur. J. Biochem. 205, 111­115. 13. Steuber, J., Arendsen, A. F., Hagen, W. R. & Kroneck, P. M. H. (1995). Molecular properties of the dissimilatory sulfite reductase from (Essex) and comparison with the enzyme from Desulfovibrio vulgaris (Hildenborough). Eur. J. Biochem. 233, 873­879. 14. Dahl, C., Kredich, N. M., Deutzmann, R. & Trüper, H. G. (1993). Dissimilatory sulphite reductase from Archaeoglobus fulgidus: physico-chemical properties of the enzyme and cloning, sequencing and analysis of the reductase genes. J. Gen. Microbiol. 139, 1817­1828. 15. Ikeuchi, Y., Shigi, N., Kato, J., Nishimura, A. & Suzuki, T. (2006). Mechanistic insights into sulfur relay by multiple sulfur mediators involved in thiouridine biosynthesis at tRNA wobble positions. Mol. Cell, 21, 97­108. 16. Dahl, C., Schulte, A. & Shin, D. H. (2007). Cloning, expression, purification, crystallization and preliminary X-ray diffraction analysis of DsrEFH from Allochromatium vinosum. Acta Crystallogr. Sect. F, 63, 890­892. 17. Pires, R. H., Venceslau, S. S., Morais, F., Teixeira, M., Xavier, A. V. & Pereira, I. A. C. (2006). Characterization of the Desulfovibrio desulfuricans ATCC 27774 DsrMKJOP complex--a membrane-bound redox complex involved in the sulfate respiratory pathway. Biochemistry, 45, 249­262. 18. Cort, J. R., Mariappan, S. V. S., Kim, C.-Y., Park, M. S., Peat, T. S., Waldo, G. S. et al. (2001). Solution structure of Pyrobaculum aerophilum DsrC, an archaeal homologue of the gamma subunit of dissimilatory sulfite reductase. Eur. J. Biochem. 268, 5842­5850. 19. Mander, G. J., Weiss, M. S., Hedderich, R., Kahnt, J., Ermler, U. & Warkentin, E. (2005). X-ray structure of the -subunit of a dissimilatory sulfite reductase: fixed and flexible C-terminal arms. FEBS Lett. 579, 4600­4604. 20. Cornilescu, G., Delaglio, F. & Bax, A. (1999). Protein backbone angle restraints from searching a database for chemical shift and sequence homology. J. Biomol. NMR, 13, 289­302. 21. Holm, L. & Sander, C. (1996). Mapping the protein universe. Science, 273, 595­603. 22. Dover, L. G., Corsino, P. E., Daniels, I. R., Cocklin, S. L., Tatituri, V., Besra, G. S. & Futterer, K. (2004). Crystal structure of the TetR/CamR family repressor Mycobacterium tuberculosis EthR implicated in ethionamide resistance. J. Mol. Biol. 340, 1095­1105. 23. Lübbe, Y. J., Youn, H.-S., Timkovich, R. & Dahl, C. (2006). Siro(haem)amide in Allochromatium vinosum and relevance of DsrL and DsrN, a homolog of cobyrinic acid a,c diamide synthase for sulfur oxidation. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 261, 194­202. 24. Numata, T., Fukai, S., Ikeuchi, Y., Suzuki, T. & Nureki, O. (2006). Structural basis for sulfur relay to RNA mediated by heterohexameric TusBCD complex. Structure, 14, 357­366. 25. Shin, D. H., Yokota, H., Kim, R. & Kim, S.-H. (2002). Crystal structure of a conserved hypothetical protein from Escherichia coli. J. Struct. Funct. Genomics, 14, 53­66. 26. Hedderich, R., Klimmek, O., Kröger, A., Dirmeier, R., Keller, M. & Stetter, K. O. (1999). Anaerobic respiration with elemental sulfur and with disulfides. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 22, 353­381.

Structure, Redox Properties and Interactions of A. vinosum DsrC 43. Delano, W. L. (2002). The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System. DeLano Scientific, San Carlos, CA, USA. 44. Holm, L. & Sander, C. (1998). Touring protein fold space with Dali/FSSP. Nucleic Acids Res. 26, 316­319.

707

45. Holm, L. & Park, J. (2000). DaliLite workbench for protein structure comparison. Bioinformatics, 16, 566­567. 46. Laemmli, U. K. (1970). Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4. Nature, 227, 680­685.

