doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2009.06.049

J. Mol. Biol. (2009) 392, 529­546

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Designing Out Disulfide Bonds of Leech Carboxypeptidase Inhibitor: Implications for Its Folding, Stability and Function
Joan L. Arolas, Virginia Castillo, Sílvia Bronsoms, Francesc X. Aviles and Salvador Ventura
Institut de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, E-08193 Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Facultat de Ciències, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, E-08193 Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain Received 13 January 2009; received in revised form 4 May 2009; accepted 18 June 2009 Available online 25 June 2009 Leech carboxypeptidase inhibitor (LCI) is a 67-residue, tight-binding metallocarboxypeptidase inhibitor composed of a compact domain with a fivestranded -sheet and a short -helix that are strongly stabilized by four disulfide bonds. In this study, we investigated the contribution of each particular disulfide to the folding, stability and function of LCI by constructing a series of single and multiple mutants lacking one to four disulfide bonds. The results allow a better understanding of how individual disulfide bonds shape and restrict the conformational space that LCI must explore before attaining its native conformation. The work also dissected the role played by intramolecular rearrangements of disulfides during LCI folding, providing a new kinetic scheme in which the 2S ensemble suffers a nonspecific oxidation into the 3S ensemble. These 3-disulfide-bonded species reshuffle to preferentially form III-A and III-B, two major native-like folding intermediates that need structural rearrangements through the formation of scrambled isomers to finally render native LCI. The designed multiple mutants of LCI are unable to fold correctly, displaying a highly unstructured conformation and a very low inhibitory capability, which indicates the importance of disulfide bonds in LCI for both correct folding and achievement of a functional structure. In contrast, the elimination of a single disulfide bond in LCI only results in a significant reduction of conformational stability, but the mutations have a rather moderate impact on carboxypeptidase inhibition, allowing the possibility to target the intrinsic stability and specific activity of LCI independently. In this way, the findings reported provide a basis for the design of novel variants of the molecule with improved therapeutic properties.
© 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Edited by F. Schmid

Keywords: metallocarboxypeptidase inhibitor; disulfide bond; protein folding; protein stability; protein engineering

*Corresponding authors. F. X. Aviles is to be contacted at Protein Engineering Unit, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, E-08193 Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain. S. Ventura, Protein Folding and Design Unit, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, E-08193 Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain. E-mail addresses: francescxavier.aviles@uab.es; salvador.ventura@uab.es. Abbreviations used: bis-ANS, 4,4'-bis(1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonate); BPTI, bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor; CPA, carboxypeptidase A; GdnHCl, guanidine hydrochloride; GSH, reduced glutathione; GSSG, oxidized glutathione; Ki, inhibition constant; LCI, leech carboxypeptidase inhibitor; MALDI-TOF MS, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry; MCP, metallocarboxypeptidase; RP-HPLC, reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography; TFA, trifluoroacetic acid; WT, wild type.
0022-2836/$ - see front matter © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

530

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability

Introduction
The covalent link of cysteine residues by disulfide bonds is vital for the folding, stability and function of many proteins both in bacteria and in eukaryotes and is a topic of wide interest in the fields of protein folding and protein engineering.1­3 The removal of a disulfide bond by reduction or substitution for another amino acid residue usually results in a significant conformational destabilization of the

protein.4­8 In addition, it may have a positive or negative effect on the folding rate and folding efficiency of the protein by narrowing the folding landscape or by leading to kinetically trapped intermediates during the folding reaction.9­12 The term "oxidative folding" describes the composite process by which a reduced unfolded protein gains both its native disulfide bonds (disulfide-bond formation) and its native structure (conformational folding).13,14 Numerous studies directed to investigate the oxi-

Fig. 1. Structure of LCI. (a) Ribbon representation of the three-dimensional structure of native LCI. The four native disulfide bonds (SS1, Cys11­Cys34; SS2, Cys18­Cys62; SS3, Cys19­Cys43; and SS4, Cys22­Cys58) are shown in yellow sticks. The N- and C-terminal residues are labeled. The Protein Data Bank accession code for the structure is 1DTV. This figure was prepared with PyMOL. (b) Amino acid sequence of LCI. Its secondary structure elements and disulfide-bond pairings are schematically shown above and below the sequence, respectively.

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability

531 variants with enhanced stability and/or altered activity. We have previously described the unfolding pathway and conformational stability of LCI, revealing that this protein has slow unfolding kinetics and is highly stable against denaturation.32 We have also extensively characterized its oxidative folding pathway, showing a rapid and sequential flow of 1- and 2disulfide intermediates that reaches a rate-limiting step in which two 3-disulfide intermediates (termed III-A and III-B) act as major kinetic traps.33 These two intermediates contain only native disulfide bonds (III-A and III-B lack Cys22­Cys58 and Cys19­Cys43, respectively) and need major structural rearrangements through the formation of a heterogeneous population of 4-disulfide scrambled isomers to render native LCI. We have recently determined the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) structure of trapped and isolated III-A,34 as well as the crystal structure of an analog of III-B,35 reporting that both intermediates are metastable and contain a nativelike structure that is responsible for their strong accumulation during the LCI folding reaction. They display greater flexibility as compared with the native form, especially at the regions surrounding the free cysteines (or alanines in the analog), however. In this study, we examined the effect of disulfide-bond removal on the folding, stability and function of LCI using site-directed mutagenesis to replace each cystine with a pair of alanine residues.

dative folding of small disulfide-rich proteins have taken advantage of the particular chemistry of disulfide-bond formation.15­17 In those studies, the proteins are initially fully reduced/unfolded and then allowed to refold in the presence of selected buffers containing different redox agents. The folding intermediates that arise during the folding reaction are subsequently trapped in a time-course manner by acidification (reversible) or alkylation (irreversible) and separated by reversed-phase highperformance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC), which makes their further disulfide-bond and structural characterization possible. The extent of heterogeneity of folding intermediates, the predominance of intermediates containing native disulfide bonds and native (sub)structures and the presence of scrambled isomers (fully oxidized species that contain at least two non-native disulfide bonds) as intermediates are used to define the mechanism of oxidative folding of the analyzed protein.18 Surprisingly, a great diversity of folding mechanisms have been observed among small disulfide-rich proteins, even for those containing similar disulfide-bond patterns and three-dimensional structures.19,20 At the two extremes of this diversity we find bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) and hirudin, two well-known serine protease inhibitors. BPTI folds through a limited number of disulfide intermediates adopting native disulfide pairings and native-like structures that funnel the folding reaction toward the native protein and prevent the accumulation of scrambled isomers.21,22 In contrast, the folding of hirudin shows a high degree of heterogeneity of intermediates, including an extensive population of scrambled isomers that act as major kinetic traps slowing the folding reaction.23­25 Other proteins, such as leech carboxypeptidase inhibitor (LCI), display both similarities and dissimilarities to the folding of BPTI and hirudin, owing to the presence of both native-like intermediates and scrambled isomers.26,27 LCI is a 67-residue cysteine-rich protein isolated from the medical leech Hirudo medicinalis that inhibits metallocarboxypeptidases (MCPs) of the A/B subfamily (M14A, according to the MEROPS database) with nanomolar affinity.28 The threedimensional structure of LCI shows that it folds in a compact domain consisting of a five-stranded antiparallel -sheet and a short -helix that are strongly stabilized by the presence of four disulfide bonds (Fig. 1).29 LCI is a potent inhibitor of plasma carboxypeptidase B, also known as CPU or thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor, a molecular link between blood coagulation and fibrinolysis.30,31 Assuming that leeches secrete LCI during feeding, the inhibitor could help maintain the liquid state of blood by inhibition of thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor. Indeed, our group has recently tested the in vitro profibrinolytic activity of LCI and demonstrated its possible use as an enhancer of the tissue-type plasminogen activator therapy in thrombotic disorders (S. Salamanca et al., unpublished data). Knowledge about the folding and unfolding determinants of this molecule is essential for the development of

Results
To study the contribution of the four disulfide bonds to the folding, stability and function of LCI, we constructed seven mutant proteins in which single or multiple disulfide bonds were disrupted by Cys  Ala mutations (Table 1). They include the mutants lacking one of the four native disulfide bonds of LCI (LCI_1 to LCI_4), a double mutant lacking the two native disulfide bonds absent in the III-A and III-B intermediates of wild-type (WT) LCI folding (LCI_3/4), a triple mutant displaying only the Cys11­Cys34 disulfide bond (LCI_2/3/4) and a mutant lacking the four native disulfide bonds of the inhibitor (LCI_1/2/3/4). The mutant and WT forms were expressed using Escherichia coli cells harboring a plasmid containing the OmpA signal peptide for

Table 1. LCI mutant proteins constructed in this work
Name LCI_1 LCI_2 LCI_3 LCI_4 LCI_3/4 LCI_2/3/4 LCI_1/2/3/4 Missing disulfide bond(s) SS1 SS2 SS3 SS4 SS3, SS4 SS2, SS3, SS4 SS1, SS2, SS3, SS4 Mutations C11A/C34A C18A/C62A C19A/C43A C22A/C58A C19A/C43A, C22A/C58A C18A/C62A, C19A/C43A, C22A/C58A C11A/C34A, C18A/C62A, C19A/C43A, C22A/C58A

532

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability

Fig. 2. Oxidative folding of WT and LCI_2, LCI_3 and LCI_4 mutants. RP-HPLC traces of the acid-trapped intermediates that occur along the oxidative folding of different LCI variants. The reactions were carried out in Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5, in the absence (Control -) and in the presence (Control +) of 0.25 mM 2-mercaptoethanol or a mixture of GSSG and GSH (0.5 and 1 mM) as detailed in Materials and Methods. The retention times of the native (N) and fully reduced/unfolded (R) forms are labeled. III-A and III-B are two native 3-disulfide intermediates of the oxidative folding of WT LCI.

periplasmic expression and were purified by a combination of three chromatography steps that rendered soluble proteins with purity greater than 95% as described in Materials and Methods. About 3 mg/l of protein was obtained for WT LCI. However, the expression yields of the single and multiple LCI mutants were much lower (10­50 times) depending on the identity of the mutated disulfide bond: WT N LCI_3 N LCI_2 N LCI_4 N LCI_1 N LCI_3/ 4 N LCI_2/3/4  LCI_1/2/3/4. Oxidative folding of WT and LCI mutants Fully reduced and unfolded WT, LCI_1, LCI_2, LCI_3, LCI_4 and LCI_3/4 forms were allowed to

refold in Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5, in the absence (Control -) and in the presence (Control +) of either 2-mercaptoethanol or a mixture of oxidized glutathione and reduced glutathione (GSSG and GSH). The intermediates arising along the folding reaction of the WT and mutant proteins were trapped by acidification or alkylation at selected time points and further analyzed by RP-HPLC and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization timeof-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) to investigate their chromatographic behavior and disulfide-bond content, respectively. A high degree of heterogeneity of intermediates was observed at the beginning of the folding process of WT LCI (up to 8 h), with similar RP-HPLC profiles observed

Fig. 3. Disulfide species in the oxidative folding of WT and LCI_2, LCI_3 and LCI_4 mutants. Folding was performed in Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5, in the absence (Control -) and in the presence (Control +) of 0.25 mM 2-mercaptoethanol or a mixture of GSSG and GSH (0.5 and 1 mM). The percentages of disulfide species were determined by alkylation with 4vinylpyridine and subsequent analysis by MALDI-TOF MS as detailed in Materials and Methods. XS represents an ensemble of species with an X number of disulfide bonds. The recovery of the native LCI variants is represented by bars and was calculated from the peak areas in the corresponding RP-HPLC chromatograms.

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability

533

Fig. 3 (legend on previous page)

534
Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability Fig. 4. Oxidative folding of LCI_1 and LCI_3/4 mutants. RP-HPLC traces of the acid-trapped intermediates that occur along the oxidative folding of different LCI variants. The reactions were carried out in Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5, in the absence (Control -) and in the presence (Control +) of 0.25 mM 2-mercaptoethanol or a mixture of GSSG and GSH (0.5 and 1 mM). The retention times of the native (N) and fully reduced/unfolded (R) forms are labeled. III-A and III-B are two native 3-disulfide intermediates of the oxidative folding of WT LCI.

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability

535 with GSSG/GSH for 24 h (Fig. 3). In contrast, LCI_3 rapidly folded through smaller populations of 1and 2-disulfide intermediates and a low percentage of 3-disulfide scrambled isomers, as indicated by the slight effect exhibited by the addition of thiol catalyst (Figs. 2 and 3). Again, the presence of oxidizing reagent (GSSG) strongly speeded the folding rate by acceleration of disulfide-bond formation. The absence of a strong kinetic barrier in the folding reaction of this mutant (i.e., the reshuffling of scrambled isomers into the native protein) accounted for an extremely efficient process with more than 90% of native protein recovered after 24 h in the absence of redox agents (Control -). LCI_1 and LCI_3/4 could not reach any predominant conformation, not even after incubation with GSSG/GSH for 48 h (Fig. 4). LCI_1 folding underwent a sequential formation of 1-, 2- and 3-disulfide intermediates, leading to the accumulation of a highly heterogeneous population of scrambled isomers that could not rearrange into any native-like state. The case of the double mutant was similar to that of LCI_1 and only differed in the amount of occurring intermediates, which were more reduced owing to the lower number of possible disulfide species. The initial formation of 1-disulfide intermediates was followed by the final accumulation of three major 2-disulfide scrambled isomers that could not evolve into any predominant form (see GSSG/GSH condition in Fig. 4). The expression of LCI_2/3/4 and LCI_1/2/3/4, containing one and no disulfide bond, respectively, rendered a unique

regardless of the presence of thiol catalyst (see Fig. 2, Control - and Control +). The folding reaction was shown to undergo a sequential flow through the formation of 1-, 2- and 3-disulfide intermediates that ended up with a strong accumulation of two native 3-disulfide intermediates, III-A and IIIB (Fig. 2). The last step of folding was characterized by the occurrence of a heterogeneous population of 4-disulfide intermediates that needed the presence of 2-mercaptoethanol or GSH to reshuffle their non-native disulfide bonds and efficiently render native protein. The addition of oxidizing reagent (GSSG) strongly accelerated the folding rate, promoting the coexistence of both 3-disulfide intermediates (III-A and III-B) and a mixture of 4disulfide scrambled isomers as major kinetic traps of the reaction. Of the five LCI mutants that were analyzed in terms of oxidative folding, only LCI_2, LCI_3 and LCI_4 were able to acquire a native-like state (Fig. 2), although they followed different folding mechanisms. LCI_2 and LCI_4 folded through heterogeneous populations of 1- and 2-disulfide intermediates, leading to the accumulation of a complex population of 3-disulfide scrambled isomers that slowed the folding rate (Fig. 2). As in the case of WT LCI, only the presence of thiol catalyst could promote disulfide-bond rearrangements toward the native disulfide-bond pairing and native-like structure. However, for LCI_4, the folding process was not very efficient and only approximately 50% of the protein was recovered as native form after treatment

Fig. 5. Effect of denaturant on the oxidative folding of WT and LCI_2, LCI_3 and LCI_4 mutants. RP-HPLC traces of the acid-trapped intermediates that occur along the oxidative folding of different LCI variants. The reactions were carried out in Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5, containing 0.5 M GdnHCl in the absence (Control -) and in the presence (Control +) of 0.25 mM 2mercaptoethanol. The retention times of the native (N) and fully reduced/unfolded (R) forms are labeled. III-A and III-B are two native 3-disulfide intermediates of the oxidative folding of WT LCI.

536 conformation. Nevertheless, both mutants eluted in the RP-HPLC in a position close to that of the fully reduced/unfolded form of WT LCI (data not shown), suggesting a high degree of hydrophobicity and low compactness. On the other hand, the nativelike forms of LCI_2, LCI_3 and LCI_4 eluted at time points located between those of the native and fully reduced/unfolded forms of WT LCI, pointing to a medium degree of hydrophobicity and compactness. As previously reported,33 the addition of low concentrations of denaturant strongly accelerates the folding of WT LCI by diminishing the accumulation of the native-like intermediates III-A and III-B, which act as kinetic traps of the reaction. The oxidative folding of the three LCI mutants that could achieve a native-like conformation, LCI_2, LCI_3 and LCI_4, was examined using 0.5 M guanidine hydrochloride (GdnHCl) both in the absence (Control -) and in the presence (Control +) of thiol catalyst. While the folding of LCI_2 and LCI_4 was slightly affected by the addition of the denaturant (Fig. 5), the formation of native LCI_3 was strongly accelerated by its presence. Reductive unfolding and disulfide scrambling of WT and LCI mutants The reductive unfolding of the native form of WT, LCI_2, LCI_3 and LCI_4 was studied in Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5, using increasing concentrations of dithiothreitol (DTT) as reducing agent to test the stability of their disulfide bonds.36,37 The mixtures were trapped in a time-course manner by acidification and further analyzed by RP-HPLC. Reduction of WT LCI underwent an apparent all-or-none mechanism in which only low amounts of III-A and IIIB intermediates were detected along the reaction (Fig. 6). These two species were subsequently reduced into fully reduced LCI without a significant accumulation of 2- and 1-disulfide intermediates. The same reduction behavior was observed at different concentrations of DTT (1­100 mM), with varia-

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability

tions only in the rates of the reduction process. The analysis also revealed an all-or-none reduction mechanism for the 3-disulfide LCI mutants, which however resisted much lower concentrations of DTT than the WT. The dependence of the fraction of reduced protein on the reaction time could be fitted to a single constant first-order reaction (R N 0.99) for LCI_3 and LCI_4 (Fig. 7a and b). A linear dependence of the apparent reductive unfolding rates on the DTT concentration was observed (Fig. 7c), which allowed us to calculate average rate constants of 0.129 ± 0.002 and 0.406 ± 0.002 s- 1 M- 1, for LCI_3 and LCI_4, respectively. The reduction rate of LCI_2 appeared to be in between those of LCI_3 and LCI_4 at any given DTT concentration, but the reactions could not be fitted to a first-order equation using a single constant, suggesting a different reduction mechanism for this mutant. It is well established that in the presence of denaturant and thiol initiator, unfolding of a small disulfide-rich protein is accompanied by reshuffling of its native disulfide bonds, a process called disulfide scrambling.38,39 Unfolding of native WT, LCI_2, LCI_3 and LCI_4 was carried out in Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5, in the presence of increasing concentrations of denaturant (urea or GdnHCl) and 0.25 mM 2-mercaptoethanol as thiol initiator. After reaching equilibrium for 20 h, the reactions were trapped by acidification and analyzed by RP-HPLC. The denaturation curves showed that the extent of unfolding resulting from the equilibrium between scrambled isomers and the native protein was clearly dependent upon the strength of denaturant used (Fig. 8a). Urea required in general higher concentrations than GdnHCl to denature the native proteins. The midpoint denaturant concentrations (cM) were as follows: N 8, 2 and 4.2 M for WT, LCI_2 and LCI_3, respectively, and 4.1, 1.0, 1.9 and 0.6 M GdnHCl for WT, LCI_2, LCI_3 and LCI_4, respectively. Thus, all the mutants are significantly less stable than the WT form (see thermodynamic parameters in Table 2). The relative stability of the

Fig. 6. Reductive unfolding of WT and LCI_2, LCI_3 and LCI_4 mutants. RP-HPLC traces of the acid-trapped intermediates that occur along the reductive unfolding of different LCI variants. The native proteins were treated with selected concentrations of DTT in Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5. "N" and "R" stand for the native and fully reduced/ unfolded forms, respectively. III-A and III-B are two native 3-disulfide intermediates that also accumulate along the oxidative folding of WT LCI.

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability

537 absence of denaturant (Fig. 8b). While the WT form and LCI_3 do not reshuffle into any scrambled isomer population, displaying structural uniqueness, LCI_2 and LCI_4 reshuffle into 10% and 45% of  scrambled isomers, respectively, with Keq values of 0.1 and 0.45. Conformational properties of WT and LCI mutants The structural features of the native forms of WT and LCI mutants were analyzed by circular dichroism (CD) and NMR spectroscopy. The CD spectrum of the native WT LCI displays a well-defined minimum in ellipticity at 208 nm and a maximum at 228 nm, whose signal has been shown to correlate with the degree of unfolding of the protein.35 The shape of the CD spectrum of LCI_3 is similar to that of WT LCI (Fig. 9a), except for a slight decrease in the intensity of the 228-nm maximum. The decrease in the intensity of this signature is more pronounced for LCI_4 and LCI_2, being especially significant the complete lack of the maximum and minimum of ellipticity of LCI_2/3/4 and LCI_1/2/3/4, which show a CD spectrum close to that of random-coil polypeptides. These results are further supported by NMR spectroscopy. The one-dimensional NMR spectrum of WT LCI displays a wide signal dispersion of resonances at both low (amide and aromatic region) and high (methyl region) fields, with good peak sharpness, characteristic of a folded molecule. The spectra of LCI_2, LCI_3 and LCI_4 show a lower dispersion of resonances at the amide region (Fig. 9b), mainly in the case of LCI_4, and those of LCI_2/3/4 and LCI_1/2/3/4 exhibit clear band broadening and peak collapse around 8 ppm. Altogether, these data indicate a partially folded conformation for the single mutants and a mostly unstructured conformation for the multiple mutants. The conformation of LCI_1/2/3/4 was also assessed by fluorescence spectroscopy. The fluorescence spectrum of LCI is dominated by the contribution of two Tyr and two Trp residues (Tyr9, Tyr29, Trp42 and Trp50) buried in the interior of the protein that give an emission maximum at 350 nm (Fig. 9c).35 The comparison of the spectrum of WT LCI with that of the multiple mutant reveals an unfolded conformation for the latter, which is supported by a red shift to 355­360 nm and a strong increase of intensity in the fluorescence emission. To test whether LCI_1/2/3/4 displays any residual structure, we incubated it with bis-ANS [4,4'-bis(1anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonate)]. The dye binds to hydrophobic surfaces from partially folded intermediates with much higher affinity than to native or completely unfolded proteins,40 resulting in an increase and a blue shift of bis-ANS fluorescence emission. A 6-fold increase in bis-ANS fluorescence intensity and a strong shift toward lower wavelengths of the emission maximum were detected for LCI_1/ 2/3/4 (Fig. 9d), indicating the presence of hydrophobic clusters exposed to solvent. These

Fig. 7. Kinetics of reduction of LCI_3 and LCI_4 mutants. Reduction reactions for (a) LCI_3 and (b) LCI_4 were carried out in Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5, containing 0.5 mM ( ), 2 mM (), 10 mM () or 50 mM () DTT. The reactions were fitted to first-order reactions as described in Materials and Methods. (c) Linear dependence of the calculated reduction rates from DTT concentration for LCI_3 () and LCI_4 ( ) mutants.





different LCI mutants is in agreement with their level of expression and with the percentages of scrambled isomers obtained after reaching equilibrium in the presence of thiol initiator and in the

538

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability

Fig. 8. Disulfide scrambling of WT and LCI_2, LCI_3 and LCI_4 mutants. (a) The denatured fraction of the different LCI variants was calculated as the percentage of native protein converted into scrambled isomers. WT LCI ( ), LCI_2 (), LCI_3 ( ) and LCI_4 () were denatured in the presence of increasing concentrations of GdnHCl (filled symbols) or urea (open symbols) for 20 h at room temperature in Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5, containing 0.25 mM 2mercaptoethanol as thiol initiator. (b) RP-HPLC traces of the acidtrapped scrambled isomers generated by disulfide scrambling. The native form of WT and LCI_2, LCI_3 and LCI_4 mutants was incubated for 20 h in Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5, containing only 0.25 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. The retention time of the native (N) forms is labeled.





hydrophobic surfaces are more protected in the WT structure as evidenced by its lower affinity for bisANS. Also, the bis-ANS signal of LCI_1/2/3/4 at increasing temperature exhibits a linear decrease without any detectable cooperativity (data not shown). Inhibitory activity of WT and LCI mutants WT LCI is a tight-binding competitive inhibitor of MCPs of the A/B subfamily with an inhibition constant (Ki) against bovine CPA (carboxypeptidase A; the archetypal MCP) in the nanomolar range (Table 3). The Ki values of the LCI mutants showed that LCI_2 and LCI_3 have an inhibitory potential similar to that of WT LCI. In contrast, LCI_4 suffered a significant loss of inhibitory activity with a Ki about 10 times higher than the WT value. LCI_2/3/ 4 and LCI_1/2/3/4 inhibited the bovine CPA with very low affinity, with a Ki in the micromolar range. On the other hand, long-term inhibitory assays conTable 2. Thermodynamic properties of unfolding of the WT and LCI single mutants
m (kcal GWT­mut G (kcal mol- 1) mol- 1 M- 1) cM (M) (kcal mol- 1) LCI_2 urea LCI_3 urea WT GdnHCl LCI_2 GdnHCl LCI_3 GdnHCl LCI_4 GdnHCl 1.5 ± 0.42 2.9 ± 0.33 4.7 ± 0.41 1.6 ± 0.29 2.9 ± 0.28 1.0 ± 0.39 0.76 ± 0.06 0.68 ± 0.08 1.16 ± 0.11 1.37 ± 0.29 1.53 ± 0.12 1.71 ± 0.17 2.0 4.2 4.1 1.0 1.9 0.6

ducted with LCI_3 revealed that this mutant displays a dissociation constant about 3 times higher than that in the WT form.

Discussion
Contribution of disulfide bonds to the conformational stability of LCI One of the most intriguing properties of LCI folding is the role played by intramolecular rearrangements of disulfides during folding and how this correlates with the formation/disruption of its structure, conformational stability and function. LCI consists of a five-stranded antiparallel -sheet with a 3­1­2­5­4 topology and a short -helix that packs onto the most compact part of the -structure. Three disulfide bonds (Cys11­Cys34, Cys18­Cys62 and Cys22­Cys58) sustain the structure of the sheet that is covalently connected to the -helix by the Cys19­Cys43 disulfide bond. In this work, we have analyzed the stability of LCI mutants using the disulfide scrambling technique. The quantitative conversion of the native proteins to scrambled forms reflects their conformational stability and approaches to physiological conditions in which thiol catalysts are likely to be present. Elimination of disulfide bonds in LCI invariably results in a strong reduction in the conformational stability of the protein. Disulfide bonds are proposed to stabilize proteins by decreasing the conformational entropy of the denatured state.41 The expected stabilization of the unfolded state and therefore the

- 3.1 - 1.8 - 3.7

The errors shown correspond to the fitting errors.

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability

539

Fig. 9. Conformational properties of WT and LCI mutants. (a) Far-UV CD analyses of WT and LCI mutants were carried out at 25 °C in Tris­HCl buffer, pH 7.5, using a final protein concentration of 0.2 mg/ml. (b) One-dimensional NMR spectra of WT and LCI mutants were recorded at 25 °C and 600 MHz in Tris­HCl buffer, pH 7.5, using a protein concentration of 1.5 mg/ml. (c) Fluorescence emission analysis of WT and LCI_1/2/3/4 carried out at 25 °C in Tris­HCl buffer, pH 7.5, using 13 M protein concentration. The excitation wavelength was set at 280 nm. (d) Fluorescence emission spectra of bis-ANS collected in the absence and in the presence of WT and LCI_1/2/3/4 at 25 °C. The excitation wavelength was set at 370 nm.

destabilization of a disulfide-containing protein upon removal of one or more covalent links can be calculated using the Wang­Uhlenbeck formula for loop entropy. 42 The predicted GWT­mut provides a framework to rationalize the effects of disulfidebond removal on LCI conformation and folding.

Table 3. Ki values of the native forms of WT and LCI mutants against bovine CPA
Ki (nM) WT LCI_2 LCI_3 LCI_4 LCI_2/3/4 LCI_1/2/3/4 1.1 ± 0.2 2.1 ± 0.3 2.4 ± 0.3 12.6 ± 0.5 3400 ± 225 6500 ± 240

The stability of WT LCI in the presence of a thiol agent is 4.7 kcal/mol. Mutants destabilized by a significant gain of loop entropy higher than this value are not expected to fold into a compact and unique structure. Accordingly, CD and NMR data clearly indicate that removal of more than two disulfide bonds in LCI results in unfolding toward mostly unstructured conformations in which the specific interactions among aromatic residues, characteristic of the native state of the inhibitor, are completely lost. In contrast to WT LCI, LCI_1/2/3/ 4 is able to significantly bind bis-ANS, indicating the presence of hydrophobic clusters exposed to solvent in this mutant. Nevertheless, the contacts sustaining these clusters appear to be non-specific since they are rapidly lost in a non-cooperative manner upon heating; also, the intrinsic fluorescence spectrum of Tyr and Trp residues indicates that their side chains

540 are fully accessible to solvent. Individual disulfide bonds SS3 (Cys19­Cys43) and SS4 (Cys22­Cys58) are missing in the major LCI folding intermediates (III-B and III-A, respectively), although they attain a folded conformation.33 Loop entropy considerations predict that LCI_3/4 would be destabilized by about 6 kcal/mol and therefore would be unstructured, in spite of conserving the two disulfide bonds shared by the two major LCI folding intermediates. In this regard, the double mutant cannot fold into a preferential conformation and a heterogeneous population of 2S species is formed. The distribution of the LCI_3/4 2S species at equilibrium is independent of the presence of redox agents, which, as discussed in the next section, indicates that there is no preferential non-covalent interaction driving the formation of these species. The predicted entropic destabilizations for the single LCI mutants suggest that they should be at least partially folded. In agreement with this prediction, we have shown that III-A and III-B intermediates display a native-like conformation and function. No stable intermediate lacking disulfide SS1 (Cys11­Cys34) or SS2 (Cys18­Cys62) has been detected to accumulate during the LCI folding reaction, and therefore their conformational properties are unknown. If only unfolded-state entropic considerations are taken into account, about 0.6 kcal/mol should separate the most and least stable mutants. However, the experimental data are in contradiction with this proposal: LCI_1 is unable to fold into a unique conformation and LCI_4 and LCI_3 are, respectively, less and more stable than they should be according to the entropic gain in their respective unfolded states. This indicates that apart from entropic factors, other forces influence the stability of single LCI mutants. To address this discrepancy, we have used the FoldX force field developed by Guerois et al.43 and Schymkowitz et al.44 to predict stability changes in the single LCI mutants and the precise energy terms accounting for them. In this algorithm, the stabilization of the unfolded state by disulfide-bond removal is calculated using the logN rule of Darby and Creighton.45 There is a good correlation between these values and those calculated with the Wang­Uhlenbeck approach (Table 4). FoldX accurately predicts the rank and relative differences in stability for those LCI mutants able to fold into a predominant conformation (LCI_2, LCI_3 and LCI_4). A minor destabilization, relative to the WT form, is predicted for LCI_3 (- 0.10 kcal/mol), whereas a striking loss of stability is predicted for LCI_4 (- 4.17 kcal/mol). LCI_1 and LCI_2 are predicted to have intermediate stabilities (losses of - 2.03 and - 2.48 kcal/mol, respectively). Apart from the gain in entropy in the unfolded state, the main destabilizing effect appears to be a reduction of the van der Waals contributions, linked to the formation of cavities inside the protein due to the smaller
 http://foldx.crg.es/

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability Table 4. Stabilization (G) of the unfolded state expected for each LCI mutant with respect to the WT at 25 °C based on loop entropy (in kcal mol- 1)
Wang­Uhlenbeck model LCI_1 LCI_2 LCI_3 LCI_4 LCI_3/4 LCI_2/3/4 LCI_1/2/3/4 2.79 3.36 2.83 3.19 6.01 9.37 12.16 Creighton model 3.34 3.98 3.17 3.80 6.98 10.97 14.34

volume of Ala side chains (Fig. 10). These destabilizing effects are partially compensated by the increase in entropy of the Ala side chains in the native state, relative to bonded Cys, in all the mutants. In LCI_3, according to the energy terms reported by the algorithm, the main stabilizing factor is a reduction of the energy penalization due to inter- and intraresidue steric overlaps relative to the WT protein, which suggests that the covalent link between the -sheet and the -helix introduces some strain in WT LCI. Importantly, the crystal structure of LCI_3 shows a relaxation of the backbone in the residues adjacent to the Ala mutations, especially in the last turn of the -helix, which can significantly contribute to alleviate this strain.35 The same effect, although to a minor extent, is predicted for the disulfide bonds connecting the highly regular lower part of the sheet. No such strain appears to exist in the less regular upper part of the -sheet, and therefore the entropic destabilizing effect in LCI_4 cannot be effectively compensated. Accordingly, in the solution structure of the III-A mutant, lacking the Cys22­Cys58 disulfide bond, -strands 2 and 5 connected by this bond adopt essentially the same structure as in the WT protein.34 The reduction rate for disulfide bonds buried in a stable folded conformation is nearly always found to be slow and directly involved in the rate-determining step of the reductive unfolding reaction.37,46 With the exception of Cys62, all other Cys residues are deeply buried in the core of WT LCI, accounting for its high resistance to reduction. The corresponding cross-bridges would be shielded from reducing agents, such as DTT, except when conformational fluctuations would expose the disulfides. Thus, the lower conformational stability of single LCI mutants makes their disulfides much more reactive to DTT than the same bonds in the WT form. The linear dependence of reductive unfolding rates of LCI_3 and LCI_4 on the DTT concentration indicates that the rate-limiting step of their unfolding reaction is the reduction of the first disulfide bond. Accordingly, reduction of these mutants undergoes an apparent all-or-none mechanism in which all three disulfides are reduced in an apparent cooperative manner, with no significant accumulation of partially reduced intermediates. In excellent agreement with their relative conformational stabilities, LCI_4 is reduced 3.1 times faster than LCI_3, which confirms that this rate-limiting step is sensitive to

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability

541

Fig. 10. FoldX predicted changes in stability for LCI_1, LCI_2, LCI_3 and LCI_4 mutants relative to WT LCI. The predicted overall change in stability ("Total energy") is the result of the contribution of the following: hydrogen-bond formation between backbone atoms ("Backbone H-bond"), van der Waals interactions ("van der Waals"), electrostatic interactions ("Electrostatics"), penalization for burying polar groups and solvation of hydrophobic groups ("Solvation"), clashes between atoms from different residues ("Side-chain clashes"), torsional intraresidue clashes ("Intraresidue clashes"), entropy cost of fixing side chains ("Entropy side chain"), entropy cost of fixing the backbone ("Entropy main chain") and entropy restriction in the unfolded state resulting from disulfide-bond formation/disruption ("Disulfide"). Other energy terms calculated by the algorithm but not affected by the mutations are not represented.

conformational changes in the protein. Interestingly, the reduction reaction of LCI_2, which lacks the most exposed Cys18­Cys62 disulfide bond, could not be fitted to a simple first-order reaction and the accumulation of a higher extent of partially reduced intermediates was detected, even at high DTT concentrations. This suggests that once reduced, the free thiolates of Cys18 and/or Cys62 might play a catalytic role in the concerted LCI disulfide reduction reaction. An important result derived from the present study is that the relative stabilities of LCI_3 and LCI_4 mutants do not agree with those previously deduced for their III-B and III-A counterparts since III-A has been shown to be more stable and structured than III-B. 33 This reversion of the conformational properties of the major LCI folding intermediates responds to the effect of substituting free Cys in the intermediates by Ala in the correspondent analogs. Thus, the greater stability of III-A relative to LCI_4 may be due to the absence of a cavity in the hydrophobic core, provided that the thiols remain protonated. In agreement with this hypothesis, computation of Cys22 and Cys58 solvent accessibility with the DSSP program indicates that they are totally buried in the solution structure of the intermediate. Conversely, the lower stability of III-B relative to LCI_3 may be due to charged thiolates preventing the packing of the  http://swift.cmbi.kun.nl/gv/dssp/

helix onto the -sheet. Unfortunately, no structure of the III-B intermediate is available. Mutations of these residues to Ser in the LCI_3 structure were modeled with FoldX and changes in stability were calculated to emulate the effect of polar residues in positions 19 and 43 of III-B. A 1.9-kcal/mol destabilization is predicted, which is in good agreement with the energetic cost of burying hydroxyl groups in the core of barnase47 and suggests that the presence of charged thiolates would be strongly destabilizing. Cys-to-Ala mutations are considered the most neutral changes to emulate disulfide disruption in folding intermediates, especially when the disulfide bond is buried in the protein core. However, as deduced from our data, it is advisable to be cautious when attributing the conformational and thermodynamic properties of mutants to those of the correspondent intermediate forms without any other considerations, since they can be either overstabilized or destabilized relative to the des species depending on the accessibility, local environment or dihedral angles of the considered disulfide bond. Role of disulfide bonds in the folding pathway of LCI The data reported in the present and previous work of our group converge to indicate that the folding pathway of LCI hinges critically on the presence of localized stable structures. The different structural contents of III-B and III-A or LCI_3 and

542 LCI_4 indicate that the accumulation of the major intermediates along the LCI folding reaction or the folding of their analogs into stable conformations relies on their ability to protect their three native disulfide bonds from rearrangement in the interior of totally or partially folded structures. In this context, the properties of LCI_2 constitute a paradox because, despite being conformationally stable, its des[18­62] counterpart does not accumulate during the oxidative folding reaction of WT LCI. This suggests that, as proposed for reductive unfolding, during refolding, the free thiolates Cys18 and Cys62 might attack other disulfide bonds quickly, causing the des[18­62] species to rearrange quickly to other disulfide species. This seems plausible since Cys62, the most exposed Cys residue in LCI, is found at the C-terminus and in an edge -strand, two factors known to correlate with structural mobility. LCI_1 is predicted to have a structural stability similar to that of LCI_2. However, elimination of the Cys11­Cys34 disulfide bond in LCI_1 has the strongest impact on the LCI folding reaction. LCI_1 folding cannot be funneled into a single species with native disulfide connectivity, and the reaction becomes trapped in a highly heterogeneous population of scrambled isomers. The replacement of the Cys residues by Ala probably permits the formation of a non-polar cavity in the LCI hydrophobic core. The solvation of this type of cavities is very unfavorable and causes a remarkable loss of enthalpy in the folded state.48 Accordingly, although FoldX underestimates LCI_1 destabilization, it predicts a higher solvation penalty for this particular mutant. Also, this disulfide is the only one connecting the 1 and 3 strands, while the 4 and 5 strands are connected by three and two disulfide bonds, respectively. Theoretical calculations34 suggest that in LCI the hierarchy of disulfidebond formation critically depends on the establishment of a folding nucleus around 1 and the beginning of 2. Apparently, this folding nucleus cannot form in the absence of the Cys11­Cys34 disulfide bond, most likely because the 17 N-terminal residues of 1 and 2 strands become either unrestricted or trapped in a non-native conformation in these conditions. Oxidative folding implies two major chemical reactions: oxidation (disulfide formation) and isomerization (disulfide reshuffling). Under typical oxidative folding conditions (Control +), the disulfide-bonded species interconvert rapidly within each disulfide ensemble by reshuffling; in contrast, oxidation between disulfide ensembles is relatively slow. Each disulfide ensemble (1S, 2S, 3S) can be considered therefore to be in thermodynamic equilibrium, and the ratios of disulfide forms in each ensemble should reflect their relative conformational stability.49 In this situation, in addition to loop entropy, non-covalent interactions, either native or non-native, determine the distribution of disulfide species within a particular ensemble. In contrast, in the absence of free thiols (Control -), reshuffling reactions are highly restricted and an entropically determined quasi-stochastic distribution of disul-

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability

fides species is expected. Comparison of disulfide profiles of single LCI mutants in the presence and in the absence of free thiols during the formation of the 1S and 2S ensembles indicates that the distribution of species does not differ significantly in both conditions for each particular mutant. This implies that non-covalent interactions do not play an important role in the early stages of LCI folding, in good agreement with the prediction that R, 1S and 2S species do not contain an extensive regular structure. The present folding analysis of single LCI mutants demonstrates that scrambled isomers with at least two non-native disulfide bonds can effectively populate their folding pathways and in certain cases accumulate significantly at the end of the reaction. These scrambled isomers are productive species since their disulfides can rearrange to render the natively connected LCI mutants. This ability is evident in the case of LCI_2 and LCI_4 folding, where the presence of thiol agents allowing the reshuffling of these trapped species in the last stage of folding clearly increases the yields of natively connected protein relative to the Control - reaction. This effect is also observed, although less relevant, in LCI_3 folding. As discussed above, in the presence of thiol agents, the 3S disulfide ensemble can be considered to be in thermodynamic equilibrium at the end of the reaction and the ratios of native to scrambled isomers should reflect their relative conformational stability. The native disulfide protection and higher conformational stability of LCI_3 relative to any other 3S isomer are likely to be the causes of its high accumulation at equilibrium, whereas the less stable and more flexible LCI_2 and LCI_4 mutants coexist with scrambled forms. In principle, the 3S scrambled isomers would form directly by oxidation of the apparently non-structured and entropically distributed 2S ensemble and their accumulation would depend on the stability of the natively bonded forms that originate from their reshuffling. Accordingly,

Fig. 11. Schematic diagram of the oxidative folding of LCI. (a) Scheme of the folding pathway of LCI as previously described.33 "R" and "N" indicate the fully reduced/unfolded and native forms, respectively. 1S, 2S, 3S and 4S are ensembles of molecules with the corresponding number of disulfide bonds. "3S N" stands for 3disulfide species with native bonds. III-A and III-B are formed by direct oxidation of 2S species already containing two native disulfide bonds. (b) Scheme of the folding pathway of LCI based on the results derived from the present work. III-A and III-B arise from a non-specific oxidation of the 2S ensemble to 3S species and the subsequent reshuffling of these forms into the native-like intermediates.

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability

543 affects to the same extent the structures of the folded and scrambled forms, as it occurs in the case of the marginally stable LCI_4 mutant. Contribution of disulfide bonds to LCI function Although proteins possess stable native structures, the evolutionary fitness of a protein does not depend on the stability of the native structure per se but rather on the stability of the structure that allows the protein to better perform its function in its physiological environment. Stability is therefore under selection only insofar as it is necessary for the biochemical function, and many proteins are only marginally stable at their physiologically relevant temperatures.51 Surprisingly, LCI_2 and LCI_3 are excellent carboxypeptidase inhibitors in spite of being significantly destabilized, especially in the case of LCI_2. As previously shown for LCI_3, docking of the mutant on top of the active site of the carboxypeptidase strongly restricts the conformational fluctuation of the inhibitor and allows an efficient binding to the target enzyme.35 This induction of the inhibitory activity upon docking to the protease has also been shown for highly destabilized forms of BPTI.52 From the results reported here, it appears that the stability and inhibitory activity of LCI are uncoupled, since the WT stability clearly exceeds that necessary for an efficient inhibition of carboxypeptidases. However, this extra stability could allow LCI to be functional in its physiological environment. LCI is a component of leech saliva that acts in the host blood, two fluids where low stability usually results in reduced half-life due to their high content of proteolytic enzymes. In addition, according to the three-dimensional structures of III-A and LCI_3, the entropic cost of binding is higher in these forms than in the WT, whereas the enthalpic gain should be very similar. This predicts a higher dissociation constant for the 3-disulfide mutants compared with WT LCI, a fact that is indeed confirmed by inhibitory assays with LCI_3. This mutant would be a temporary inhibitor, as previously described for mutants of the Streptomyces subtilisin inhibitor lacking one disulfide bond that are more susceptible to proteolysis.53 In any case, the uncoupling of thermodynamic stability and inhibitory activity in LCI may pave the way for the design of novel LCI variants with improved properties. In this context, it is worth remembering the increasing biomedical interest of both natural and synthetic carboxypeptidase inhibitors for coagulation­fibrinolytic disorders.30,54

when the native protein conformation is disrupted (i.e., at high denaturant concentrations), all these mutants reshuffle rapidly to 3S scrambled forms. Importantly, the present work questions whether III-A and III-B originate, at least exclusively, from the direct oxidation of 2S molecules containing two native disulfides. Since the analysis of the initial folding stages suggests that no enthalpic bias toward the formation of native disulfides exists, only a minor fraction of the molecules in this population is expected to display the correct combination of disulfide bonds. Once demonstrated that 3S nonnatively bonded species can rearrange to render 3S forms with native disulfides and native-like conformations, a more probable mechanism for the formation of III-A and III-B intermediates would be the non-specific oxidation of the unfolded 2S ensemble to 3S species and the subsequent reshuffling of these forms into the intermediates (see Fig. 11). Thus, the folding of LCI appears to follow the quasi-stochastic model proposed by Saito et al. for RNase A.50 Similar to the case of LCI_3, the high stability and/or protection of the native disulfide bonds in III-A and III-B relative to any other 3S isomer provides an explanation about why other des species cannot accumulate significantly. III-A and III-B are "disulfide-insecure" intermediates in which the free thiol groups are protected from the solvent by the secondary structure elements; therefore, structural fluctuations that expose the thiol groups also expose the disulfide bonds, promoting the reshuffling and formation of 4S scrambled isomers instead of direct oxidation of the free thiols to obtain the native disulfide pairing.14 The conversion of scrambled species to native protein constitutes the rate-limiting step in LCI folding. The new LCI folding scheme might imply that thiol agents accelerate the LCI folding pathway by promoting reshuffling not only in the 4S ensemble but also in the 3S population. This would be consistent with the increased rate and efficiency of the LCI folding reactions performed under mild denaturing conditions. This effect had been previously attributed to partial unfolding of III-A and III-B intermediates.33 However, the new data indicate that folded LCI mutants displaying three native disulfides, with stabilities that overall should resemble those of natural intermediates, form efficiently in the presence of moderate concentrations of chaotropic agents. In fact, the folding pathways of LCI_2 and especially of LCI_3 are significantly accelerated, indicating a destabilization of the kinetic traps in the folding reaction of these mutants. Because the R, 1S and 2S forms are unstructured, it is unlikely that the denaturant agent exerts its action over these species; it rather destabilizes the more compact 3S non-native species, making their disulfides more accessible and promoting their reshuffling. The effect of the denaturant depends on the energy gap between the folded and the kinetically trapped species. In this way, the acceleration of the folding rate is clearly higher for LCI_3 than for LCI_2. No effect is expected when the denaturant

Materials and Methods
Site-directed mutagenesis, protein expression and purification The synthetic gene encoding for LCI and cloned into the pBAT-4-OmpA vector55 was used as template for PCR in the site-directed mutagenesis. The seven mutants designed for the present work were generated using a

544
QuickChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene) according to the instructions of the manufacturer and verified by DNA sequencing. The WT and mutant forms of LCI were produced and purified as previously published.28 Briefly, the proteins were expressed in E. coli strain BL21(DE3), growing the cells in M9 minimal medium (0.5% glycerol) supplemented with 0.2% casamino acids at 37 °C and inducing at an A600 of 1.0 with 1 mM isopropyl--D-thiogalactopyranoside (final concentration). The secreted proteins were treated with 2 mM cystine and 4 mM cysteine (final concentrations) at pH 8.5 to obtain the maximum amount of native form. The proteins were subsequently purified from the culture supernatant using a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters), followed by anion-exchange chromatography on a TSKDEAE 5PW column (Tosohaas) and by RP-HPLC (Alliance, Waters) on a 4.6-mm Protein C4 column (Vydac Grace). Protein identity and purity were confirmed by MALDI-TOF MS and automated Edman degradation. The concentration of the LCI variants in solution was determined by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm and using the calculated absorption coefficient 0.1% = 2.12. The purified and quantified proteins were kept lyophilized. Oxidative folding experiments The native protein (2 mg) was reduced and unfolded in 0.5 M Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5, containing 200 mM DTT and 6 M guanidine thiocyanate for 2 h at room temperature. To initiate folding, we loaded the sample onto a PD-10 desalting column (Sephadex G-25, GE Healthcare) previously equilibrated with 0.1 M Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5. The protein was eluted in 1.2 ml and split in three parts that were immediately diluted in the same buffer to a final protein concentration of 0.5 mg/ml, in the absence (Control -) and in the presence (Control +) of 0.25 mM 2mercaptoethanol or 0.5 mM/1 mM GSSG/GSH. In some cases, the refolding experiments were carried out in the presence of 0.5 M GdnHCl. Folding intermediates were trapped in a time-course manner either by acidification with 4% aqueous trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) or by alkylation with 0.1 M Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5, containing 0.1 M 4vinylpyridine for 1 h at room temperature. The acidtrapped intermediates were subsequently analyzed by RPHPLC using a linear 20%­40% gradient of acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA over 50 min on a 4.6-mm Jupiter C4 column (Phenomenex) at a flow rate of 0.75 ml/min. Aliquots derivatized with 4-vinylpyridine (each pair of modified cysteines increases the molecular mass by 212 Da) were diluted 1:10 in 0.1% aqueous TFA and analyzed by MALDI-TOF MS using an Ultraflex spectrometer (Bruker) operating in linear mode under 20 kV. Samples were prepared by mixing equal volumes of the protein solution and matrix solution (10 mg/ml of sinapic acid dissolved in aqueous 30% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA) and using the dried droplet method. A mixture of proteins from Bruker (protein calibration standard I; mass range = 3­25 kDa) was used as external mass calibration standard. Reductive unfolding and disulfide scrambling experiments The native protein (0.5 mg/ml) was dissolved at room temperature in 0.1 M Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5, containing increasing concentrations of DTT (1­100 mM). Aliquots of the mixtures were removed at various time points, trapped by acidification with 4% aqueous TFA and analyzed by RP-HPLC as detailed in Oxidative folding

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability

experiments to monitor the unfolding reaction. For disulfide-scrambling experiments, the native protein (0.5 mg/ml) was dissolved in 0.1 M Tris­HCl buffer, pH 8.5, containing 0.25 mM 2-mercaptoethanol as thiol initiator and selected concentrations of denaturants (0­8 M urea or GdnHCl). The reaction was allowed to reach equilibrium typically for 20 h at room temperature. The samples were then quenched with 4% aqueous TFA and analyzed by RP-HPLC as described above. Least-squares fitting of reductive unfolding data to a first-order reaction and determinations of standard errors of the fitted parameters were conducted using the program KaleidaGraph (Synergy Software, Reading, PA). Thermodynamic parameters As previously reported for WT LCI,35 thermodynamic parameters were calculated by fitting experimental data from disulfide scrambling to Eq. (1): y= ða + b½denaturantÞ À ðc + d½denaturantÞ n   o H 1 + exp À DGU2 O À m½denaturant =RT + ðc + d½denaturantÞ where y is the observed fractional population of native species, GH2O is the free energy change of unfolding U in the absence of denaturant, m is a parameter for cooperativity of unfolding and (a + b[denaturant]) and (c + d [denaturant]) are terms for the baseline dependence on denaturant concentration. The midpoint concentration of unfolding, cM, was calculated by Eq. (2): cM = DGH2 O =m U The fitting was performed using the non-linear leastsquares algorithm provided with the software KaleidaGraph assuming a two-state unfolding mechanism. CD, fluorescence and NMR spectroscopy Samples for CD spectroscopy were prepared by dissolving the protein to a final concentration of 0.2 mg/ml in 20 mM Tris­HCl buffer, pH 7.5. CD spectra were collected in a Jasco J-715 spectrometer at 25 °C using a cell of 2-mm path length. Samples for fluorescence spectroscopy were measured in the same buffer on a fluorescence spectrophotometer (Cary Eclipse, Varian) at a final protein concentration of 13 M and at 25 °C. The excitation wavelength was set at 268 and 280 nm, with excitation and emission slit widths of 5 and 10 nm, respectively. The fluorescence emission was measured between 280 and 400 nm. Samples for NMR spectroscopy were prepared at a protein concentration of 1.5 mg/ml in 20 mM Tris­HCl buffer, pH 7.5, using a 9:1 ratio by volume of H2O/D2O. One-dimensional NMR spectra were acquired at 25 °C on a Bruker AVANCE 600-MHz spectrometer using solventsuppression WATERGATE techniques. The collected spectra were processed and analyzed using the TopSpinv2.0 software packages from Bruker Biospin. bis-ANS binding assay The fluorescence emission spectra of bis-ANS in the absence and in the presence of protein were recorded using 20 mM Tris­HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 5 M

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability bis-ANS to obtain a final protein concentration of 13 M. Samples were read after 10 min of incubation using an excitation wavelength of 370 nm. The fluorescence emission was measured between 400 and 600 nm, with excitation and emission slit widths of 10 nm each. Thermal transition curves were obtained at a heating rate of 1 °C/min by measuring the bis-ANS emission at 460 nm after excitation at 370 nm. CPA inhibitory experiments The inhibitory activity of the native form of different LCI variants was tested by measuring the inhibition of the hydrolysis of the chromogenic substrate N-(4-methoxyphenylazoformyl)-Phe-OH (Bachem) by bovine CPA (Sigma) at 350 nm using a Cary 400 UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Varian). The assays were performed in 50 mM Tris­HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 100 mM NaCl, at a substrate concentration of 100 M. Ki values for the complexes of WT and LCI mutants with CPA were determined using pre-steady-state kinetics as reported for tight-binding inhibitors, with a final correction for substrate competition.56 FoldX modeling To model the mutations in LCI, we used the BuildModel option of the FoldX algorithm (version 2.65).44 This command reads the Protein Data Bank coordinates and duplicates them internally. Then, it mutates the selected position in one molecule to itself and, in the other, to the selected variant, while moving the neighboring side chains. It ensures that the moving side chains and the rotamer set for them are the same in both cases. The effect of the mutation is subsequently computed by subtracting the energy of the self-mutated WT from that of the mutant. The G values are provided in kilocalories per mole for all modeled structures.

545
disulfide bonds in goose-type lysozyme. FEBS J. 275, 2818­2830. Klink, T. A., Woycechowsky, K. J., Taylor, K. M. & Raines, R. T. (2000). Contribution of disulfide bonds to the conformational stability and catalytic activity of ribonuclease A. Eur. J. Biochem. 267, 566­572. Liu, Y., Breslauer, K. & Anderson, S. (1997). "Designing out" disulfide bonds: thermodynamic properties of 30­51 cystine substitution mutants of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor. Biochemistry, 36, 5323­5335. Vaz, D. C., Rodrigues, J. R., Sebald, W., Dobson, C. M. & Brito, R. M. (2006). Enthalpic and entropic contributions mediate the role of disulfide bonds on the conformational stability of interleukin-4. Protein Sci. 15, 33­44. Zavodszky, M., Chen, C. W., Huang, J. K., Zolkiewski, M., Wen, L. & Krishnamoorthi, R. (2001). Disulfide bond effects on protein stability: designed variants of Cucurbita maxima trypsin inhibitor-V. Protein Sci. 10, 149­160. Kurokawa, Y., Koganesawa, N., Kobashigawa, Y., Koshiba, T., Demura, M. & Niita, K. (2001). Oxidative folding of human lysozyme: effects of the loss of two disulfide bonds and the introduction of a calciumbinding site. J. Protein Chem. 20, 293­303. Parrini, C., Bemporad, F., Baroncelli, A., Gianni, S., Travaglini-Allocatelli, C., Kohn, J. E. et al. (2008). The folding process of acylphosphatase from Escherichia coli is remarkably accelerated by the presence of a disulfide bond. J. Mol. Biol. 379, 1107­1118. Qin, M., Zhang, J. & Wang, W. (2006). Effects of disulfide bonds on folding behavior and mechanism of the beta-sheet protein tendamistat. Biophys. J. 90, 272­286. Ruoppolo, M., Vinci, F., Klink, T. A., Raines, R. T. & Marino, G. (2000). Contribution of individual disulfide bonds to the oxidative folding of ribonuclease A. Biochemistry, 39, 12033­12042. Wedemeyer, W. J., Welker, E., Narayan, M. & Scheraga, H. A. (2000). Disulfide bonds and protein folding. Biochemistry, 39, 4207­4216. Welker, E., Narayan, M., Wedemeyer, W. J. & Scheraga, H. A. (2001). Structural determinants of oxidative folding in proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 98, 2312­2316. Creighton, T. E. (1986). Disulfide bonds as probes of protein folding pathways. Methods Enzymol. 131, 83­106. Creighton, T. E. (1997). Protein folding coupled to disulphide bond formation. Biol. Chem. 378, 731­744. Narayan, M., Welker, E., Wedemeyer, W. J. & Scheraga, H. A. (2000). Oxidative folding of proteins. Acc. Chem. Res. 33, 805­812. Chang, J. Y. (2004). Evidence for the underlying cause of diversity of the disulfide folding pathway. Biochemistry, 43, 4522­4529. Arolas, J. L., Aviles, F. X., Chang, J. Y. & Ventura, S. (2006). Folding of small disulfide-rich proteins: clarifying the puzzle. Trends Biochem. Sci. 31, 292­301. Chang, J. Y. (2008). Diversity of folding pathways and folding models of disulfide proteins. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 10, 171­178. Darby, N. J., Morin, P. E., Talbo, G. & Creighton, T. E. (1995). Refolding of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor via non-native disulphide intermediates. J. Mol. Biol. 249, 463­477. Weissman, J. S. & Kim, P. S. (1991). Reexamination of the folding of BPTI: predominance of native intermediates. Science, 253, 1386­1393.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13. 14.

Acknowledgements
This study was supported by grant BIO200768046 from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation and grants SGR01037 and SGR00037 from the national Catalan government. V.C. is a beneficiary of a predoctoral fellowship from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation. We acknowledge Prof. Christian P. Sommerhoff and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful suggestions to the manuscript.
15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21.

References
1. Creighton, T. E., Zapun, A. & Darby, N. J. (1995). Mechanisms and catalysts of disulfide bond formation in proteins. Trends Biotechnol. 13, 18­23. 2. Frand, A. R., Cuozzo, J. W. & Kaiser, C. A. (2000). Pathways for protein disulphide bond formation. Trends Cell Biol. 10, 203­210. 3. Hogg, P. J. (2003). Disulfide bonds as switches for protein function. Trends Biochem. Sci. 28, 210­214. 4. Kawamura, S., Ohkuma, M., Chijiiwa, Y., Kohno, D., Nakagawa, H., Hirakawa, H. et al. (2008). Role of

22.

546
23. Chang, J. Y. (1996). The disulfide folding pathway of tick anticoagulant peptide (TAP), a Kunitz-type inhibitor structurally homologous to BPTI. Biochemistry, 35, 11702­11709. 24. Chang, J. Y., Canals, F., Schindler, P., Querol, E. & Aviles, F. X. (1994). The disulfide folding pathway of potato carboxypeptidase inhibitor. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 22087­22094. 25. Chatrenet, B. & Chang, J. Y. (1993). The disulfide folding pathway of hirudin elucidated by stop/go folding experiments. J. Biol. Chem. 268, 20988­20996. 26. Chang, J. Y., Li, L. & Lai, P. H. (2001). A major kinetic trap for the oxidative folding of human epidermal growth factor. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 4845­4852. 27. Salamanca, S., Li, L., Vendrell, J., Aviles, F. X. & Chang, J. Y. (2003). Major kinetic traps for the oxidative folding of leech carboxypeptidase inhibitor. Biochemistry, 42, 6754­6761. 28. Reverter, D., Vendrell, J., Canals, F., Horstmann, J., Aviles, F. X., Fritz, H. & Sommerhoff, C. P. (1998). A carboxypeptidase inhibitor from the medical leech Hirudo medicinalis. Isolation, sequence analysis, cDNA cloning, recombinant expression, and characterization. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 32927­32933. 29. Reverter, D., Fernandez-Catalan, C., Baumgartner, R., Pfander, R., Huber, R., Bode, W. et al. (2000). Structure of a novel leech carboxypeptidase inhibitor determined free in solution and in complex with human carboxypeptidase A2. Nat. Struct. Biol. 7, 322­328. 30. Arolas, J. L., Vendrell, J., Aviles, F. X. & Fricker, L. D. (2007). Metallocarboxypeptidases: emerging drug targets in biomedicine. Curr. Pharm. Des. 13, 349­366. 31. Marx, P. F. (2004). Thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor. Curr. Med. Chem. 11, 2335­2348. 32. Salamanca, S., Villegas, V., Vendrell, J., Li, L., Aviles, F. X. & Chang, J. Y. (2002). The unfolding pathway of leech carboxypeptidase inhibitor. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 17538­17543. 33. Arolas, J. L., Bronsoms, S., Lorenzo, J., Aviles, F. X., Chang, J. Y. & Ventura, S. (2004). Role of kinetic intermediates in the folding of leech carboxypeptidase inhibitor. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 37261­37270. 34. Arolas, J. L., D'Silva, L., Popowicz, G. M., Aviles, F. X., Holak, T. A. & Ventura, S. (2005). NMR structural characterization and computational predictions of the major intermediate in oxidative folding of leech carboxypeptidase inhibitor. Structure (Camb.), 13, 1193­1202. 35. Arolas, J. L., Popowicz, G. M., Bronsoms, S., Aviles, F. X., Huber, R., Holak, T. A. & Ventura, S. (2005). Study of a major intermediate in the oxidative folding of leech carboxypeptidase inhibitor: contribution of the fourth disulfide bond. J. Mol. Biol. 352, 961­975. 36. Chang, J. Y., Li, L. & Bulychev, A. (2000). The underlying mechanism for the diversity of disulfide folding pathways. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 8287­8289. 37. Li, Y. J., Rothwarf, D. M. & Scheraga, H. A. (1995). Mechanism of reductive protein unfolding. Nat. Struct. Biol. 2, 489­494. 38. Chang, J. Y. (1997). A two-stage mechanism for the reductive unfolding of disulfide-containing proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 69­75. 39. Chang, J. Y. & Li, L. (2001). The structure of denatured alpha-lactalbumin elucidated by the technique of disulfide scrambling: fractionation of conformational isomers of alpha-lactalbumin. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 9705­9712.

Role of Disulfide Bonds on LCI Folding and Stability

40. Takashi, R., Tonomura, Y. & Morales, M. F. (1977). 4,4Bis (1-anilinonaphthalene 8-sulfonate) (bis-ANS): a new probe of the active site of myosin. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 74, 2334­2338. 41. Pace, C. N., Grimsley, G. R., Thomson, J. A. & Barnett, B. J. (1988). Conformational stability and activity of ribonuclease T1 with zero, one, and two intact disulfide bonds. J. Biol. Chem. 263, 11820­11825. 42. Wang, M. C. & Uhlenbeck, G. E. (1945). On the theory of the Brownian motion II. Rev. Mod. Phys. 17, 323­342. 43. Guerois, R., Nielsen, J. E. & Serrano, L. (2002). Predicting changes in the stability of proteins and protein complexes: a study of more than 1000 mutations. J. Mol. Biol. 320, 369­387. 44. Schymkowitz, J., Borg, J., Stricher, F., Nys, R., Rousseau, F. & Serrano, L. (2005). The FoldX web server: an online force field. Nucleic Acids Res. 33, W382­W388. 45. Darby, N. & Creighton, T. E. (1995). Disulfide bonds in protein folding and stability. Methods Mol. Biol. 40, 219­252. 46. Ewbank, J. J. & Creighton, T. E. (1993). Pathway of disulfide-coupled unfolding and refolding of bovine alpha-lactalbumin. Biochemistry, 32, 3677­3693. 47. Serrano, L., Kellis, J. T., Jr, Cann, P., Matouschek, A. & Fersht, A. R. (1992). The folding of an enzyme: II. Substructure of barnase and the contribution of different interactions to protein stability. J. Mol. Biol. 224, 783­804. 48. Hubbard, S. J. & Argos, P. (1995). Evidence on close packing and cavities in proteins. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 6, 375­381. 49. Welker, E., Wedemeyer, W. J., Narayan, M. & Scheraga, H. A. (2001). Coupling of conformational folding and disulfide-bond reactions in oxidative folding of proteins. Biochemistry, 40, 9059­9064. 50. Saito, K., Welker, E. & Scheraga, H. A. (2001). Folding of a disulfide-bonded protein species with free thiol(s): competition between conformational folding and disulfide reshuffling in an intermediate of bovine pancreatic ribonuclease A. Biochemistry, 40, 15002­15008. 51. Fersht, A. (1999). Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science: A Guide to Enzyme Catalysis and Protein Folding Freeman, New York, NY. 52. Krokoszynska, I., Dadlez, M. & Otlewski, J. (1998). Structure of single-disulfide variants of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) as probed by their binding to bovine beta-trypsin. J. Mol. Biol. 275, 503­513. 53. Kojima, S., Kumagai, I. & Miura, K. (1993). Requirement for a disulfide bridge near the reactive site of protease inhibitor SSI (Streptomyces subtilisin inhibitor) for its inhibitory action. J. Mol. Biol. 230, 395­399. 54. Sanglas, L., Valnickova, Z., Arolas, J. L., Pallares, I., Guevara, T., Sola, M. et al. (2008). Structure of activated thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor, a molecular link between coagulation and fibrinolysis. Mol. Cell, 31, 598­606. 55. Peranen, J., Rikkonen, M., Hyvonen, M. & Kaariainen, L. (1996). T7 vectors with modified T7lac promoter for expression of proteins in Escherichia coli. Anal. Biochem. 236, 371­373. 56. Bieth, J. G. (1995). Theoretical and practical aspects of proteinase inhibition kinetics. Methods Enzymol. 248, 59­84.

