ht. 3. ~iochenz., 1~~72, 3,

247-257.

[Scientechnica

(Publishes)

Ltd.]

247

ASSAYS FOR GLYOXYLATE

AMINOTRANSFERASE

ACTIVITIES
E. V. ROWSELL, J. A. CARNIE, K. SNELL*
AND B. TAKTAK

Department of Biochemistry, University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, Manchester M60 IQD Dedicated to Professor A. E. Braunstein for his 70th birthday (26 May, 1971)
(Received 20 Janwry,

1972)

ABSTRACT x. Methods are described for the assay of aminotransferase activity with glyoxylate and L-glutamate, L-giutamine, or L-alanine in ~fra~tionated tissue homogenates, based on the specific estimation of n-oxoglutarate or pyruvate in inactivated assay samples. 2. An alternative general procedure relies on the estimation of glycine after separation by paper chromatography. 3, Experiments showing the reliability of the assays are reported. /H

R-C -COOH+CHO.COOH ANY arn~lo~~f~rase operating with glyoxylate as acceptor may be assayed, in principle, by measuring the formation of glycine. In this way, for example, Nakada (1964) followed the purification of rat liver aminotransferase. L-glutamate : glyoxylate We wished to study the level of activity of this enzyme in tissues of different animal species and to test other potential amino donors, but in our hands Nakada's preferred method for glycine estimation (see Alexander, Landwehr, and Seligman, 1945) proved unreliable; even with pure glycine standards we were unable to obtain consistent results and we turned to assay procedures based on the measurement of keto acid formation. With r-glutamate and glyoxylate as substrates the reaction has been followed estimating n-oxoglutarate in inactivated incubation samples, adding glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH), excess reduced nicotinamide adeninc dinucleotide (NADH)) and ammonia and observing the total oxidation of NADH (decrease in extinction at 340 nm.). The * Present address: Department of Biochemistry, University of Birmingham, Birmingham BI 5 2TT.

+R.CO.COOH+CHsNH,.COOH same procedure was employed for incubations with L-glutamine as amino donor, assuming that the 2-oxoglutaramate first formed by transamination would be degraded virtually immediately to ammonia and 2-oxoglutarate; this is justifiable at least for assays with crude liver preparations (seeMeister, I 954). In assays with L-alanine as donor two methods of pyruvate estimation have been applied. Salicylaldehyde under strongly alkaline conditions reacts with pyruvate to form a coloured derivative, but not with several other keto acids (Braunstein, 1937) ; and, taking advantage of this specificity, it has been used (e.g., by Braunstein and Kritzmann, 1937) to demonstrate L-ala&e : 2-oxoglutarate aminotransferase activity. It proved possible in the same way to measure pyruvate in the presence of glyoxylate without interference. Greater sensitivity was required in some of our investigations and this has been achieved estimating pyruvate in assay samples with lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and excess NADH, noting the total decrease in extinction at 340 nm. in the presence of a large excess (cf. glyoxylate) of tris (hydrox~ethyl)aminomethane atpH 8.4.

MH*

248

ROWSELL AND OTHERS RECOMMENDED ASSAY ~IETHODS

ht. J. Biochem.

Under these conditions glyoxylate forms a Schiff base with Tris and is no longer a substrate for LDH, but the enzymic pyruvate oxidation of NADH is not affected (Thompson and Richardson, I 968). The methods have been applied in comparative surveys for glyoxylate aminotransferase activities and in studying activity with L-alanine and glyoxylate in the rat under different physiological conditions, and brief reports of these investigations have been made (Rowsell, Carnie, andTaktak, 1966; Rowsell, Carnie, and Snell, 1969; Rowsell, Snell, Carnie, and Al-Tai, 1969). The findings, augmented by further work, will form the basis of a separate publication. The present paper gives a full description of the assays with evidence of their reliability.
MATERIALS AND METHODS CHEMICALS Rabbit muscle LDH, 1800 international units (I.U.) per ml.; beef liver GDH, 450 I.U. per ml.; and NADH were obtained from Boehringer Corporation (London) Ltd., and diluted in the buffer appropriate to each estimation procedure. Glyoxylic acid (BDH Chemicals Ltd., Poole, U.K.) was neutralized with NaOH to the PH of the buffer selected for the particular assay; it was 96 per cent pure as estimated by LDH and NADH. Sodium pyruvate (Boehringer) and 2-oxorzlutaric acid (C.P. erade. Mann Research LaboFatories, New ?ork) Gere 5~6 per cent pure as assayed respectively by LDH or GDH. The fraction of salicylaldehyde (BDH) distilling at 196' C. was collected and stored in a dark bottle at 4' C. After a period of several months the reagent blank value in pyruvate estimation increased and a further redistillation was then Other aromatic aldehydes, all >g7 per necessary. cent pure, were purchased from Koch-Light Other Laboratories Ltd., Colnbrook, U.K. chemicals were analytical grade (BDH). Tnsux HOMOGENATES homogenizer These were prepared in a Potter using a glass tube and Teflon pestle. EXTINCTION MEASUREMENTS Measurements were made with Unicam spectrophotometers, model SP6oo for the visible, SP500 or the automatically recording model SP8oo for the U.V. The molar extinction coefficient of NADH at 340 nm. was taken as 6.22 x 10~. tl-KS?TO ACID ESTIMATIONS Estimations were calorimetric via reaction with 2,4-dinitrophenylhydraxine as described by Greenberg ( I 962).

I. L-Glutamate : Glyoxylate Aminotransferase
The standard reaction mixture containing 200 umoles sodium L-elutamate. 200 umoles glyoxylate, and 750 umo`ies potassium phosphate buffer, &H 7.4, in 12.5 ml. and a control without nlyoxylate were preincubated at 37' C. Pre&&bated tissue homogenate (2.5 ml. in O-I i\I phosphate buffer) was added to each and samples were removed into an equal volume of IO per cent trichloro-acetic acid in ice at zero time and at timed intervals. Incubations were performed under nitrogen to minimize oxidation of substrates or reaction products. The denatured samples were centrifuged and a measured volume of each clear supernatant was neutralized to pH 7.4 (approximately) with M NaOH. For the estimation of n-oxoglutarate, additions were made to a spectrophotometer cuvette as follows: neutralized assay sample (up to 1.0 ml.), o* I ml. NADH (about 0.2 umole), 0.1 ml. I `5 1M ammonium chloride, and d. I M `potassium phosnhate buffer. dH 7.6. for a total volume 2.0 ml. After noting' ;he kx&ction at 340 nm. 0.; ml. GDH was added (4.5 I.U.) and the decrease in extinction followed to completion (within 5-x0 minutes). To minimize the slight non-enaymic transamination observed for these particular substrates 2-oxoglutarate estimations were made as soon as possible following the assay incubation. 2. L-Glutamine : Glyoxylate Aminotransferase L-Glutamine was the amino donor and the buffer employed was 0.1 M potassium borate, PH 7.8; in all other details the procedure was as described in method I. Borate was preferred here to minimize L-glutamate formation by the phosphate-activated glutaminase (see Roberts, 1960). 3. L-Alanine : GJyoxylate Aminotransferase

L-Alanine was the amino donor; in all other respects incubation and sampling into trichloroacetic acid were as described under method I. After centrifugation, but without neutralization, pyruvate was then estimated in assay sample supernatants. Pyruvate estimation in the presence of glyoxylate: (a) The salicylaldehyde procedure was based on that Additions were made to of Berntsson (1955). boiling-tubes in the followin order: inactivated assay sample, water to x7.5 ml., 2.5 ml. 25 per cent w/v NaOH, 0.25 ml. salicylaldehyde, and "0 ml. 25 per cent NaOH. A reagent blank was ?ncluded. Tubes were sealed with Parafilm and shaken vigorously to dissolve any precipitate from After 2 hours at the salicvlaldehvde addition. room temperature extinctions were read at 470 nm. Extinction maxima are attained after about 1.5 hours and stable up to about 3 hours. We have preferred to calculate pyruvate in assay samples by with a pyruvate standard run comparison

r972>3

GLYOxYLATE AMINOTRANSFERASE ASSAY the mixture was neutralized n-oxoglutarate. steady a rate was observed, Ig.o-ml. with of pared assay oxylate proceed and estimated

249 for a

simultaneously, though reproducible linear calibration curves are obtained. (b) Additions were made to a spectrophotometer cuvette as follows: 0.4 ml. or less of assay sample (with, therefore, 4 umoles or less of glyoxylate), 1.0 ml. 0.8 M Tris-HCl buffer, pH 8.4, O-I ml. NADH (about 0.3 umole), and water to a total volume of 2.9 ml. The extinction was read at 340 nm.; 0.1 ml. LDH (18 I.U.) was added and the extinction read minutes. (c) A time-saving again after 3-6 variant of the conventional dehydrogenase proA o.4-ml. cedure has also been employed. aliquot or less of each assay sample was made up to 1.0 ml. including 800 l.tmoles Tris-HCl buffer, fiH 8.4. From a freshly prepared batch mixture 2.0 ml. were added containing: 20 umoles Tris, pH 8.4, 0.3 pmole NADH, and LDH (18 I.U.). Extinctions were then measured at 340 nm. between 3 and 6 minutes after mixing. Pyruvate increase for each sample (cf. zero time) was calculated from the extinction decrease (cf. equivalent zero-time sample). 4. Glycine Estimation To follow the course of glycine formation aminotransferase incubation samples (4.5 ml.) were inactivated in ice-cold perchloric acid 72 per similarly with an extra cent w/w (0.5 ml.); control incubation containing glyoxylate as sole substrate. After centrifugation, 3.0 ml. of each supernatant were neutralized with 4 M KOH; tubes were cooled in ice and the precipitated potassium perchlorate was removed by further centrifugation. A n-g-ml. aliquot of each neutralized extract was incubated with O-I ml. hydrogen peroxide 30 per cent w/v at 30" C. for 30 minutes (to degrade keto acids and thus avoid any possibility of non-enzymic transamination during chromatography). Glycine was then separated by paper chromatography and estimated colorimetrically with ninhydrin in comparison with a glycine standard run on the same paper, following the method of Kay, Harris, and Entenman ( I 956). Suitable systems for the separation of glycine on Whatman No. I paper were as follows: from alanine, leucine, or phenylalanine with n-propanoll water 4 : I v/v, descending for 42 hours; from glutamate with redistilled sec. butanol/formic acid (g8-xoo per cent)/water 70 : 15 : 15 v/v/v, descending for 28 hours; from glutamine with n-butanol/methanol,/water 2:2:1 v/v/v, descending for 40 hours. EXPERIMENTAL NON-ENZYMIC TRANSAMINATION WITH GLYOXYLATE Incubations and glyoxylate with phosphate genate. were made as described with L-glutamate I, but tissue homoeach sampling in method

In a series of experiments accumulation low

of 2-oxoglutarate incubation, that (e.g.,

0.33-0.37 pmoles per hour for
negligibly commeasured see Fig. 4); it delay seemed for any glutamate enzyme

experiment

even so, for the

enzyme-catalysed reactions without

: glyto of

advisable

in the estimation

n-oxoglutarate, inactivated. No (I

once assay samples had been
keto with acid in or glycine tests and

non-enzymic was incubation)

formation hour's Only L-glutamine formation presented preliminary valence tarate

observed

similar

glyoxylate

or L-alanine. to estimations of glycine of has non-enzymic to transamination In the course check the equithe

in relation

a real problem. attempts it was gave

of glycine and pyruvate formation for amino-acid A

or n-oxogluthat on paper aminaspot was

discovered separation ninhydrin solvents, to contain

procedure tion

chromatograms obtained

a non-enzymic

of glyoxylate.

in the glycine position for a number development following glyoxyof 50 ~1. of an aqueous

of different solution, acids tions assays. of

the initial application late, together (e.g., leucine,

freshly prepared alanine, in

with any one of several aminoglutamate, the glutamine, all at the concentraaminotransferase for example, and when the there same

phenylalanine), employed With L-alanine, to

was approximately glyoxylate phenomenon applying It would amination highly

an 8 per cent conversion glycine; glyoxylate point. transas become in filterreas this

was observed

alone was applied appear occurs

to a paper and dried before at the same non-enzymic mixtures that

an amino-acid

on the paper,

perhaps

glyoxylate-amino-acid concentrated

in the course of drying; action. Non-enzymic of organic Corrections solvents for

and it may be that some substance paper has a catalytic action possible chromatogram effect would would in the presence explanation.

development be unreliable;

begins is another it seems unlikely

buffer replacing following

that reactions occurring under such conditions be quantitatively reproducible.

Immediately

250

ROWSELL AND OTHERS

Int.

3. Biochem.

The difficulty was circumvented by degrading glyoxylate before applying aminotransferase incubation samples to chromatoa-Keto acids are oxidatively grams. decarboxylated by hydrogen peroxide

(Bunton, rg4g) and there was a total loss of keto acid when glyoxylate-amino-acid mixtures, at concentrations appropriate for aminotransferase assays, were treated with hydrogen peroxide (see method 4). Following such treatment no non-enzymic glycine formation could be observed. Full recoveries of glycine were obtained, however, by applying the chromatographic procedure with a variety of L-a-amino-acid-keto-acidglyoxylate-glycine mixtures (at concentrations such as would be found in aminotransferase assay incubation samples) after preincubation with peroxide. TESTS FOR INTERFERENCE WITH KETO ACID ESTIMATIONS L-glutamate : glyoxylate and L-glutamine : glyoxylate aminotransferase assay mixtures were prepared with rat liver homogenate, and inactivated without incubation. After centrifugation and neutralization I+ml. portions (equivalent to 8.3 mg. liver) were tested with glutamate dehydrogenase estimations of 2oxoglutarate standards (0~02-o~20 umole) ; no interference was observed. When pyruvate was estimated by salicylaldehyde (method (a)) the observed extinctions were not changed in the presence of 20 umoles of glyoxylate. In the presence of inactivated rat liver L-alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase assay mixture there was some increase in extinctions, more than could be accounted for by endogenous pyruvate, but the same increase was observed for the range of

a.1

t

FIG. I.-Effect of glyoxylate or L-alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase assay extract on the estimation of pyruvate with salicylaldehyde. Applying method (a) (0) with pyruvate standards alone or in the presence of 20 pmolea glyoxylate, and (A) in the presence of 2.0 ml. of an inactivated unneutralized rat liver L-alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase assay mixture, zero-time sample equivalent to 16.7 mg. liver. By LDH estimation method (6) 2.0 ml. of the assay extract were found to contain 0-t t nmole pyruvate.
Table L-EFFECT TRIO bmol=)

OF TRIS : GLYOXYLATE RATIO ON GLYOXYLATE BINDING TRIS : GLYOXYLATE MOLAR RATIO INITIAL RATE OF DECREASE

(AE,,

per minute x 10~) 58o* `I7
52 2 "5 I'3

0 too
200 izz 1000

0 20
40 IO0 160 200

Five nmoles glyoxylate, xoo nmoles potassium phosphate buffer, pH 8.4, 0.3 nmole NADH, and Tris buffer, @H 8.4, as indicated were mixed in a total 2.9 ml. at room temperature (25O C.). After adding o' I ml. LDH (18 I.U.) the oxidation of NADH ( an indicator of free glyoxylate) was followed spectrophotometrically at 340 nm. *By extrapolation from observations with 1.8 I.U. ofLDH.

1972, 3

GLYOXYLATE AMINOTRANSFERASE ASSAY

25'

pyruvate standards tested, i.e., there was no interference with pyruvate-salicylaldehyde colour development (Fig. I). For reliable enzymic estimations of pyruvate the key consideration was the need

added, rates were lower with trichloro-acetic acid than with HCl, showing inactivation or inhibition of LDH by the trichloroacetate ion. Using the procedure described in Table II with 0.4 pmole pyruvate replacing

Table II.--EFFECT OF ACIDONSTABILI~ OF TRWGLYOXYLATECOMPLEX ACIDADDED (ml.) Trichloro-acetic
0

HCl

INITIALRATE OF DECREASE (AZ&,, per minute x I os) 1'4 "3 "3 2.6 4'0 5'0 8.40 8.22 8.10 7.98 7.81 7.62 J:: 7'94 7'79 7.62 7.06 8.40

0'2 0.4 0.6 0.8 I'0 "4

0.4 0.6 0.8
1'0

15

2.8 5.6 7

"4 Phosphate buffer replacing Tris, no acid

--

;; 460*

Eight hundred pmoles Tris buffer, pH 8.4, 4 moles glyoxylate, 0.3 pmole NADH, and 5 Per cent (0.31 M) trichloro-acetic acid or 0.3 M HCl as indicated were mixed in a total 2.9 ml. at room temperature (25" C.). After adding 0.1 ml. LDH (18 I.U.) the oxidation of NADH was followed spectrophotometrically at 340 nm. The pH was then measured. *By extrapolation from observations with 1.8 I.U. of LDH. to eliminate any LDH reaction with glyoxylate, and the conditions necessary for the formation and stability of the Tris-glyoxylate complex were investigated. As Table I shows, a slight LDH reaction could still be observed with a Tris-glyoxylate molar ratio of 200 : I at pH 8.4; but for ratios exceeding IOO : I the free glyoxylate had been reduced to a permissibly low level, and this occurred virtually immediately without any deliberate preincubation. The Tris-glyoxylate complex dissociates as the PH is lowered; however, it was shown that in the presence of 800 pmoles of Tris at PH 8.4 (the amount adopted for routine use in pyruvate estimations), with samples in unneutralized trichloro-acetic acid (5 per cent), up to 0.4 ml. would be estimated without serious interference through glyoxylate re-oxidation of NADH ( Table II). In these experiments for equivalent amounts of acid glyoxylate, for 0.4 ml. 5 per cent trichloroacetic acid and x.8 I.U. of LDH the initial rate of extinction decrease at 340 nm. was 0*2x4 per minute (equivalent to 2.14 per minute for the I 8 I.U. LDH routinely used). When the LDH method (c) was applied with different amounts of pyruvate in the presence of 5 pmoies glyoxylate and the equivalent of 0.4 ml. 5 per cent trichloroacetic acid, extinction decreases (cf. no pyruvate) agreedwell with those observedwith pyruvate alone (Fig. 2). Making continuous spectrophotometric observations under these conditions it was apparent that pyruvate consumption was complete within 3 minutes for the whole range of amounts tested, but in each case there was a very slow persistent extinction decrease (about 0.00 I 4 per minute) due to a small residue of free glyoxylate not

252

ROWSELL AND OTHERS

Id.

3.

Biochem.

entirely eliminated by Tris (see Tables I and II). The effect of this can be seen in the slight downward displacement of the Fig. 2 points where glyoxylate was added. To maximize the accuracy of pyruvate estimation by the LDH procedure (b or c) it was evident that extinctions should be read
Ewe
o-7

r

tissue preparation, which absorbed at 340 nm. and changed in concentration during assay incubation, to that extent estimations of pyruvate accumulation would be in error. On several occasions, however, we have applied both LDH procedures (b and G) for estimations of pyruvate increase with the same series of assay samples from a rat liver L-alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase incubation, and found no significant discrepancies. Reasonable agreement was noted when

0.) -

0.3 -

0.2 -

O.I-

FIG. z--Effect of glyoxylate and trichloroacetic acid on the estimation of pyruvate by lactate dehydrogenase. Two ml. of an LDH-NADH-Tris mixture were added to 1.0 ml. containing (A) 5 nmoles glyoxylate, 0.2 ml. IO per cent trichloroacetic acid, 8oo Rmoles Tris, @H 8.4, and pyruvate as indicated, or (0) Tris and pyruvate alone; StV extinctions were then read at 340 nm. method (G) for further details. within 2-3 minutes after allowing time for pyruvate reactions to go to completion. Similar good recoveries of pyruvate (cf. Fig. 2) were observed in the presence of a 0.5-ml. portion (equivalent to 4.2 mg. tissue) of an unneutraiized inactivated rat liver L-alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase mixture [testing methods (b) or (c)l. There was an obvious potential defect in method (c) for pyruvate estimation which If there were any required investigation. endogenous substance introduced from a

FIG. g.-Equivalence of glycine and pyruvate formation in L-alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase assays. The two upper series of points refer to an incubation with rat liver (r/60 tissue dilution), the lower points to rabbit liver (r/600 Pyruvate accumulation (a) was dilution). estimated with salicylaldehyde, glycine (A) by method 4.

the salicylaldehyde and LDH methods were compared in the same way (see Figs. 5, 6). CONTROLS In tissue incubations with L-glutamate as sole substrate the rate of n-oxoglutarate formation was 5-15 per cent of the aminotransferase test rate, owing, presumably, to oxidative deamination and to transamination with endogenous keto acids. With L-alanine or L-glutamine as sole substrate, rates of keto acid production were immeasurably low.

197% 3

GLYOXYLATE AMINOTRANSFE~E LINEARITY ENZYME Assays were

ASSAY OF PROGRESS CURVES

`53 ;
OF INITIAL RATE WITH tissue concentrations and Lmouse (MUS

When glycine formation was also followed, negligibly low rates were observed for controls with glyoxylate alone.
LACK OF EFFECT WITH ADDED PHOSPH.4TE I\Joeffect was observed on aminotransferase rates when pyridoxal phosphate, 5 x ro -5 ~%f, PYRIDO~AL

PROPORTIONALITY at

CONCENTRATION different by testing glyoxylate with

made

glutamate

or L-glutamine

musdus),

rat (Rattuuf nomegicusf rabbit , or (O~c~l~gus c~~icu~~s) liver, and for L-alanine :

!

8

10

20 Ni""i8%

I 30

FIG. +-Progress curves for L-ghnamate : glyoxylate aminotransferase activity with a mouse liver homogenate at different tissue dilutions (as indicated). MBxoglutarate was estimated with GDH, and values (minus low control) are presented for the total product in a x5*0-ml. incubation mixture.

was added with glyoxylate and L-glutamate, L-glutamine, or L-alanine in incubations with mouse or rat liver.
EQUIVALENCE OF CLYCINE AND Q-&TO Acm

FORMATION IN GLYOXYIATE AMMINOTR~NSFERASEREACTIONS Inactivated rat, rabbit, rat kidney rat The liver assay samples were estimated or or for both keto acid and glycine after incubating pig, or dog liver homogenate with with r.-alanine L-glutamate and glyoxylate, and

glyoxylate.

two products

were formed

in equivalent

amounts

(e.g., see Fig. 3).

glyoxylate aminotransferase activity with mouse, rat, rabbit, pig (SW scrofa), cat (F&s catus), dog (Cunis vulgaris), frog (Rana t~pararia), or toad (Bufo bufo) liver, or rat kidney. Linear progress curves were observed and there was fair proportionality between rate and tissue concentration. These were the findings with liver r.-alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase assays for rats pretreated with glucagon or neonatal rats, conditions associated with elevated enzyme activity (Rowsell, Snell, and others, 1969). Representative rest&s from these studies are given in Figs. 4-7.

254

ROWSELL

AND

OTHERS

ht.

3.

Biochem.

SEVERAL AROMATIC ALDEHYDES -ESTED AS REAGENTS FOR COLORIMETRIC ESTIMATION OF PYRUVATE There were obvious disadvantages in the sahcylaldehyde method for pyruvate estimation and other aromatic aldehyde procedures were tested in the search for a substitute.

Trinder and Kirkland (1967) have reported a relatively quick procedure (30 minutes at 5s' C.) for the selective estimation of pyruvate in the 34

r

FIG. g.-Progress curves for L-alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase activity with a frog liver homogenate at different tissue dilutions (as indicated). Pyruvate was estimated with salicylaldehyde ( l ) or with LDH by method (6) (0).

FIG. 6.-Progress curves for L-alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase activity with a dog liver homogenate at different tissue dilutions (as indicated). Pyruvate was estimated with salicylaldehyde (a) or with LDH by method (b) (0).

nmurer

curves for L-alanine : glyoxylate FIG. 7. -Progress at different tissue dilutions (as indicated).

aminotransferase activity with a pig liver homogenate Pyruvate was estimated with salicylaldehyde.

`9729 3

GLYOXYLATE

AMINOTRANSFERASE

ASSAY

255

presence of z-oxoglutarate, depending on a specific reaction with vanillin. colorigenic Employing the same reaction conditions investigations were made with a variety of aromatic aldehydes. Testing vanillin, p-hydroxybenzaldehvde and salicvlaldehvde with nvruvate standards mere were wavelengths at &ich calorimetric sensitivity considerably exceeded that of Bemtsson's (1955) method, with good linearity between pyruvate amount and extinction and a much smaller reagent blank; but with all three aldehydes, in this procedure glyoxylate depressed colour development with pyruvate; e.g., with vanillin the 420 run. extinction for r umole was diminished by 28 per cent in the presence of IO umoles glyoxylate. The percentage decrease became greater with increasing glyoxylate and also (for a fixed concentration of glyoxylate) with Other compounds tested increasing pyruvate. under the Trinder and Kirkland (1967) conditions were m-nitrobenzaldehyde, p-chlorobenzaldehyde, piperonal,o-methoxybenzaldehyde, 3,4-dihydroxybenzaldehyde, and 2-hydroxy-r-naphthaldehyde. None proved satisfactory: in each case there was evident colour formation with pyruvate but calorimetric sensitivity was low or the reagent blank was high. Vanillin and p-hydroxybenzaldehyde (each as 0.3 g. in 2.0 ml. methanol) were also tested under the conditions of method (a). Some advantages over salicylaldehyde were noted: a reduction in reagent blank and an increase in sensitivity with pyruvate; and under these conditions glyoxylate However, 4-5 hours were did not interfere. required for full colour development, cf. I `5 hours with salicylaldehyde. Darling's ( r 94.4) modification of the salicylaldehyde procedure for pyruvate was examined. Colour development was rapid (in IO minutes at 37" C.) and, in comparison with Bemtsson's method, there was improved calorimetric sensitivity with a low reagent blank; but again colour formation with pyruvate was depressed in the presence of glyoxylate. CYSTEINE TESTED FOR SPECIFIC COMPLEX FORMATION WITH GLYOXYLATE Rao and Ramakrishnan (1962) report that glyoxylate reacts readily with cysteine in phosphate buffer, gH 7.0, at 37" C., losing its original aldehydic properties in the formation of a stable product. Moreover they report virtually loo per cent recovery of other keto acids under incubation conditions eivin2 a total disatmearance of glyoxylate (iudgmg by dinitrophenylhydraxine reactions). These observations, the authors suggest, provide the basis for a simple colorimetric technique, which could be applied in assays for all glyoxylate aminotransferase reactions. We have made some investigation of this possibility but our experiments have been discouraging. At concentrations relevant to the

analysis of samples taken from L-alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase assays glyoxylate (2.5 umoles per ml.) and pyruvate (0.25 umole per ml.) were separately incubated with cysteine; varying the degree of cysteine excess, pH! and time of incubation the free keto acid remainmg was estimated. In 0.01 M phosphate buffer, PH 7.0, at 37" C. with cysteine at IOO umoles per ml. there was a total removal of glyoxylate by 20 minutes, but under these conditions there was a high loss of pyruvate (>go per cent). Incubations in 2.5 per cent trichloro-acetic acid were relatively favourable for the survival of free pyruvate but also for glyoxylate, e.g., after 30 minutes at 37" C. with cysteine 50 umoles per ml. the pyruvate recovery was 55 per cent but an unacceptably high proportion of glyoxylate (> IO per cent) still remained free. DISCUSSION For the assay of activity L-alanine the

: glyoxylate
LDH method

aminotransferase

of pyruvate estimation has a number of advantages over the salicylaldehyde method : it is much less time-consuming [especially true for method (c)] ; the sensitivity is much greater (see Figs. I, 2) ; and the high reagent
blank value for the salicylaldehyde method

is an unwelcome feature. There are circumstances even so for which product analysis by a simple colorimetric procedure may be the preferred technique, and we sought improvement on the Bemtsson (1955) salicylaldehyde method. However, we were unable to discover an acceptable alternative procedure for pyruvate estimation in the presence of glyoxylate by reaction with an aromatic aldehyde. The idea of complexing glyoxylate with Tris, so that without interference pyruvate may be estimated by LDH, we owe principally to Thompson and Richardson ( 1968). However, the particular procedure, which is the principal feature of their paper, is not ideal. They recommend a method of pyruvate estimation which depends on measurement of the rate of the LDH reaction, and all such methods of substrate estimation carry a serious potential defect. The initial rate may be affected (through enzyme inhibition or activation) by substances introduced inadvertently into the extract requiring estimation; and, for example, if the LDH-rate method were to be applied in connexion with L-alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase assays

(Fig. I), though reproducible,

256

ROWSELL

AND OTHERS

Id.

3.

Biochem.

made on crude extracts of animal tissues, to be quite certain of making accurate measurements of pyruvate in assay samples the method would require re'standardization for each new application (e.g., for different tissues or animals or for different physiological or pathological conditions). Moreover our samples for pyruvate estimation have contained trichloro-acetic acid: in enzyme assays with crude tissue preparations prior treatment of samples with some protein precipitant is essential, if these are to be analysed for a particular keto acid using a specific dehydrogenase without any interfering contribution to NADH oxidation by endogenous processes; and it is a further advantage to have clarified extracts for these estimations. But such reagents, even at neutrality, inhibit LDH (see Table II) and other enzymes and to a degree dependent on their concentration. The LDH-rate method might be standardized for a particular trichloro-acetic acid (etc.) concentration but there would be no flexibility in the procedure with respect to size of sample selected for It should be noted also pyruvate estimation. that our preferred procedure of observing the total equivalent oxidation of NADH as a measure of pyruvate [method (b) or (c)] involves less work, and is inherently at least as accurate. Only with Tris : glyoxylate> I oo : I have we found that free glyoxylate is reduced immediately to an acceptably low level for specific LDH pyruvate estimation (see TubleZ). This is considerably greater than the ratio as being adequate by * 7'5 : I reported Thompson and Richardson ( 1968). The explanation for this discrepancy may be that we have employed a relatively large amount of LDH, to obtain complete reduction of pyruvate in a short time, and that under these conditions the continued presence of a small amount of free glyoxylate is more readily exposed. With partially purified L-alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase the LDH assay procedure could become somewhat simpler. From an optically clear assay incubation each sample could be taken directly into a TrisNADH-LDH mixture for an extinction

measurement at 340 nm. [after the pattern of method (c)l. With sufficient Tris (see preceding paragraph) free glyoxylate would be reduced virtually to zero; the aminotransferase reaction would stop and there would be a specific oxidation of NADH by the pyruvate accumulated at that stage. The general approach we have adopted for the assay with of transaminations glyoxylate should hold for any potential amino-acid substrate, where a specific method of estimation is available for the corresponding keto acid. For example, Thompson and Richardson (rg67), working with L-alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase purified from human liver, report some reaction with L-serine and glyoxylate (incubating with l*C-glyoxylate and measuring the radioactive glycine formed after separation on paper), and hydroxypyruvate-NADH reactions are readily catalysed by LDH. In principle it would be possible to assay for this aminotransferase reaction using method 3 followed by (b) or (c), except for the substitution of L-serine as starting substrate. We have observed, in fact, that fractional micromolar amounts of hydroxypyruvate are rapidly and specifically estimated by LDH under these conditions, i.e., with sufficient Tris to remove the glyoxylate. But there are many potential amino-acid substrates not amenable to investigation in this way. In such cases one possibility would be to measure the rate of glycine accumulation ; using method 4 the only special requirement would be a chromatogram development solvent adequate for the separation of glycine from the amino donor under test. It should be stressed that whether the analysis for glycine is to be calorimetric via ninhydrin reactions, or (after incubation with [`*Cl glyoxylate) via the measurement of radioactivity, there will be a strong possibility of non-enzymic reaction on paper chromatograms unless there is prior disposal of the glyoxylate substrate. Glyoxylate aminotransferase rates were not affected in our experiments by exogenous pyridoxal phosphate; and in two instances at least, the evidence is that pyridoxal phosphate remains firmly attached to the

1972, 3

GLYOXYLATE AMINOTRANSFERASE ASSAY

257

enzyme through several stages of purification (see Nakada (1964) on rat liver glutaaminotransferase and mate : glyoxylate Koide, Okuhara, Watanabe, and Shimura (1961) on pig liver L-alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase). It would be hasty to conclude, however, that for all glyoxylate aminotransferase assays the addition of pyridoxal phosphate can safely be ignored; in fact, a very clear requirement has been demonstrated in assays for L-alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase in extracts of frozen stored human liver (Thompson and Richardson, 1967). ACKNOWLEDGEMENT We wish to thank Mr. A. T. Crabtree for excellent technical assistance.

reaction as applied to paper chromatography `, Archs Biochem. Biobhvs.. 61. IA--P 5. KOIDE, F., O~VWA`&, A.~WAT~NABE, K., and SHIMURA, (rg6r), ` Glycine formation from L. elvoxvlic acid bv transamination reaction `. MEISTER.A. (ra;a). ` Studies on the mechanism and specifici<yy`of the glutamine-a-keto acid transamination-deamination reaction `, 3. biol. Chem., 210, I 7-35. NAKADA. H. I. (tg64), ' Glutamic-glycine transaminase from rat liver `, 3. biol. Chem., 239, RAO, N. A. N., and RAMAKRISHNAN, (1g62), T. ` The interaction of glyoxylate with cysteine and its application to the assay of isocitritase and of transaminases involving glyoxylate `, Biochim.
biophys. Acta, 58, 262-265. 468-47 I.

3.

VI

aghc.

Chem. Soc.`Japan,

35, 758-762.

.

ROBERTS, E. (rg6o), ` Glutaminase `, in The Enzymes (ed. BOYER, P. D., LARDY, H., and MYRBACK,K.), vol. 4, pp. 28 j-300. New York : Academic Press. ROWSELL,E. V., CARNIE,J. A., and SNELL, K. REFERENCES (ra6o). ` An assay for L-alanine-glvoxvlate a&rZransferase `, `Biochem. 3.) 1x2, 5P. ' ALEXANDER, B., LANDWEHR,G., and SELIGMAN, RO~~ELL, E. V., CARNIE,J. A., and TAKTAK, B. A. M. ( 1g45), ' A specific micromethod for the (1966). ` Glvcine metabolism in mammalian calorimetric determination of glycine in blood k&r `;`Biochem. J., 101, 42-43P. and urine `, J. biol. Chem., x60, 51-59. ROWSELL.E. V.. SNELL.K.. CARNIE. 1. A.. and BERNTSSON, S. ` Spectrophotometric (`955), AL-TA;, A. `H. (196g),' ` Liver ' T-alaninedetermination of pyruvic acid by the salicylaldeglyoxylate and L-serine-pyruvate aminotranshyde method `, &&yt. Gem., &7, 1659-1660. ferase activities: an apparent association with BRAUNSTEIN. E. (1917). ` Suecificitv of the A. ~ --:" gluconeogenesis `, B&hem. J., 1x5, 1071-1073. salicylic aldehyde reaction of `Csonka&traub `, THOMPSON, S., and RICHARDSON, E. (rg67), J. K. Nature, Lond., 140, 427. ` Isolation and characterization of an LBRAWNSTEIN, E., and KRITZMANN, G. (x937), A. M. alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase from ` Uber den Ab- und Aufbau von Aminosluren human liver `, 3. biol. Ch.em.,w, 3614-361 g. durch Unaminierung `, Enzpologia, 2, 129-x46. THOMPSON, S., and RICHARDSON, E. (Ig68), J. K. BUNTON, A. (`gag), ` Oxidation of a-diketones C. ` Determination of pyruvate in enzyme-cataand a-keto acids by hydrogen peroxide `, lysed reactions in the presence of glyoxylate `, Nature, Lond., 163, 444. AnaSyt. B&hem., 24, 197-201. DARLING,S. (tg++), ' Method for the determinaTRINDER,P., and KIRKLAND, F. (1967). ` The J. tion of oxaloacetic acid in biologic systems `, determination of L-aspartate : 2-oxoglutarate Acta physiol. stand., 7, 306-3 I 2. aminotransferase in serum `, Clin. chim. Acta, 16, GREENBERG, M. (tg62), ` Cystathionine and D. 287-296. homoserine cleavage `, in Methodc in Enzymology (ed. COLOWICK,S. P., and KAPLAN, N. O.), New York: Academic Key Word Index : Glyoxylate aminotransferase g;ss5? PP. 936-942. assays, unfractionated tissue homogenates, pyruKAY? R. E., HARRIS, D. C.. and ENTENMAN. C. vate estimation in presence of glyoxylate, non(1g56), ` Quantification of the ninhydrin colour enzymic transamination with glyoxylate.

