Article No. jmbi.1999.3383 available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

J. Mol. Biol. (1999) 294, 1327±1336

Plant Cyclotides: A Unique Family of Cyclic and Knotted Proteins that Defines the Cyclic Cystine Knot Structural Motif
David J. Craik*, Norelle L. Daly, Trudy Bond and Clement Waine
Centre for Drug Design and Development, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia Several macrocyclic peptides ($30 amino acids), with diverse biological activities, have been isolated from the Rubiaceae and Violaceae plant families over recent years. We have signi®cantly expanded the range of known macrocyclic peptides with the discovery of 16 novel peptides from extracts of Viola hederaceae, Viola odorata and Oldenlandia af®nis. The Viola plants had not previously been examined for these peptides and thus represent novel species in which these unusual macrocyclic peptides are produced. Further, we have determined the three-dimensional structure of one of these novel peptides, cycloviolacin O1, using 1H NMR spectroscopy. The structure consists of a distorted triple-stranded b-sheet and a cystine-knot arrangement of the disul®de bonds. This structure is similar to kalata B1 and circulin A, the only two macrocyclic peptides for which a structure was available, suggesting that despite the sequence variation throughout the peptides they form a family in which the overall fold is conserved. We refer to these peptides as the cyclotide family and their embedded topology as the cyclic cystine knot (CCK) motif. The unique cyclic and knotted nature of these molecules makes them a fascinating example of topologically complex proteins. Examination of the sequences reveals they can be separated into two subfamilies, one of which tends to contain a larger number of positively charged residues and has a bracelet-like circularization of the backbone. The second subfamily contains a backbone twist due to a cis-Pro peptide bond and may conceptually be regarded as a molecular Moebius strip. Here we de®ne the structural features of the two apparent subfamilies of the CCK peptides which may be signi®cant for the likely defense related role of these peptides within plants.
# 1999 Academic Press

*Corresponding author

Keywords: kalata B1; cyclotides; NMR spectroscopy; cyclic peptides; cystine knot

Introduction
Proteins are traditionally regarded as linear chains of amino acids which fold up into a de®ned three-dimensional shape necessary to enable their biological function. In many proteins, the linear peptide backbone is cross-linked via disul®de bonds between cysteine residues, but even in these cases the three-dimensional folds are invariably topologically simple, i.e. not knotted. Here we describe a unique family of cyclic proteins in
Abbreviations used: CCK, cyclic cystine knot. E-mail address of the corresponding author: d.craik@mailbox.uq.edu.au
0022-2836/99/501327±10 $30.00/0

which this tenet of topological simplicity is not obeyed. This cyclotide family of proteins is abundant in plants from the Rubiaceae and Violaceae family and contains not only a unique amide head to tail cyclized peptide backbone, but also incorporates a cystine knot in which an embedded ring in the structure formed by two disul®de bonds and their connecting backbone segments is threaded by a third disul®de bond. These combined features of the cyclic cystine knot (CCK) produce a unique protein fold that is topologically complex and has exceptional chemical and biological stability. Small cyclic peptides are not uncommon in nature, particularly as antibiotics of microbial ori# 1999 Academic Press

1328 gin, and appear to have advantages of improved stability and biological activity over their non-cyclic counterparts. Because of their favorable properties, cyclic peptides (or mimics of them) have been widely used in pharmaceutical applications, perhaps best exempli®ed by the immunosuppressant cyclosporine. These classical cyclic peptides invariably comprise fewer than 15 amino acid residues, usually lack disul®de bonds and generally do not have well de®ned three-dimensional structures. However, in the last few years there have been several isolated reports of larger cyclic peptides, on the order of 30 amino acid residues, which have the potential to exhibit folded structures more characteristic of true proteins. These include kalata B1 (Saether et al., 1995), the circulins (Gustafson et al., 1994), cyclopsychotride (Witherup et al., 1994) and several peptides from Viola arvensis È (Claeson et al., 1998; Goransson et al., 1999; È Schopke et al., 1993). These macrocyclic peptides were originally discovered from random screening programs or, in the case of kalata B1, from anecdotal evidence from native medicine studies: African women of the Lulula tribe use an extract from the plant Oldenlandia af®nis as a uterotonic agent to speed child birth (Gran, 1970). The active ingredient was found to be a 29-amino acid peptide (Gran, 1973) which was subsequently shown to be cyclic (Saether et al., 1995). The circulins were discovered from a random screening program targeting anti-HIV activity (Gustafson et al., 1994), cyclopsychotride A (Witherup et al., 1994) was discovered based on screening of plant extracts for inhibition of neurotensin binding to cell membranes, and various peptides from Viola species È (Claeson et al., 1998; Goransson et al., 1999; È Schopke et al., 1993) were initially found based on screening for haemolytic activity. Thus, all of the known macrocyclic peptides have diverse biological activities but their function in plants is not yet known. We suspect that these molecules are involved in host defence since they are expressed in large quantities in these plants (up to 1 g/kg of leaf material) and are cysteine-rich, as occurs in a number of other plant defence proteins. We report here the discovery of a new series of cyclic proteins, exempli®ed by cycloviolacin O1 from the native Australian violet, Viola odorata, and show that these proteins are homologous in their spacing of cysteine residues to other macrocyclic peptides from the Rubiaceae and Violaceae families. We further show that these conserved cysteine residues de®ne a cystine knot motif at the core of a consensus three-dimensional structure of this family of macrocyclic proteins. The cyclic backbone and cystine knot result in a topology which is unique amongst proteins. As far as we are aware, there are no other naturally occurring head-to-tail cyclic proteins and certainly none which also incorporate an embedded disul®de knot.

Plant Cyclotides

Identification and Characterisation of Cycloviolacin O1
Based on our investigation of the prototypic macrocyclic peptide kalata B1 (Saether et al., 1995) we looked for macrocyclic peptides in V. odorata by screening chromatographic fractions using mass spectrometry. Fresh plant material was ground and extracted with 1:1 methanol/dichloromethane. The HPLC pro®le of V. odorata extracts prepared in this way showed a large number of peaks (Figure 1) but we focussed particularly on those with long retention times (>20 minutes). Mass spectra of these peaks were recorded and those with apparent molecular weights in the range 2500-3500 were further examined. For example, the mass spectrum of the last-eluting peak in Figure 1 suggested a molecular mass of 3116. On reduction and alkylation of the isolated fraction corresponding to this peak, the mass of six alkyl groups was gained, suggesting the possibility of six cysteine residues being present. Amino acid sequencing of the reduced and alkylated peptide using Edman degradation was attempted but no sequence could be determined, suggesting that the peptide was N-terminally blocked or cyclic. Treatment of the reduced and alkylated peptide with Endo-GluC yielded a product which was 18 mass units heavier, consistent with hydrolysis of a single amide bond in a cyclic peptide. Amino acid sequencing of this fraction yielded the sequence shown in Figure 1, which is consistent with the molecular weight derived from mass spectrometry. All of the available evidence suggests that the naturally occurring peptide is the head-to-tail cyclic derivative of this sequence, which we refer to as cycloviolacin O1, re¯ecting its origin as the ®rst macrocyclic peptide characterised from V. odorata. We have similarly screened a large number of extracts from V. hederaceae, V. betonicifolia and O. af®nis and found a range of other macrocyclic peptides of similar masses. A selection of the derived sequences is shown in Table 1 and it is clear that the family of cyclic peptides is very widespread in plants. To facilitate the study of such peptides and their comparisons with other molecules we refer to this generic family of macrocyclic peptides as the plant cyclotides (cyclo peptides), de®ned here to include peptides of $30 amino acids with a cyclised backbone and six cysteine residues involved in three disul®de bonds.

Three-dimensional Structure of Cycloviolacin O1
750 MHz NMR spectra of cycloviolacin O1 were recorded, assigned and used to determine the three-dimensional structure of this peptide. The cyclic nature of cycloviolacin O1 was unequivocally con®rmed by a continuous closed series of sequential NOE connectivities, including daN,

Plant Cyclotides

1329

Figure 1. Isolation and characterisation of cycloviolacin O1. (a) HPLC pro®le of the crude extract from V. odorata. The region of interest is expanded in (b) to show the peptide peaks labelled with their mass. Cycloviolacin O1 eluted last in this pro®le. The peptide was reduced with tris-carboxyethylphosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with maleimide. (c) The reduced and alkylated species (labelled M  6), which has a mass 582 Da greater than the native peptide since 97 Da was added to each of the six cysteine residues during alkylation, was puri®ed under the same HPLC conditions and eluted ®ve minutes earlier than the native peptide. The reduced and alkylated species was cleaved with Endoproteinase Glu-C after initial attempts to sequence it failed. (d) The cleaved species (labelled M  24), has a mass 18 Da greater than the reduced and alkylated peptide due to addition of H2O across the cleaved peptide bond. (e) N-terminal sequencing of cycloviolacin O1 for 30 cycles yielded the indicated sequence.

dNN, or dad in the case of Pro. Figure 2 shows a superposition of the family of calculated NMR structures and the associated geometric and energetic statistics are in Table 2. The three-dimen-

sional structure is compact and contains a number of b-turns, three b-strands arranged in a triplestranded b-sheet, a short helical segment, and a network of disul®de bonds which form a cystine

Figure 2. Stereoview of a superimposed family of structures of cycloviolacin O1 calculated using simulated annealing based on NMR-derived distance and torsion angle restraints. The methods used in the structure determination were similar to those given by Daly et al., (1999a). Selected residues are indicated using a numbering scheme based on the sequence order shown in Table 1 (i.e. CysI is arbitrarily de®ned as residue 1 in this cyclic peptide). The superposition shows the 20 lowest energy structures whose geometric and energetic statistics are given in Table 2. The disul®de connectivities of the lowest energy structure are displayed with a thickened line to emphasize the knotted structure. The co-ordinates and restraints have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank (ID code 1DF6).

1330

Plant Cyclotides

Plant Cyclotides

1331
Table 2. Energetic statistics for the family of 20 cycloviolacin O1 structures
Ê Mean pairwise r.m.s. deviations (A)a Backbone Heavy atom Mean r.m.s.d. from experimental restraints Ê NOE (A) Dihedral angles ( ) Mean r.m.s.d. from idealised covalent geometryb Ê Bonds (A) Angles ( ) Impropers ( ) Mean energies (kJ/mol) Ec NOE Ec dih Ed L-J Ebond Eimproper Eangle Etotal Ramachandran plot statisticse Residues in most favored regions (%) Residues in additional allowed regions (%) Residues in generously allowed regions (%) Residues in disallowed regions (%) 0.51 Æ 0.15 1.14 Æ 0.26 0.02 Æ 0.002 0.35 Æ 0.05 0.009 Æ 0.0004 2.26 Æ 0.06 0.21 Æ 0.02 7.29 Æ 1.48 0.17 Æ 0.05 À117.2 Æ 4.9 5.07 Æ 0.47 0.79 Æ 0.13 54.6 Æ 2.95 À43.4 Æ 9.09 55.2 38.5 6.0 0.2

knot (McDonald & Hendrickson, 1993; Pallaghy et al., 1994; Isaacs, 1995; Norton & Pallaghy, 1998). As illustrated in Figure 3(a) the cystine knot consists of an embedded ring in the structure, formed by two disul®de bonds and their connecting peptide backbones, which is penetrated by the third disul®de bond. In the case of cycloviolacin O1 the embedded ring is an octapeptide, made up of disul®de-linked tri- and penta-peptide backbone segments (Figure 3(b)). The cystine knot motif is seen in other larger proteins (Murray-Rust et al., 1993) although the size of the embedded ring is larger than in the case of the cyclotides and so the impression of a knot is not so apparent. Consideration of van der Waals radii suggests that an octapeptide ring is the smallest hole through which a disul®de bond could penetrate.

The Cyclic Cystine Knot is a Conserved Structural Framework Amongst the Cyclotide Family of Peptides
From the conserved spacing of cysteine residues across the family of cyclotides it was thought that the other members of the family would adopt similar three-dimensional structures, and to con®rm this we compared cycloviolacin O1 to kalata B1 (Saether et al., 1995) and circulin A (Daly et al., 1999a), the only other macrocyclic peptides for which structures have been determined. The global folds of cycloviolacin O1, kalata B1 and circulin A are indeed very similar, with the RMS ®t over backbone atoms of the loops with conserved spaÊ cing being <1.3 A for all three molecules. The ®t is particularly good over the cystine knot core of the molecules, as shown in Figure 3(b). It is clear that these molecules form a consensus structure, which we refer to as the cyclic cystine knot (CCK). The main elements of this new protein motif are shown in Figure 3(c). Two of the b-strands form a hairpin which is essentially at the core of the knot, containing three of the six Cys residues. The two strands of the hairpin are linked with several hydrogen bonds. The third strand is distorted from ideal b geometry, and contains a b-bulge in the segment between CysI and CysII.

The values in the Table are given as mean Æ standard deviation. a R.m.s. deviation measured for the whole molecule. The Ê Ê corresponding values are 0.44(Æ0.14) A and 1.02 Æ 0.24 A for the backbone and heavy atoms for a subset of the 14 lowest energy structures. b Idealised geometry as de®ned by CHARMm force ®eld and as implemented within X-PLOR. c Force constants for the calculation of square-well potentials for the NOE and dihedral angle restraints were 50 kcal Ê molÀ1AÀ1 and 200 kcal molÀ1radÀ2, respectively. d The Lennard-Jones van der Waals energy was calculated with CHARMm empirical energy function. e Ramachandran statistics were calculated using ProcheckNMR (Laskowski et al., 1996).

Our determination of the sequences of an extensive series of macrocyclic peptides, together with three-dimensional structures of three members of the family, allows some general conclusions to be drawn regarding the role of particular amino acids in de®ning the knotted topology. Table 1 includes the sequences of the new cyclotide peptides reported here and various peptides reported pre-

Table 1. (footnote)
All peptides are cyclic and hence the choice of starting residue is arbitrary. The numbering scheme for cysteine residues is shown at the top of the Table, and that for the loops is at the bottom. The conserved cysteine residues are boxed and colored yellow. Other conserved residues are highlighted in color, with individual residues which are exceptions to a conserved series being boxed. The generic name cycloviolacin re¯ects the fact that the peptides are cyclic and come from the Violaceae family. The kalata peptides are named B1, B2 etc following the original name of Gran (1970) and Saether et al. (1995) for kalata B1. Kalata S, was distinguished in naming because it is identical to varv peptide A and differs only from kalata B1 in a single T/S substitution. Peptides derived from plants in the Violaceae family are indicated by black lettering of their name while those from Rubiaceae are red. Cycloviolacins O1-O12 were isolated from V. odorata; cycloviolacin H1 was isolated from V. hederaceae and the kalata peptides were isolated from O. af®nis. However, some peptides are present in multiple species, e.g. kalata B1 occur in both Rubiaceae and Violaceae families. Cycloviolacin O12 (which is identical to varv peptide E) occurs in more than one Violaceae species.

1332

Plant Cyclotides

Figure 3. Structural features of cycloviolacin O1 and other plant cyclotides. In (a) is a ribbon representation of the NMR-derived structure of cycloviolacin O1, with the cysteine residues numbered CysI to CysVI. In (b) is a superimposition of the cystine-knots of kalata B1, circulin A and cycloviolacin O1. The backbone is shown in green and the cysteine residues are colored in yellow and have their Ca atoms highlighted with spheres. (c) Schematic representation of the cyclic cystine knot motif showing the arrangement of the connected disul®de bonds and the general topology of the knot. The bold arrows represent the strands of the b-hairpin (labelled strand 1 and strand 2) and the shaded arrow represents an extended region which is distorted from standard b-geometry but nominally makes up the third strand of the b-sheet. (d) Summary of the conserved and variable residues in the known cyclotides. The conserved amino acids involved in the formation of the embedded ring in the structure are outlined in pink and connected by disul®de bonds CysI-CysIV and CysV-CysII. All other amino acids are outlined in black, with variable residues colored blue and conserved residues green. In an attempt to represent something of the three-dimensional topography of the knot, those residues closer to the observer are outlined with a thicker black outline.

viously from the Violaceae and Rubiaceae plant families. The alignments are based on the six highly conserved Cys residues whose disul®de connectivity is indicated schematically at the bottom of the Table. This representation shows the embedded ring formed by two intracysteine backbone segments and their connecting disul®de bonds, CysI-CysIV and CysII-CysV, and highlights the penetration of this ring by the third disul®de bond (CysIII-CysVI). Because of the cyclic nature of the amide backbone, there are nominally six loops (i.e. six separate backbone segments) between successive Cys residues, and these are numbered loop 1 to loop 6 at the bottom of the Table. Their topolo-

gical placement is illustrated in Figure 3(c). Examination of the sequences shows that there is remarkable conservation amongst many of the loops, but for those loops where there are variations, the peptides fall into two subfamilies: Loops 1 and 4 correspond to the backbone segments of the embedded ring of the cystine knot and are the most conserved part of the sequence. Loop 1 comprises residues GET/S (the third residue is S in subfamily 1 and T in subfamily 2), while loop 4 contains just a single residue, most often S. Loop 2 contains exactly four residues, but has different compositions in the two subfamilies. In

Plant Cyclotides

1333 Figure 3(d) summarises the conserved and variable residues of the CCK motif of the cyclotide family and shows their positioning with respect to the core cystine knot. The highly conserved nature of the amino acids within the embedded ring of the cystine knot (loops 1 and 4) suggests that it is not just the number of amino acids in this motif, but their nature which stabilises the knot. By contrast, most variability occurs in loops 2, 3 and 5. The variable residues in loops 2 and 5 are clustered together in two b-turns immediately adjacent to each other. This means that the variable residues point out into the solvent, suggesting the possibility that this region may be important in binding interactions and biological function of the cyclotides. Loop 3 varies most in size of any of the loops and this results in the only signi®cant difference in three-dimensional structures of the different cyclotides. In subfamily 2, exempli®ed by kalata B1 this four residue loop forms a relatively disordered extended strand, but in subfamily 1 it is suf®ciently long to form two turns of 310-helix. This small helical segment is apparent in Figure 3 in cycloviolacin O1. It is interesting that in this case, the structure has a remarkable resemblance to plant defensin structures (Broekaert et al., 1995), which consist of a triple stranded b-sheet and a single helix, suggesting a possible defence role for the cyclotides. This is further supported by our ®nding that cycloviolacin O1 and other CCK peptides are haemolytic agents, and cause 50 % lysis of

subfamily 1, the ®rst three residues are hydrophobic and the fourth residue is always P. In subfamily 2, the two central residues are GG, the ®rst residue is hydrophobic and the ®nal residue is T, with one exception. In loops 3 and 5 there is more variability in the number and type of residues present. For subfamily 1, loop 3 includes up to seven residues, largely hydrophobic apart from a conserved G, while in subfamily 2, there are only four residues (NTP, plus the conserved G). Loop 5 contains four or ®ve residues, with a conserved V at the C-terminal position. Subfamily 1 contains two positively charged residues, whereas subfamily 2 contains predominantly a SWP sequence before the conserved V. Finally, loop 6 has a C-terminal proline preceded by the sequence NGI/L, all of these residues being highly conserved. In subfamily 1, the proline is immediately adjacent to CysI, whereas in subfamily 2 there is an intervening hydrophobic residue. It is interesting that there is no mixing of loop sequences between the subfamilies, i.e. in all of the peptides so far discovered there are no natural chimeras in which any peptide from subfamily 1 contains even a single loop from subfamily 2 or vice versa, apart from loop 4 which is identical in both subfamilies. It is also interesting that there is a difference in the net charge of the two subfamilies. In general peptides from subfamily 1 have a net charge of 2 while those in subfamily 2 are neutral or slightly negative.

Figure 4. Topologies of cystine knot peptides. (a) The common cysteine connectivity of known cystine knot peptides from plants, animals and fungi. This connectivity pattern can be redrawn to illustrate that the pattern is topologically simple, i.e. involves no line crossings in two dimensions, as shown in (b). Circularisation of the backbone, as in (c), removes this topological simplicity, as occurs in the CCK family of cyclotides. Other non-knotted arrangements of disul®de connectivities are however theoretically feasible, as shown in (d). The series (e) to (h) shows the successive unfolding of non-cyclic cystine knot peptides, demonstrating their topological simplicity and is based on a kinemage from Benhan & Jafri (1993).

1334 erythrocytes at a concentration of $20 mM and by a recent report showing anti-bacterial activity of kalata B1 (Tam et al., 1999b).

Plant Cyclotides

Topological Implications of the CCK Motif in Protein Structures
Many small cystine-rich proteins, including proteinase inhibitors from plants (Favel et al., 1989), toxins from cone snail (Nielsen et al., 1996) and spider (Narasimhan et al., 1994) venoms, and avirulence gene products such as AVR9 (Vervoot et al., 1997) from fungi adopt a cystine knot structure. This motif is thus represented in diverse species from animals, plants and fungi. The order of connectivity of disul®de bonds is similar in all of these molecules, i.e. CysI-CysIV, CysII-CysV and CysIIICysVI, as illustrated in Figure 4(a). However, the spacing of amino acids between cysteine residues is generally such that the apparent knot in the structures is much looser than in the cyclotides. In addition, there is a fundamental topological difference between the cyclic and acyclic cystine knot proteins. Although commonly referred to as knots, the latter are in fact not knotted in a mathematical sense (Mans®eld, 1994; Mislow & Liang, 1996), are topologically simple (Mao, 1993), and may be drawn in two dimensions on a non-crossing diagram, such as is shown in Figure 4(b). By contrast, the cyclotides are topologically complex, cannot be represented without crossing in a planar diagram (Figure 4(c)), and may thus be regarded as true knots. It is interesting to note that backbone cyclization is a necessary, but not suf®cient, condition for knotting as described here, because it is possible to envisage cyclic disul®de-rich proteins such as that represented in Figure 4(d), which are not knotted. However, a search of the protein database did not reveal any known proteins with such a topology. The issue of whether there are knots in proteins is controversial (Mans®eld, 1994; Mao, 1993; Mislow & Liang, 1996; Takusagawa & Kamitori, 1996), and is complicated by different usage of the term knot amongst mathematicians and biologists. For example, a typical representation of the fold of many ``cystine knot'' proteins is shown in Figure 4(e). On the basis of common usage it is intuitively reasonable to refer to such structures as knotted; however, they may clearly be untied by a non-bond-breaking geometrical transformation (Benham & Jafri, 1993), as illustrated in the series Figure 4(e) to (h), with structure 4(h) exemplifying the topologically simple nature of these molecules, equivalent to 4(b). In this example the untying involves pushing the C terminus and its associated peptide chain through the embedded ring in the middle of the knot as shown. Although such an unthreading mechanism at ®rst seems unlikely, a recent study (De Young et al., 1996) has suggested that this may indeed be responsible for a very slow unfolding of human nerve growth factor.

Such unthreading, or the reverse process of threading to form the cystine knot, is clearly not possible in CCK proteins such as the cyclotides, because they do not have N or C termini. Formation of the knot must arise from successive formation of individual disul®de bonds, with the central penetrating bond presumably not formed last as this would seem sterically unfavorable. However, the detailed mechanism of disul®de bond formation of the cyclotides remains unknown, as does the mechanism of backbone cyclization. The latter presumably occurs enzymatically and is currently the subject of further investigation by us, but it is of interest to note that closing the ends of an untied knot via cyclization can, in principle, be done in one of several topologically distinct ways, leading to topological chirality (Benham & Jafri, 1993; Mao, 1993). For example, joining of the N and C termini of Figure 4(h) could occur either over, or under the intervening backbone, leading to topological isomers. In the cyclotides for which we have determined structures we see only one of the possible topological isomers occurring naturally.

The Cyclic Cystine Knot as a Molecular Engineering Framework
The cyclotides have exceptional stability as demonstrated, for example, by the fact that in one medical application African women boil the plant containing kalata B1 and drink it, implying a high degree of chemical and enzymatic stability, as well as oral bioavailability. We have tested a wide range of proteases for activity against cyclotides and ®nd that the oxidised CCK framework is completely impervious to enzymatic cleavage. This is not surprising based on the compact three-dimensional structures shown in Figure 2. Protease digestion is only possible after reduction of the disul®de bonds to remove the cystine knot. The stability of this framework suggests that it may be useful as an engineering scaffold onto which different amino acid sequences could be grafted to achieve different functional ends. Applications could include pharmaceuticals or agrochemicals. The recent development of synthetic chemistry methods applicable to this class of molecules promises to facilitate such applications (Daly et al., 1999b; Tam et al., 1999a).

Moebius Strip Nature of Cyclotides?
Cyclization of any ribbon-like entity can be done in many ways but the two topologically simplest are by connection of the ends of the linear ribbon with no twist (i.e. bracelet-like), or with a single twist. The latter results in what is commonly known as a Moebius strip, which has the fascinating property of having just a single continuous side, compared to two sides of a bracelet. This opens the intriguing question of whether the cyclo-

Plant Cyclotides

1335
structure by NMR of circulin A: a macrocyclic knotted peptide having anti-HIV activity. J. Mol. Biol. 285, 333-345. Daly, N. L., Love, S., Alewood, P. F. & Craik, D. J. (1999b). Chemical synthesis and folding of large cyclic polypeptides: studies of the cystine knot polypeptide kalata B1. Biochemistry, 38, 10606-10614. De Young, L. R., Burton, L. E., Liu, J., Powell, M. F., Schmelzer, C. H. & Skelton, N. J. (1996). RhNGF slow unfolding is not due to proline isomerization: possibility of a cystine knot loop-threading mechanism. Protein Sci. 5, 1554-1566. Evans, T. C., Jr., Benner, J. & Xu, M. Q. (1999). The cyclization and polymerization of bacterially expressed proteins using modi®ed self-splicing inteins. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 18359-18363. Favel, A., Mattras, H., Coletti-Previero, M. A., Zwilling, R., Robinson, E. A. & Castro, B. (1989). Protease inhibitors from Ecballium elaterium seeds. Int. J. Pept. Protein Res. 33, 202-208. È Goransson, U., Luijendijk, T., Johansson, S., Bohlin, L. & Claeson, P. (1999). Seven novel macrocyclic polypeptides from Viola arvensis. J. Nat. Prod. 62, 283286. Gran, L. (1970). An oxytocic principle found in Oldenlandia af®nis DC. Medd. Nor. Farm. Selsk. 12, 173-180. Gran, L. (1973). Isolation of oxytocic peptides from Oldenlandia af®nis by solvent extraction of tetraphenylborate complexes and chromatography on sephadex LH-20. Lloydia, 36, 207-208. Gustafson, K. R., Sowder, R. C., II, Henderson, L. E., Parsons, I. C., Kashman, Y., Cardellina, J. H., II, McMahon, J. B., Buckheit, R. W., Jr, Pannell, L. K. & Boyd, M. R. (1994). Circulins A and B: novel HIVinhibitory macrocyclic peptides from the tropical tree Chassalia parvifolia. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 116, 93379338. Isaacs, N. W. (1995). Cystine knots. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 5, 391-395. Laskowski, R. A., Rullmannn, J. A., MacArthur, M. W., Kaptein, R. & Thornton, J. M. (1996). AQUA and PROCHECK-NMR: programs for checking the quality of protein structures solved by NMR. J. Biomol. NMR, 8, 477-86. Mans®eld, M. L. (1994). Are there knots in proteins? Struct. Biol. 1, 213-214. Mao, B. (1993). Topological chirality of proteins. Protein Sci. 2, 1057-1059. McDonald, N. Q. & Hendrickson, W. A. (1993). A structural superfamily of growth factors containing a cystine knot motif. Cell, 73, 421-424. Mislow, K. & Liang, C. (1996). Knotted structures in chemistry, biochemistry and molecular biology. Croatica Chemica Acta, 69, 1385-1403. Murray-Rust, J., McDonald, N. Q., Blundell, T. L., Hosang, M., Oefner, C., Winkler, F. & Bradshaw, R. A. (1993). Topological similarities in TGF-b2, PDGF-BB and NGF de®ne a superfamily of polypeptide growth factors. Structure, 1, 153-159. Narasimhan, L., Singh, J., Humblet, C., Guruprasad, K. & Blundell, T. (1994). Snail and spider toxins share a similar tertiary structure and `cystine motif'. Struct. Biol. 1, 850-852. Nielsen, K. J., Thomas, L., Lewis, R. J., Alewood, P. F. & Craik, D. J. (1996). A consensus structure for omega-conotoxins with different selectivities for voltage-sensitive calcium channel subtypes: comparison of MVIIA, SVIB and SNX-202. J. Mol. Biol. 263, 297-310.

tides are bracelet-like or Moebius-like? While it must be recognised that a peptide backbone is strictly not a ¯at ribbon because there are three variable torsion angles which de®ne it (f, c and o), it is nevertheless the case that biologists routinely represent proteins using ribbon diagrams, particularly for regions of secondary structure such as b-sheets or a-helices. An extended peptide backbone can clearly be regarded as a ribbon having two distinct sides. If we regard the f and c backbone angles as ¯exible, and hence notionally translatable back to standard values corresponding to a ¯at extended structure, then the twist of a peptide backbone is determined by the planar peptide bond angle o, which is most often 180  (trans) but occasionally 0  (cis). It is very interesting that we have discovered examples of both Moebius and bracelet-like classes amongst the cyclotides. In the case of kalata B1 (and other members of subfamily 2), there is a cis amide bond between Trp2 and Pro3 which effectively results in a twist in the peptide backbone. There is no Pro at the corresponding position in circulin A, cycloviolacin O1 and other members of subfamily 1 and hence these can be regarded as bracelet-like molecules. It is therefore convenient to distinguish the two subfamilies of cyclotides as the bracelet cyclotides (subfamily 1) and the Moebius cyclotides (subfamily 2). In conclusion, the cyclotides represent a novel family of proteins which exemplify the exquisite diversity and topological complexity of natural proteins. With the recent advent of synthetic (Daly et al., 1999b; Tam et al., 1999a) and intein-based (Evans et al., 1999) methods of cyclizing proteins the potential for producing further topological complexity and for exploitation of this intriguing framework is greatly increased.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by a grant from the Australian Research Council (D.J.C.). D.J.C. is an Australian Research Council Professorial Fellow. We thank Dr K Gustafson for helpful discussions and Dr D. G. Norman for providing O. af®nis plant materials. C.W. thanks AusAid for a PhD scholarship.

References
Benham, C. J. & Jafri, M. S. (1993). Disul®de bonding patterns and protein topologies. Protein Sci. 2, 41-54. Broekaert, W. F., Terras, F. R. G., Cammue, B. P. A. & Osborn, R. W. (1995). Plant defensins: novel antimicrobial peptides as components of the host defense system. Plant Physiol. 108, 1353-1358. È Claeson, P., Goransson, U., Johansson, S., Luijendijk, T. & Bohlin, L. (1998). Fractionation protocol for the isolation of polypeptides from plant biomass. J. Nat. Prod. 61, 77-81. Daly, N. L., Koltay, A., Gustafson, K. R., Boyd, M. R., Casas-Finet, J. R. & Craik, D. J. (1999a). Solution

1336
Norton, R. S. & Pallaghy, P. K. (1998). The cystine knot structure of ion channel toxins and related polypeptides. Toxicon, 36, 573-583. Pallaghy, P. K., Nielsen, K. J., Craik, D. J. & Norton, R. S. (1994). A common structural motif incorporating a cystine knot and a triple-stranded b-sheet in toxic and inhibitory polypeptides. Protein Sci. 3, 18331839. Saether, O., Craik, D. J., Campbell, I. D., Sletten, K., Juul, J. & Norman, D. G. (1995). Elucidation of the primary and three-dimensional structure of the uterotonic polypeptide kalata B1. Biochemistry, 34, 4147-4158. È Schopke, T., Hasan, Agha M. I., Kraft, R., Otto, A. & È Hiller, K. (1993). Hamolytisch aktive komponenten aus Viola tricolor L. und Viola arvensis Murray. Sci. Pharm. 61, 145-153. Takusagawa, F. & Kamitori, S. (1996). A real knot in protein. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 118, 8945-8946.

Plant Cyclotides Tam, J. P., Lu, Y.-A. & Yu, Q. (1999a). Thia zip reaction for synthesis of large cyclic peptides: mechanisms and applications. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121, 4316-4324. Tam, J. P., Lu, Y. A., Yang, J. L. & Chiu, K. W. (1999b). An unusual structural motif of antimicrobial peptides containing end-to-end macrocycle and cystine-knot disul®des. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 96, 8913-8118. Vervoot, J., van den Hooven, H. W., Berg, A., Vossen, P., Vogelsang, R., Joosten, M. H. A. J. & de Wit, P. J. G. M. (1997). The race-speci®c elicitor AVR9 of the tomato pathogen Cladosporium fulvum: a cystine knot protein. FEBS Letters, 404, 153-158. Witherup, K. M., Bogusky, M. J., Anderson, P. S., Ramjit, H., Ransom, R. W., Wood, T. & Sardana, M. (1994). Cyclopsychotride A, A biologically active, 31-residue cyclic peptide isolated from Psychotria Longipes. J. Nat. Prod. 57, 1619-1625.

Edited by P. E. Wright (Received 12 October 1999; received in revised form 16 October 1999; accepted 16 October 1999)

