Biochimie (1990) 72, 617-624 ~) Soci~t6fran~aise de biochimie et biologie mol6culaire/Elsevier, Paris

617

Modelling allosteric processes in E coli aspartate transcarbamylase
J C h e r f i l s t, P V a c h e t t e 2, J J a n i n ~*
t Laboratoire de Biologic Physicochimique (UA 1131 CNRS), B~t 433, Universit~ Paris-Sud, 91405 Orsay; alum, B~t 209, Universitd PaHs-Sud, 91405 Orsay, France

(Received I June 1990; accepted 28 June 1990)

Summary - The allostericproperties of aspartate transcarbamylasefrom E coli have been investigatedby a combinationof genetic, biochemical and structural studies. Based on the X-ray structures of the enzymein T and R state established by Lipscombet al, we have analyzedthe interactions between the 12 polypeptide chains and have identifiedsnbunit interfaces that play a major part in the allostericmechanism: the clc4 interface between the 2 catalytic trimers, and one of 2 different interfaces between catalytic and regulatory chains, the clr4 interface, which exists only in T state. We have modelled mutations affectingthese interfaces: mutation pAR5 in the gene coding for r chains concerns the clr4 interface, mutation Tyr --~ Phe 240 in the gene codingfor c chains, the clc4 iilterface. Both mutant proteins have reduced cooperativityand /or allosteric regulation by CTP and ATP. Molecular mechanicsimulationslead to specificproposals for tile structural origin of these effects,and some of the proposals can be checked by site-directed mutagenesis.Finally, we have modelledsubstrates bound at the active site of the T state, which binds aspartate less tightly than the R state and for which X-ray structures of bound substrate analogs were not available. protein modelling/ aspartate transcarbamylase/ molecular graphics

Introduction A quarter of a century after the famous paper by Monod et al [1], do we understand how allosteric proteins work? There is still no general answer to this question, and it is now likely that each protein has its own mechanism. Yet much insight into the field has been gained from biochemical and structural studies,
now
.

t '.n .r n h i. n. ~. c .l . . .

.

.

.

i n ~ n.r,,v , v, ~~ rx~ ,a ~ l ,~ , z u l

~r~r.~.~,~h ul~l~l~.Jal.,aa

, , * ' ! ; ~ ; . altw.,u~,laa/,,xn~ ~ * ~

directed mutagenesis [2, 3]. Allosteric proteins have always been fascinating objects for structural studies, and a special challenge to crystallographers who must solve at least 2 structures of each protein, since crystals of different forms are not isomorphous. Nowadays, crystallographic data are available for the R and T forms of 4 allosteric proteins: hemoglobin since 1971, now pushed to a high degree of precision, then E coli aspartate transcarbamylase and very recently, muscle glycogen phosphorylase [4] and bacterial phosphofructokinases [5]. Computer modelling is a natural and an almost obligatory link between the crystallographer and the biochemist or molecular biologist. Starting from atomic coordinates derived from the X-ray structures, proposals can be made to experimentalists, who in turn will want to interpret their results in terms of atomic interactions and conformational changes. Wc have

done our best to build that link between structural and functional studies of E coli aspartate transcarbamylase (ATCase). Modelling studies presented here are centered around the role of ATCase subunit and domain interfaces in cooperativity and regulation. The idea that interfaces between subunits play an essential part in allostery goes back to [1]. Its validity is well-established in the case of hemoglobin, where natural variants supplement structural studies [6]. With ATCase, site directed mutagenesis is more easily performed than with hemoglobin and many mutant enzymes with altered interface interactions have been prepared. We attempt here to model and interpret their properties in terms of the known structures of the protein. In a second part, we report on graphic modelling of natural substrates binding into the catalytic site. Hypotheses derived from modelling studies are compared with experimental evidence and suggest new experiments. Interfaces in the allosteric mechanism ATCase catalyses the first committed step of pyrimidine biosynthesis: the transfer of the carbamyl group of carbamyl-phosphate on the amino group of L-aspartate, yielding carbamyl-L-aspartate and phosphate. The enzyme has 6 catalytic c chains and 6 regulatory r

*Correspondence and reprints

0iS

J Cherfils et al

chains, with a total molecular weight of 306000. X-Ray studies initiated more than 20 years ago have provided high-resolution structures for both the low-activity T state and the more active R state of the protein [7-91. They have o p e n e d the way for site directed mut~genesis and biochemical studies, reviewed in [10-13]. Atomic coordinates for the unligated T form [8], the CTP-ligated T form [141, and the N-phosphonacetyI-Laspartate (PALA) ligated R form [9] have been made available to us by Pr Lipscomb et al in Harvard. As they contain crystaUographically independent information for 2 e and 2 r chains, results presented here have been checked on both half-molecules (hemispheres), unless specified otherwise. The molecular architecture of ATCase is represented in figure 1. Catalytic chains, which fold into 2 domains, associate into trimers. Regulatory chains also fold into 2 domains, but they associate into dimers. The complete molecule has D3 symmetry in both R and T states. The 3-fold axis of symmetry joins its poles and goes through the centers of 2 catalytic trimers. Regulatory dimers sit on each of the three 2-fold axes in the equatorial plane. The R and T allosteric states differ in the relative position and orientation of the catalytic trimers, of the regulatory dimers relative to the trimers, and also in many details which contribute to the quaternary and tertiary structural changes. There are no less than 5 different types of interface between polypeptide chains. Non-symmetrical (heterologous) interfaces clc2, clrl and clr4 interfaces are present in 6 copies, 2-fold symmetrical (isologous) clc4 and rlr6 interfaces in 3 copies. Each c chain has 3 interfaces with other c chains and 2 with r chains. It also has an interfa~ between its N-terminal and C-terminal domains, called the polar and equatorial domains to describe tlleir location in the molecule, or the carbamylphosphate and aspartate domains to describe their contributions to the active site of the enzyme. Each r chain has 2 interfaces with c chains, one with another r chain, and an interface between its N-terminal and Cterminal domains called the allosteric and the Zn domain as they contain the regulatory sites and the Zn 2÷ ion site. Only the clrl and the rlr6 interfaces are similar in the R and T states. Other interfaces are 'allosteric interfaces' in the sense that, being affected to some extent by the structure change, they contribute to the relative stability of the 2 states. We compare subunit interfaces in R and T states by measuring the area of the protein surface which is buried in contacts between chains, which we call an interface area. Interface areas can be calculated for each pair of polypeptide chains by comparing their solvent accessible surface areas [15] as isolated chains and as a pair. Results are shown in table I. The accessible surface area of ATCase is 113000 A,2. The total subunit interface area is 28900 /~2 in the unligated T state,

f

b

Fig 1. (a) ATCase is composed of 2 trimers of c chains bearing 6 catalytic sites, and of 3 dimers of r chains bearing binding sites for the effectors CTP and ATP. Catalytic trimers are labelled clc2c3 and c4c5c6. Regulatory dimers are labelled rlr6, r2r4 and r3r5. The molecule is viewed along its 3-fold axis; Al and Zn in r chains point to their allosteric and zinc domains, and eq and po in c chains to their equatorial and polar domains. The location of one active site is indicated by a circle (adapted from Hontzako et al (1982)). (b) Comparison of T and R states viewed with their 3-fold axis vertical. The molecule elongates by 12/~ when going from T to R. Allosteric interfaces relating c chains (clc4) or c and r chains (clr4) are emphasized.

Modelling ATCase Table I. Accessible surface areas are calculated with the Shrake and Ruplcy (1973) algorithm using a program by AM Lesk. The probe size was 1.4 ~.. Each interface area is the sum of the accessible surface areas of 2 isolated chains less that of the pair. The total area of all subunit interfaces in ATCase is 6 times the sum of clc2, clrl and clr4 interfaces plus 3 times that of clc4 and rlr6. All values have been calculated for both hemispheres of the molecule not related by crystallographic symmetry. The value reported here is the mean.

619

Interfaces

T form

T+CTP

R form

C1-C2 R1-R6 C1-R1 C1--C4 C l-R4

1920 1550 1380 410 520

2060 1560 1310 580 580

2180 1460 1520 310

30100 fi~2 in the CTP-ligated T state. Interfaces cover a significant fraction of the protein surface: 17% of that of each r chain and 23% of that of each c chain. The total interface area is slightly smaller, 27500 A2 in R state than in T. Larger interfaces areas imply fewer unfavourable contacts made by hydrophobic protein groups with water, and more favourable interactions between polypeptide chains. Protein folding tends to minimize their solvent accessible surface area [16]. Values quoted here suggest that there is a significant hydrophobic contribution to the stability.of the T state, derived from 1500-2000 A 2 extra.protein surface area buried at interfaces. Subunit interfaces are distributed in the following way: The rlr6 interface forms a regulatory dimer. It has 2-fold symmetry and covers 1550 A 2 in both R and T. It involves only allosteric domains. The contact region, which forms an o~//3 motif, is insensitive to the R to T transition. Within regulatory dimers, dimers of allosteric domains behave as rigid bodies during the transition. As they move relative to the Zn domains and the catalytic chains, the interface between domains of r chains is somewhat different in R and T (see next section). The clrl interface covers about 1350 A 2 and relates the polar domain of a c chain to the Zn domain of a r

chain belonging to the same hemisphere. The major part is made up of loops of polypeptide chain in the polar domain packing on loops which form the Zn binding site in the r chain. This part of the structure is also invariant during the allosteric transition. Hence, Zn domains of r and polar domains o f c move together. In R state, the interface is ~ 170 ,~z larger than in T, as helix H7 of the equatorial domain moves into contact with the r chain as a result of a domain movement in c chain, which has larger effects on interfaces considered next. Within catalytic trimers, each c chain is involved in 2 clc2 interfaces, the largest and most complex interfaces of ATCase. Their area, about 2000 ,~2 is somewhat larger in R than in T, but most of the difference is due to interactions made with the substrate analog PALA used to stabilize R state in the crystal. The clc2 interface is formed by the tip of the polar domain from one c chain fitting into the cleft be,ween the 2 domains of another c chain, where the catalytic sites reside. Polar domains provide all of the buried surface (1000/1,2) on one side and most of it (700 ,~2) on the other side, the remainder (300 ~2) coming from the equatorial domain, PALA or substrate binding induces a hinge motion of the equatorial domain closing the cleft at the active site. Major changes occur at the domain interface. As ligands interact with both domains of the one c chain and with the polar domain of the other c chain, it is a tertiary structure change that affects the clc2 interface rather than the quaternary structure, during the transition from R to T. The symmetrical clc4 interface links catalytic trimers from both hemispheres of the ATCase molecule. It buries about 500 A2 in T state and only 300 A2 in R state. It involves the '240's loop' of c chains, which adopts very different conformations in each form. This interface, which is described in more detail later, is deeply affected by both tertiary and quaternary structural changes and plays a critical role in the allosteric mechanism. The clr4 interface relates c and r chains belonging to opposite hemispheres. It exists only in T state, where it buries ~ 550 ,~2. Its role in stabilizing the T state is discussed in the next section.

Modelling a mutation at the clr4 interface

The most significant change affecting subunits interfaces during the R to T allosteric transition is the formation of a clr4 interface between catalytic and regulatory chains of 2 different hemispheres. Mutations in this interface can affect the allosteric properties. We have modelled such a mutant called pAR5. In pAR5 ATCase, 2 residues are deleted at the C-terminal of r chains, and residues 145-153 are

620

J Cherlils et al

replaced by a new sequence of 6 residues. In the crystal structure of wild-type ATCase, residues 145-153 form an a-helix. One face of the helix is in contact with the allosteric domain and therefore part of the domain interface within the r chain. The other face forms the clr4 interface in T state. In R, it is no longer in contact with cl, but only with solvent, pAR5 ATCase has full enzymatic activity, no substrate eooperativity and is no longer inhibited by CTP [17, 18]. To build a model of the pAR5 ATCase r chains in T state, we used a segment of the serine protease kallikrein [19] which happens to have a sequence almost identical to that of the mutant C-terminal sequence. The segment also forms an a-helix. Energy minimization was performed on a region of the ATCase molecule comprising a whole r chain and those parts of c chains which are in contact with it in T state. Parallel minimizations were run on mutant and wild type structures, and we compared the 2 minimized structures. We found only minor changes within the r chain, which implies that the mutation does not affect the main chain conformation. Perturbations > 1 A were localized in the immediate neighbourhood of mutated residues, affecting the clr4 interface, but not the clrl interface. The minimization procedure created a new salt bridge within the r chain between the terminal carboxylate and the amino group of a lysine residue of the allosteric domain, Lys 28 (fig 2). In the wild type structure, the r chain is longer and the terminal carboxylate is not in a position to make that interaction. Rather, it can make another salt bridge across the clr4 interface in T state. Following this observation, we could expect that shortening the wild type r chain by 2 residues without otherwise changing its sequence should yield an enzyme with pAR5-1ike properties, and also that secondary mutations adding 2 residues or substituting Lys 28 in pAR5 might restore normal allosteric properties. All 3 types of mutants have been constructed, and they behave as predicted (see [13]). The pAR5 mutation weakens a subunit interface that is specific to the T state. Hence, it reduces the stability of T vs R, expressed in the allosteric L constant of the Monod et al model. The allosteric transition can still be observed by small angle X-ray scattering, but it is shifted towards the R quaternary structure. In the absence of ligands, under conditions where the wild type would be almost exclusively T, the mutant enzyme is intermediate between T and R [20]. The lower stability of T explains the lower cooperativity towards the substrates, but not the lack of inhibition by CTP. In addition, the modelling study suggests that the mutation perturbs the domain interface within the r chain by creating a new polar interaction that may hinder the rotation of the allosteric domains relative to the Zn domain and the core of the molecule when going from T to R.

2

"/6

Fig 2. Comparison of wild type (b) and pAR5 ATCase (a) after energy minimization. The rl chain is drawn in single line, and part of the c4 chain in double line. The location of ATP and CTP binding site is shown by an arrow. Possible electrostatic interactions made by the terminal carboxylate of rl are indicated. The interaction suggested by modelling the wild type was later confirmed in the refined X-ray structure [14], the one predicted in the mutant, by site directed mutagenesis.

Experimental evidence on mutants derived from pAR5 suggests a correlation between cooperativity and interactions at the interface between allosteric and Zn domains in r chains as the mutations make domain rotation easier or more difficult. Interface residues Leu 76 and Tyr 77 were identified as possible targets while modelling pAR5 ATCase. They are among the few residues that respond differently to energy minimization in pAR5 and wild type in T state (fig 2) [21]. In T state, the side chain of Leu 151 is intercalated between Leu 76 and Tyr 77, whereas in R state it is only in contact with Tyr 77. Modification of these residues by site directed mutagenesis should help to answer a lingering question: how does CTP binding to the allosteric domain affect the allosteric equilibrium? We

Modelling ATCase

621

suggest that all it does is to change the position and conformation of few residues at the domain interface, possibly including Leu 76, Tyr 77 and helix H2 that carries them.
Modelling a mutation at the c l c 4 interface

k'
:s4

",,
:

TV,"/x ;'
"/"i / % ','-~"

'!
~ :/", ?

't" "- -

The clc4 interface exists in both allosteric states, but its structure is so different that mutations that perturb it should affect allosteric properties as much as those in the clr4 interface. The c chain Tyr ~ Phe 240 mutant is of that type. In T state, the hydroxyl group of Tyr 240 hydrogen bonds to Asp 271 (fig 3). The tertiary structure change that affects the 240"s loop relocates these residues 10 A apart in R state. The broken H-bond is not replaced, or, more likely, it is replaced by bonds to water. Hence, the Phe 240 mutation should destabilize the T state and have little effect on R, like pAR5. Biochemical studies indicate that the mutant enzyme has reduced cooperativity [22]. As the Phe 240 mutation only removes one oxygen atom, modelling could be expected to be easier and more reliable than in the more complicated pAR5 mutant. We also proceeded by graphical building and energy minimization. This generated only very small differences between wild type and mutant structures. Most differences being insignificant, we performed separate minimizations on the 2 e chains present in atomic coordinate sets. As they are not related by crystallographic symmetry, they are not strictly identical and behave slightly differently during minimization. The discrepancies are unlikely to be significant and provide an estimate of the noise level of energy minimization. Only in the T state were correlated differences between wild type and mutant found in both c chains. In R state, no correlation was observed. Hence, small atomic movements are detected as possible effects of the mutation in T state, but not in R state. The X-ray structure of unligated T state Phe 240 ATCase has now been solved in [23]. The mutant has essentially the wild type structure: Phe 240 remains close to Asp 271 even though no H bond can be made. In one of the 2 independently determined c chains, the mutated side chain has the same conformation as Tyr 240 in the wild type. In the other, it rotates away from Asp 271. Assuming that the free energy difference between a protein-protein H bond relative to H bonds made with water is in the range 0 . 5 - 4 kcai.mol -~ [24], the mutant T state should loose 6 times that, as the 6 c chains change state in a concerted manner. The free energy difference between the 2 states is related to the allosteric L constant by:
AGt. = - R T I n L

..... (.-::.

:

<<v<.-

, ) ..J

:__<

_ ,.<---.::%, ......

·

<
, "

."

~

_

.'

(
x,

?%\\

X,:!.><. ? ~ . ,2-: : \x ' ~,, X

:I 7 " 4

s~"

,

~.:

..
· / 'v: /'{ :

~,,'~
f\i i " / . -

,< >
~ , '

,.
'

.

k.--.::<
-" ~"

\ X:"
:

,.b-.

l_>q2,:"

x.~L

l\, \ ,
A5 p 2 11 .,

k'-...j
; ',' R

<

,.~

, ~\

<

p

o

I+.

\

" <'

4 )?.k : '"~'~-,: i . ~.J>,~%,:&,,.:

?

..... "!"

,

perturbation AAGt. yields a new value L' such that: &&Gt. = - R T In L' / L

Fig 3. The clc4 interface in T state (a) and in R state (b) viewed along a 2-fold axis of symmetry as in figure lb. Residues Tyr 240 and Asp 271 are emphasized. Spheres in r chains are Zn > ions. In T state, the 240's loop of cl contacts both c4 and r4; c4 also contacts rl, forming a c4rl interface equivalent to the clr4 interface of figure 2. In R state, cl and r4 are far apart and the clc4 interface is deeply changed.

622

J Cherfils et al

The lower estimate of AAGL (3 kcal-mol -~ for 6 c chains) yields a 150-fold reduction of the allosteric constant. Solution X-ray scattering data suggest that the reduction is even less, since the mutant still has the T quaternary structure in the absence of ligands [25]. One possibility is that the Phe 240 side chain has more flexibility in T state, the favorable entropy partly compensating the loss of an H bond. Effects of that sort can be approached through molecular dynamics simulations [26, 27]. By running parallel trajectories in R and T states during which Tyr 240 is progressively converted to Phe in the force field, we can in principle estimate a AAGL attributable to the mutation. We carded such calculations at Harvard, and are currently analyzing the results (Cherfils et al, to be published).

~H 14 / 3 ±^aa : e ~ 7 ~ e~ pr ...~'T

Modelling substrate binding in T state
T state ATCase is catalytically active, albeit less so than R. The active site, defined as the region where PALA binds in R state crystals, is at the interface of the polar and equatorial domains of one c chain and in contact with another c chain. It is affected by the hinge motion of the equatorial domain going from R to T, and also by local conformation changes of lesser amplitude. Hence, modelling substrate binding to T state is of interest. We proceeded by analogy with the inhibitor PALA, and defined binding sites for both carbamylphosphate and aspartate. R and T states have similar affinities for carbamylphosphate, wbAch, unlike aspartate, is not an effector of the allosteric equilibrium [28]. Most interactions involving the phosphono-acetyl moiety of PALA can be made by carbamyl-phosphate in T state (fig 4). The binding site on the polar domain of c chains, which has essentially in the same conformation in the 2 states, is located at the N-terminal end of helix H2. In the model, the phosphate of carbamyl-phosphate group interacts with the dipole of the helix and with arginine residues, as the phosphono group of PALA does in the X-ray structure. The amide group, not present in PALA, is in a position to interact with Gin 137. Other interactions made by PALA with Set 80 and Lys 84 are not possible in T state as the 80's loop moves away from the active site. Modelling an aspartate binding site in T state from interactions observed in R state is more complex, as it requires bringing the side chains of Arg 105, Arg 167 and Arg 229 in position to interact with the carboxylate groups of the substrate. Their side chains have enough rotational freedom to allow for more than one binding mode. This agrees with ATCase kinetics, which indicate an ordered mechanism where carbamyl-phosphate binds first. When aspartate is modelled with carbamylphosphate in the T active site, the 2 substrates are

267
Fig 4. Aspartate and carbamyl phosphate are modelled in
the active site of T state ATCase.

much further apart than the corresponding moieties of PALA in R state, and too far for the transfer reaction to occur. Enzymic activity in T state must require more conformational changes. Gouaux and Lipscomb [291 have recently solved the X-ray structures of phosphonacetamide-ligated T state ATCase and of a R state ternary complex with phosphonacetamide and malonate. Hence, the validity of our model of the T state active site can now be checked. We compare in table II, interactions predicted for carbamyl-phosphate with those observed with the phosphono analog. A discrepancy is seen for Arg 105, which in the T state structure binds to the carbonyl rather than to the phosphono group. However, the predicted interaction is observed in the R state ternary complex. Also, a contact with Pro 266 has been missed. The substrate is otherwise correctly positioned and most interactions are correct, leading to reasonable suggestions for experimentation. The predicted interaction of the amide group with Gln137 is observed in the crystal structure, and has been probed by mutagenesis of this residue which does reduce catalytic activity [30].

Conclusion
Protein modelling is a fascinating activity, if only for the complex beauty of the molecules revealed by X-ray

Modelling ATCase

623

Table l.I. Predicted polar interactions of carbamyl phosphate and aspartate in the active site of T state ATCase are compared with interactions observed in the phosphonacetamide-ligated T state X-ray structure [29]. (*) Phosphonacetamide has a methylene group at this position. Modelled
Carbamyl phosphate site

Observed

Phosphate

Anhydride O Carbonyl O Amide NH2

Ser 52 Arg 54 Thr 55 Arg 105 Thr 55 His 134 Gin 137 Gln 137 Leu 267

Ser 52 A r g 54 Thr 55

(*)
His 134 A r g 105 Gin 137 Pro 266 Leu 267

Aspartate site

Amine a-Carboxylate y-Carboxylate

Lea.267 Arg 105 Arg 167 Arg 229 Gin 231

are more numerous than for catalytic activity. They could be identified by random mutagenesis followed by selection. The classical procedure, which may seem easier than site directed mutagenesis, tends, however, to produce mutations with extreme properties that are not easily interpreted by physical chemical reasoning. Hence, the prediction of mutations worth making is a major goal for modelling studies Our model of the T state active site has now been checked against X-ray data as far as carbamyl-phosphate binding is concerned, and found to be essentially correct. The binding of aspartate analogs in T state, though weak, may also be accessible to structural studies. Weber [31] has recently published a comparison of predicted vs observed interactions for an inhibitor of retrovirus proteases. We share her conclusion that successful predictions can be made as long as no main chain conformation change is involved· In contrast, the complicated changes occuring within the c chains of ATCase when PALA binds are beyond the reach of accurate modelling, and this applies afortiori to the T to R transition.

References
1 Monod J, Wyman J, Changeux JP (1965) On the nature of allosteric transitions: a plausible model. J Mol Biol 12, 88-118 2 Janin J (1989) Allosteric proteins: confirmations and limitations. Nature 339, 261-262 3 Perutz MF (1989) Mechanism of cooperativity and a!llostefic regulation inproteins. Q Rev Biophys 22, 139-237 4 Barford D, Johnson LN (1989) The allosteric transition of glycogen phosphorylase. Nature 340, 606-616 5 Schirmer T, Evans PR (1990) Structural basis of the allosteric behaviour of phosphofructokinase. Nature 343, 140-145 6 Dickerson RE, G6is I (1983) Haemoglobin: Structure, Function, Evolution, Pathology. Benjamin/Cummings, Menlo Park, USA. 7 Hontzako RB, Crawford JL, Monaco HL, Ladner JE, Edwards BFP, Evans DR, Warren SG, Wiley DC, Ladner RC, Lipscomb WN (1982) Crystal and molecular structure of native and CTP-liganded aspartate transcarbamylase from E coli. J Mol Biol 160, 219-263 8 Ke HM, Hontzako RB, Lipscomb WN (1984) Structure of unligated aspartate transcarbamylase of E coli at 2.6 A. resolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 81, 4037-4040 9 Krause KL, Volz KW, Lipscomb WN (1987) 2.5 A structure of aspartate transcarbamylase complexed with the bisubstrate analog N-phosphonacetyl-L-aspartate. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 82, 1643-1647 10 Kantrowitz ER, Lipscomb WN (1988) E coli aspa:'tate transcarbamylase: the relation between structure and function. Science 241,669- 674 11 Kantrowitz ER, Lipseomb WN (1990) E coli aspartate transcarbamoylase: the molecular basis for a concerted allosteric transition. Trends Biochem Sci 15, 53-58 12 Allewel NM (1989) E coli aspartate transcarbamylase: structure, energetics, and catalytic and regulatory mechanism. Annu Rev Biophys Chem 18, 71-92 13 Herv~ H, Xi XG, Ladjimi M, Van Vliet F, Cunin R (1990) Engineering aspartate transcarbamylase. Biochimie 72,609-616 14 Kim KH, Pan Z, Hontzako RB, Ke Hid, Lipscomb WN (1987)

crystallography and for the mystery of the relationship v,,,~o,,,,,,,,,,,, *'~vfunction. There can nn~uly be a better ~".... ' .... example than ATCase, with its 45000 atoms, 2778 amino acid residues and 12 polypeptide chains. Its structure has been explored in detail only at a few selected places: the catalytic site, some of the subunit contacts. Modelling has been used first to make results from structural studies accessible to other experimental approaches, then to help making physical chemical sense of the results. The case of the pAR5 mutant is exemplary of the first application, as the functional role of contacts made by the C-terminus of r chains had not been noticed before its analysis. In contrast, the Tyr---> Phe 240 mutation had been purposely chosen to affect a previously identified interaction. Its consequences being less than could be expected for the loss of 6 H bonds per molecule, our a posteriori analysis aims to explain that observation. Both pAR5 and Phe 240 ATCases have similar phenotypes even though the mutations are in different genes. Catalysis is left intact in these subunit interface mutants, while cooperativity is reduced as the T state is made less stable. The 2 mutations belong to one of many possible classes of aUosteric mutations. Others may destabilize the R state, affect substrate binding, allosteric effector binding, or possibly stabilize new quaternary structures. Mutation targets for aUostery

624

J Cherfils et al 23 Gouaux JE, Lipscomb WN, Middleton SA, Kantrowitz ER (1989) Structure of a single amino acid mutant of aspartate carbamoyltransferase at 2.5 A resolution. Implications for the cooperative mechanism. Biochemistry 28, 1798-1803 24 Fersht AR, Shi JP, Knill-Jones J, Lowe DM, Wilkinson A J, Blow D, Brick P, Carter P, Waye MMY, Winter G (1985) Hydrogen bonding and biological specificity analyzed by protein engineering. Nature 314, 235-238 25 Cherlils J, Sweet RM, Middleton SA, Kantrowitz ER, Tauc P, Vachette P (1989) Structural consequences of a one-atom mutation on aspartate transcarbamylase from E coli. FEBS Lett 247, 361-366 26 Brooks CL, Karplus M, Pettitt BM (1989) Proteins: A Theoretical Perspective of Dynamics, Structure and Thermodynamics 27 Van Gunsteren WF, Weiner PK (1989) Computer Simulation of Biomolecular Systems: Theoretical and Experimental Applicat/ons. ESCOM, III, Leiden 28 Collins KD, Stark GK (1971) Aspartate transcarbamylase: interaction with the transition state analog N-phosphonacetyl-Laspartate. J Biol Chem 246, 6599-6605 29 Gouaux JE, Lipscomb WN (1990) Crystal structures of phosphonacetamide ligated T and phosphonacctamide and malonate ligated R states of aspartate carbamoyltransferase at 2.8 A resolution and neutral pH. Biochemistry 29, 389-402 30 Stebbins JW, Xu W, Kantrowitz ER (1989) Three residues involved in binding and catalysis in the carbamyl phosphate binding site of E coli aspartate transcarbamylase. Biochemistry 28, 2592-2600 31 Weber IT (1990) Evaluation of homology modelling of HIV protease. Proteins Struct Funct Genet 7, 172-184

Structural asymmetry in the CTP-iiganded form of aspartate carbamoyltransferase from E coil J Mol Biol 196, 853 15 Lee BK, Richards FM (1971) The interpretation of protein structure: estimation of solvent accessibility. J Mol Bio155,379- 400 16 Chothia C. Wodak S, Janin J (1976) Role of subunits interfaces in the allosteric mechanism of hemoglobin. Proc Nail Acad Sci USA 73, 3793-3797 17 Cunin R, Jacobs A, Charlier D, Crabeel M, Herv6 G, Glandsdorff N, Pitrard A (1985) Structure-function relationship in allosteric aspartate transcarbamylase of E coli: primary structure of a pyrI gene encoding a modified regulatory subunit. J Mol Biol 186, 707-713 18 Ladjimi MM, Ghtlis C, Feller A, Cunin R, Glandsdorff N, Pitrurd A, Herr6 G (1985) Structure-function relationship in allosteric aspartate transcarbamylase of E coli: involvmentof the C-te_,~ainalregion of regulatory chains in homotropic and heterotropic interactions. J Mol Biol 186, 715-724 19 Bode W, Chen Z, Barrels K, Kutzbach C, Schmidt G, Bartunik H (1983) Refined 2A X-ray crystal structure of porcine pancreatic kail.icrein.J Mol Biol 164, 234 20 Cherfils J, Vachette P, Tauc P, Janin J (1987) The pAR5 mutation and the allosteric mechanism of E coli aspartate carbamoyltransf¢~ase. EMBO J 9, 2843-2847 21 Cherfils J (1987) Contribution au Iogiciel de graphisme moltculaire Manosk. Application ~ I'~tude d'aspects structuraux de I'aspartate transcarbamylase d'E coli. Thesis, Universit6 de Paris-Sud, Orsay 22 Middleton SA, Kantrowitz ER (1986) Importance of the loop at residues 2 2 4 0 in the allosteric mechanism of E coli aspartate carbamoyltransferase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 83, 5866-5870

