Abstracts / Molecular Immunology 44 (2007) 147­266

177

of infection and leukocyte-dependent killing of the parasite. Eosinophils have been shown to be effective at killing some species of helminth, possibly via C-dependent adherence and degranulation, though the role that C plays in vivo is poorly understood. We have used mice genetically deficient in proteins important for classical (C1q), alternative (factor B) or all pathways of C activation (C3) to assess the role of C in immunity to the nematode Nippostrongylus brasiliensis during (i) normal primary infections, (ii) in the presence of constitutive eosinophilia (C-deficient/interleukin (IL)-5 Tg mice), and (iii) secondary infection with the parasite. During primary infections, C activation (C3 deposition) on larvae was factor B-dependent and occurred in the skin within 30 min of subcutaneous injection. Eosinophil recruitment, leukocyte adherence and localised eosinophil degranulation were also dependent on factor B. However, 150 min post-injection (p.i.), C activation on larvae was reduced or non-existent. Eosinophil and neutrophil recruitment to skin and leukocyte adherence at this time point was C-independent, suggesting compensation by other factors. Factor B or C3 deficiency, but not C1q deficiency, was associated with higher lung larval burdens than in wild type mice 48 h p.i. Interestingly, C deficiency did not impair the strong innate anti-parasite resistance found in IL-5 Tg mice, highlighting that eosinophils can damage helminths without the aid of C. Potent secondary immunity was similarly C-independent. Together, these data suggest that the alternative pathway of C activation is important for early innate recognition of N. brasiliensis in the skin, promoting interactions of eosinophils with the parasite. However, after only 2.5 h in the host, the parasite can evade the potentially damaging effects of C, enhancing its chances of survival. doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2006.07.072 68 The 15 SCR flexible extracellular domains of human complement receptor type 2 can mediate multiple ligand and antigen interactions Hannah E. Gilbert a , Rengasamy Asokan b , V. Michael Holers b , Stephen J. Perkins a
a

SCR 1­15 was 38 nm. Sedimentation equilibrium curve fits gave a mean molecular weight of 135,000 ± 13,000 Da, in agreement with a fully glycosylated structure. Velocity experiments using the g* (s) derivative method gave a sedimentation coefficient of 4.2 ± 0.1 S. In order to construct a model of CR2 SCR 1­15 for constrained fitting, homology models for the 15 SCR domains were combined with randomised linker peptides generated by molecular dynamics simulations. Using an automated procedure, the analysis of 15,000 possible CR2 SCR 1­15 models showed that only those models in which the 15 SCR domains were flexible but partially folded back accounted for the scattering and sedimentation data. By comparison with threedimensional structures for CR2 ligands, the best-fit CR2 models provided an explanation of the molecular basis for the versatile interaction of CR2 with four ligands C3d, CD23, gp350 and IFN- . The flexible location of CR2 SCR 1­2 is also likely to facilitate interactions of C3d-antigen complexes with the B cell receptor (BCR), as there is no apparent physical proximity of the SCR 1­2 ligand binding domain with the BCR:C3d-bound antigen complex without a flexible structure being allowed. doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2006.07.073 69 Complement activation as a mediator of recurrent miscarriages Guillermina Girardi a , Dmitry Yarilin a , Joshua Thurman b , V. Michael Holers b , Jane Salmon a Department of Medicine, Hospital for Special Surgery, Weill Medical College, Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, United States; b Departments of Medicine and Immunology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80262, United States Between 1 and 3% of women suffer recurrent miscarriages. We have recently identified complement activation as an effector in pregnancy loss and fetal growth restriction in a mouse model of antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. We now test the hypothesis that complement activation is also a necessary intermediary event in the pathogenesis of recurrent spontaneous miscarriage that is not associated with autoantibodies. DBA/2mated female CBA/J mice (CBA × DBA) are a well-studied model of pregnancy loss that share many features with human recurrent miscarriage. In CBA × DBA females 30­40% of the embryos are resorbed. Histological studies showed extensive C3 deposition and monocytes infiltrates in decidua as early as day 6 of gestation as well as a decreased plasma levels of VEGF, a factor required for normal placentation, when compared to control combinations (CBA/J × BALB/c). To provide direct evidence that complement is, in fact, a critical mediator in this model of spontaneous pregnancy loss, we attempted to rescue fetuses from CBA × DBA mice with complement inhibitors. Crry-Ig completely rescued pregnancies in CBA × DBA mice (Crry-Ig versus untreated 8.5 ± 6.3% fetal resorptions versus 28.0 ± 7.2%, p < 0.01). Inhibition of C5 cleavage with anti-C5 mAb and blockade of C5a receptors with a peptide antagoa

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Darwin Building, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK; b Departments of Medicine and Immunology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 4200 East Ninth Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA Complement receptor type 2 (CR2, CD21) is a cell surface protein that links the innate and adaptive immune response during the activation of B cells. The extracellular portion of CR2 comprises 15 or 16 short complement repeat (SCR) domains, for which the overall arrangement in solution is unknown. This was determined by constrained scattering and ultracentrifugation modelling. The radius of gyration of CR2 SCR 1­15 was determined to be 11.5 nm by both X-ray and neutron scattering, and that of its cross-section was 1.8 nm. The distance distribution function P(r) showed that the overall length of CR2

