Structure 14, 1729­1730, December 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved

DOI 10.1016/j.str.2006.11.002

Preview

Perfecting the Genetic Code with an RNP Complex
In this issue of Structure, Sekine et al. (2006) present a splendid example, using glutamyl-tRNA synthetase crystal structures, of the steps potentially taken in the transition from the RNA world to the theater of proteins. Since the discovery of ribozymes and the development of the idea of life first emerging from an RNA world (Gilbert, 1986), biologists have struggled to imagine the logical progression of events that led to proteins. At the same time, regardless of what the imagination can conjure, a connection to reality has to be made. That, in turn, requires experiments to test specific hypotheses or to provide an opportunity for serendipitous findings. To go from RNA to proteins requires the genetic code--triplets of nucleotides representing single amino acids. The modern code is an algorithm determined by aminoacylation reactions, whereby each of 20 amino acids is linked to its cognate tRNA that bears the anticodon triplet of the code. The 20 aminoacyl tRNA synthetases (one for each amino acid) that catalyze these reactions are ancient proteins that were present in the last common ancestor of the tree of life (Carter, 1993; Cusack, 1997). As the eons passed, the tree split into the three great kingdoms--archaea, bacteria, and eukarya, which encompass all life forms. Yet, the genetic code remained fixed, with the same 20 aminoacyl tRNA synthetases making the same connections between anticodon triplets and amino acids. Thus, clues to the history of the transition from the RNA world to proteins might be imbedded in the tRNA synthetases themselves. Sekine et al. (2006) offer a provocative notion of one such clue. The earliest aminoacylation reactions are thought to have been catalyzed by ribozymes, which acted on primordial tRNAs (Piccirilli et al., 1992; Lee et al., 2000; Yarus, 2001). These ribozymes may have used nucleotides near the 30 -ends of the early tRNAs (where the amino acids are attached) as determinants that matched specific amino acids with ``cognate'' tRNA-like molecules. Peptides spontaneously form if two aminoacyl RNAs are brought into close proximity. The next step in evolution of aminoacylation would be development of catalysts more efficient than ribozymes alone, likely ribonucleopeptides or ribonucleoproteins (RNPs). As the code became perfected, proteins could take over the role of aminoacylation, as contemporary aminoacyl tRNA synthetases. The transition from RNP to protein might be facilitated if the substrate (tRNA) could, in part, take over the role of the ribozyme moiety that was eventually discarded. This ``takeover'' would most likely be of a noncatalytic function, like amino acid recognition, reducing the complexity of the system. This transition would also provide the opportunity to perfect the specificity of the code (amino acid-anticodon triplet), strengthening the relationship

between the amino acid and tRNA. This specificity is critical for the accuracy of the genetic code, which has to be maintained to the highest degree to prevent mistranslation, that is, incorporation of the wrong amino acids at specific codons. Here, Sekine et al. (2006) report a striking set of structures that show how mistranslation is prevented by the high amino acid specificity coming from a synthetase-tRNA complex (a kind of RNP), but not from the synthetase alone. For most aminoacyl tRNA synthetases (AARSs), the aminoacylation reaction occurs in two steps. The amino acid (AA) is first activated by condensation with ATP to form a tightly bound aminoacyl adenylate (AA-AMP), simultaneous with release of pyrophosphate (PPi). The bound adenylate then reacts with the cognate tRNA to yield the charged tRNA (AA-tRNA). AARS + AA + ATP $ AARS ðAA2AMPÞ + PPi (1)

AARS ðAA2AMPÞ + tRNA $ AA2tRNA + AMP + AARS (2) In a few instances (GluRS, GlnRS, ArgRS and an unusual LysRS), the amino acid activation reaction (Equation 1) does not occur in the absence of bound tRNA. What is known for GluRS is that amino acids similar to glutamate, like glutamine and aspartate, and even Dglutamate, can bind to GluRS in the absence of tRNA. However, in the presence of tRNAGlu, these noncognate amino acids are excluded from the enzyme (Figure 1). Thus, specific amino acid recognition is tRNA-dependent, that is, requires the context of an RNP. Although eight structures of the T. thermophilus enzyme and enzyme cocrystals were published previously (cited in Sekine et al., 2006), the key ones were missing. Four new structures now provide the answers to how amino acid recognition changes in the context of an assembled RNP. These structures are of the following complexes: GluRS-glutamate, GluRS-tRNA-glutamate, GluRS-tRNA-ATP-glutamate analog, and GluRS-tRNAadenylate analog. The structures show how RNAdependent amino acid recognition is achieved. In short, binding of tRNA induces a conformational change in the amino acid-binding pocket (Figure 1). The pocket is right next to the 30 -end of the tRNA, with the 20 -OH of the ribose of A76 binding to the a-carboxylate of glutamate. In the subtle rearrangement induced by tRNAGlu association, the amino acid-binding pocket is squeezed in a way that excludes glutamine, aspartate, and D-glutamate, and the binding of L-glutamate itself is shifted ° (1.3 A for carbon of the a-carboxyl group). A number of the tRNA synthetases that carry out the conventional two-step aminoacylation reaction given above also use tRNA to perfect amino acid recognition. In these instances, a separate domain for editing is incorporated (Hendrickson and Schimmel, 2003). The editing site hydrolytically clears misactivated amino acids (as misactivated aminoacyl adenylates or mischarged ° tRNAs) and is located typically about 30 A from the site for amino acid activation and aminoacylation (Equations

Structure 1730

have developed an alternative strategy to improve amino acid recognition; that is, they use the tRNA as a way to shape the amino acid-binding pocket. Thus, what is reported in this most recent work on GluRS--that a synthetase can use tRNA to direct a conformational change that perfects amino acid specificity, using in part a contact with the tRNA itself--may provide a general mechanism of tRNA-dependent amino acid specificity. The much bigger implication is that perhaps this functional interaction is a picture or a ``holdover'' from an earlier era in the evolution of the genetic code.
Figure 1. The tRNA-Dependent Amino Acid Recognition for GluRS Three domains of the monomeric protein are shown as distinct colors. The holoenzyme can accommodate a variety of substrates in the amino acid-binding pocket (red circle). Upon tRNA binding, the pocket undergoes a conformational change (red rectangle) and gains selectivity for glutamate.

Paul Schimmel1 and Xiang-Lei Yang1 1 The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology The Scripps Research Institute Beckman Center, BCC379 10550 North Torrey Pines Road La Jolla, California 92037
Selected Reading Carter, C.W., Jr. (1993). Annu. Rev. Biochem. 62, 715­748. Cusack, S. (1997). Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 7, 881­889. Delagoutte, B., Moras, D., and Cavarelli, J. (2000). EMBO J. 19, 5599­ 5610. Gilbert, W. (1986). Nature 319, 618. Hendrickson, T.L., and Schimmel, P. (2003). Translational Mechanisms, J. LaPointe and L. Brakier-Gingras, eds. (New York: Eurekah.com and Klumer Academic/Plenum Publishers), pp. 34­64. Lee, N., Bessho, Y., Wei, K., Szostak, J.W., and Suga, H. (2000). Nat. Struct. Biol. 7, 28­33. Piccirilli, J.A., McConnell, T.S., Zaug, A.J., Noller, H.F., and Cech, T.R. (1992). Science 256, 1420­1424. Rath, V.L., Silvian, L.F., Beijer, B., Sproat, B.S., and Steitz, T.A. (1998). Structure 6, 439­449. Sekine, S., Shichiri, M., Bernier, S., Chenevert, R., Lapointe, J., and Yokoyama, S. (2006). Structure 14, this issue, 1791­1799. Yarus, M. (2001). Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 66, 207­215.

1 and 2 above). Significantly, the editing activity is strictly tRNA-dependent, so that the clearance reaction is in effect carried out by an RNP. GluRS is not alone in requiring tRNA binding for amino acid selectivity. GlnRS and ArgRS do as well, and although less well characterized structurally, there are hints of mechanistic similarities. In both cases, there is structural evidence for conformational changes in the amino acid-binding site upon tRNA binding (Rath et al., 1998; Delagoutte et al., 2000). Importantly, the structure of the ternary complex GlnRS-tRNAGln-Gln adenylate analog shows a contact between the 20 -OH of A76 and the a-carbonyl of the bound glutaminyl adenylate analog (Rath et al., 1998). While in the ArgRS complex structure (ArgRS-tRNAArg-Arg), the 20 -OH binds to the a-carboxylate group of arginine (Delagoutte et al., 2000). Thus, GluRS, and most likely the few other tRNA synthetases that require tRNA for amino acid activation, appear to

