doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2009.07.084

J. Mol. Biol. (2009) 392, 1007­1019

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Ligand-Induced Structural Transitions, Mutational Analysis, and `Open' Quaternary Structure of the M. tuberculosis Feast/Famine Regulatory Protein (Rv3291c)
Tripti Shrivastava, Abhishek Dey and Ravishankar Ramachandran
Molecular and Structural Biology Division, Central Drug Research Institute, P.O. Box 173, Chattar Manzil, Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Lucknow 226001, India Received 12 May 2009; received in revised form 16 July 2009; accepted 22 July 2009 Available online 3 August 2009 Rv3291c is a member of the feast/famine regulatory protein family that is known to form stable protein­DNA complexes. We report a specific oligomeric transition between hexadecameric and octameric/lower-order oligomers in the presence of Phe that supports an effector-mediated model for the disassembly of a nucleosome-like particle. We had generated two mutants, Gly102Thr and Glu104Ala, which are part of the essential 100­106 effector-binding loop. The Gly102Thr mutant adopts an unusual `open' quaternary structure and offers interesting functional insights co-related to the binding of an effector. This is similar to the previously reported Escherichia coli Lrp co-crystallized in the presence of DNA where the interactions of the substrate with the N-terminal DNA binding domain presumably lead to symmetry deviations to the oligomeric association. The present structure represents a direct evidence to support that changes made to the effector-binding domain at the C-terminus also result in a functionally relevant quaternary structural change. Conversely, the Glu104Ala mutant retains the closed quaternary association observed in the native protein and reveals nonsymmetrical interaction effects in the two subunits of the dimer. We also report that the native protein unexpectedly binds Lys but does not recognize Arg and offer a structural explanation for it. Error-scaled difference distance matrix analysis suggests that the protein has a relatively flexible core that is presumably needed to mediate the structural changes necessary for the protein's regulatory functions.
© 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Edited by R. Huber

Keywords: Mycobacterium tuberculosis; Rv3291c; feast/famine regulatory proteins; ligand-induced structural transitions; `open' and `closed' quaternary structure

Introduction
Feast/famine regulatory proteins, also called Lrp/ AsnC (leucine-responsive regulatory protein/ regulator of asparagine synthase C gene product)type proteins, are known to bind to a variety of

*Corresponding author.E-mail address: r_ravishankar@cdri.res.in. Abbreviations used: Lrp/AsnC, leucine-responsive regulatory protein/regulator of asparagine synthase C gene product; ITC, isothermal titration calorimetry; DLS, dynamic light scattering; Mes, 4-morpholineethanesulfonic acid; LiAc, lithium acetate; PDB, Protein Data Bank.

small-molecule effectors, mostly amino acids, to perform their regulatory roles. They often regulate, directly or indirectly, metabolic pathways in response to amino acids and nitrogen bases in the external environment to perform a global regulatory role.1,2 The Escherichia coli Lrp, the best-studied example, is known to control about 10% of gene expression changes when the bacterium goes from a `feast' to `famine' mode of existence and binds to a variety of amino acids including leucine, alanine, valine, and proline. AsnC, on the other hand, performs a local regulatory role by binding specifically to asparagine.3,4 Other studies have shown that Lrp/AsnC proteins are involved in DNA bending, chromosome structure and organization, and the formation of globular nucleo-protein structures, among other functions. 1,3 Several crystal

0022-2836/$ - see front matter © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1008 structures of these proteins are now known from bacterial and archaeal sources. 5­13 These have demonstrated that the basic unit of the protein is a dimer that assembles into a variety of oligomeric forms. A common association is that of an octamer seen in the structures of bacterial AsnC/Lrp proteins as also in some archaeal Lrp's. Other assemblies include a helical cylinder-like arrangement seen in the Pyrococcus furiosus sp. OT3 Lrp6 or a distorted octamer seen in the E. coli Lrp in the presence of DNA.8 The general understanding is that the proteins adopt a variety of quaternary structures in the presence/absence of effectors to presumably bind to only a limited subset of their target promoter regions to elicit the required regulatory response. Structurally, the protein chain folds into two domains: one containing the HtH DNA binding motif at the N-terminal domain while the C-terminal domain contains a conserved effector-binding site. The rv3291c gene of Mycobacterium tuberculosis codes for a global Lrp protein (MtbLrp) with each chain having an Mr  18,000. It is highly upregulated in nutrient starvation models of tuberculosis designed to mimic persistence.14 Its expression has also been observed upon inhibition of septum formation and is inversely proportional to bacterial growth rate consistent with a feast/famine regulatory role.15,16 It also binds to the promoter region of lysine--aminotransferase, another highly upregulated protein in the aforesaid model whose crystal structure has been recently elucidated.12,17 Recently, it was shown that a mutant of Mycobacterium fortuitum deficient in virulence and persistence in a murine infection model could be complemented by the M. tuberculosis rv3291c. The protein is therefore important for adaptation/maintenance of long-term persistence in vivo and as such has the potential to be exploited as a novel drug target against tuberculosis persistence.18 The crystal structures and associated studies of the protein11 demonstrated that it binds preferentially to aromatic amino acids with the highest affinity for Phe and His, respectively. While Phe binds to a conserved ligand-binding site between adjacent dimers of the octamer among Lrp proteins (Type I, Supplementary Fig. 1), His binds to a novel effectorbinding site at the interface between the two subunits of a dimer (Type II, Supplementary Fig. 1). Other groups have identified protein-specific ligand-binding sites in some other Lrp regulators. Solution studies on E. coli Lrp mapped onto its subsequently determined DNA complex revealed that the earlier identified low-affinity Leu binding site is probably situated in a novel spatial location between adjacent dimers (Type III) of the oligomer. More recently, a novel Gln binding site was identified at the N-terminal domain close to the DNA binding motif (Type IV, Supplementary Fig. 1) from the crystal structure of the Sulfolobus tokodaii Grp­Gln complex. Although MtbLrp binds to Phe and His with the best affinity as deduced by X-ray-based ligand

`Open' and `Closed' Quaternary Structure of MtbLrp

screening and competitive ANS displacement binding assays,11 this does not rule out the role of other amino acids in the regulatory cascade controlled by this class of proteins. The structural and biochemical efforts supported a model11,12,19,20 where specific ligand/effector binding could dissociate a nucleosome-like protein­DNA association. This would be part of either the protein's regulatory functions or its DNA packaging role. In the present instance, we present evidence for a specific Phe-mediated dissociation of the hexadecameric form of the protein to octamers/lower-order oligomers. Subsequently, we attempted co-crystallization of MtbLrp with other amino acids to probe for binding and resultant structural effects. Among these, Arg, Pro, Thr, and Gln exhibit weak/no binding to the protein while Met, Tyr, Trp, and Leu, in addition to Phe and His, exhibit stronger electron density indicative of better binding. Surprisingly, density was observed in the case of Lys where, analogous to the experiments with Arg, we expected no binding. Lys was earlier reportedly known to bind only to some of the archaeal Lrp regulators, 21 and we report the structure of its complex with MtbLrp here. We also report the crystal structures of a couple of mutants of the protein. In the first instance, two residues that were found to be involved in interactions with the bound ligand in all MtbLrp complexes were mutated, viz. Glu104 that was mutated to an Ala and Gly102 that was mutated to a Thr. The former interacts with bound ligand at both types of binding sites while the latter is a highly conserved residue in RAM (regulation of amino acid metabolism) domain-containing proteins. The mutants were cloned and crystallized, both in the presence and in the absence of ligands. The work captures a novel `open' quaternary association in MtbLrp grossly similar to that of the E. coli Lrp in its complex with DNA. It also supports the fact that nonsymmetrical intra-protein interactions in the two subunits of the dimer could help the protein to adapt and bind to pseudo-symmetrical target DNA sites.

Results
Ligand binding induces oligomeric transitions in MtbLrp We used a combination of isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), size-exclusion chromatography, and dynamic light scattering (DLS) experiments to probe the binding of ligands to MtbLrp. Phe binds to the protein with the highest affinity as reported by us earlier through X-ray-based screening.11 MtbLrp was titrated against Phe in the ITC experiments up to a molar excess of about 150 times the concentration of the protein assuming an octamer (Fig. 1a). The buffer conditions in all the experiments including ITC, DLS, and size-exclusion chromatography were similar to those reported by us earlier for the native MtbLrp and ligand complexes and enable a comparative analysis of the results. Our initial

`Open' and `Closed' Quaternary Structure of MtbLrp

1009

Fig. 1. Calorimetric titration for the binding of Phe to MtbLrp and mutants. (a) Interactions of Phe with MtbLrp monitored by ITC. The experiments involving the Glu104Ala and Gly102Thr mutants are depicted in (b) and (c), respectively.

interests included the study of the binding constants and other parameters for ligand­protein association. Surprisingly, the ITC data clearly show a transition that occurs at about 35-fold molar excess of the ligand. The curve at first sight is typical of cooperative binding where addition of the ligand in the initial stages results in increasing heats of binding. This is apparently followed by the satura-

tion of the protein by the ligand. The MtbLrp mutants did not exhibit any binding in the ITC experiments as expected (Fig. 1b and c) and are in line with the co-crystallization experiments where also no density for Phe was observed. The titration of Phe into the buffer alone showed only small heats of dilution and supports that the ligand specifically interacts with native MtbLrp. Attempts to fit the ITC

1010

`Open' and `Closed' Quaternary Structure of MtbLrp

Fig. 2. Size-exclusion chromatography experiments involving MtbLrp in the presence of increasing concentration of Phe. Curves 1­5 represent the elution profiles at pH 6.0 on incubation of the protein with Phe at 0, 5, 35, 50, and 150 times protein concentration, respectively. The inset is the calibration curve of the Superdex S-200 column (GE Biosciences) used in the experiments. The elution position of the different oligomers is indicated.

data using different models involving up to two different kinds of binding sites and various possible oligomeric association were not successful. This led us to suspect that although the binding interactions were specific, it might entail changes to the quaternary association as this class of proteins is known to adopt a variety of quaternary structures under various in vivo (and in vitro) conditions to perform regulatory roles. We initially hypothesized that the first endothermic part of the curve could reflect the stabilization of the protein into a particular conformation/quaternary association in the presence of increasing ligand concentration. The second part of the curve, which is exothermic, was hypothesized to correspond to the binding of the ligand to the conformation/quaternary association stabilized in the initial transition. The subsequent size-exclusion chromatography experiments clearly suggest that the protein is predominantly hexadecameric (Fig. 2) in the absence of Phe and also that it exists along with a smaller percentage of octamers and tetramers in the buffer conditions. The major protein fraction corresponds to an Mr of 288,000 ±5000, and each chain has an Mr of 18,000. The peak corresponding to the hexadecamer was analyzed by DLS, and this gave a hydrodynamic radius RH of 7.1 nM for the protein particles. This corresponds to a molecular mass for the particle of about 332,000. Since each subunit has a molecular mass of 18,000, this corresponds to a hexadecamer in the absence of any added ligand. MtbLrp elutes into two peaks corresponding to Mr values of 138,000 ± 6000 and

75,000 ± 3000, respectively, when incubated with Phe at 5 times the protein concentration. The fractions corresponding to the octamer were analyzed and correspond to an R H of 4.9 nM in the DLS experiments. This corresponds to an Mr of 137,000 for the protein and is consistent with an octameric association. At a ligand concentration of 35 times the protein in the chromatography experiments, a single peak corresponding to an Mr of 140,000 ± 4000 was observed and is consistent with an octamer. The peak fraction corresponds to an RH of 5.2 nM in DLS experiments and the corresponding Mr of 157,000 also supports an octameric association. Further increases in the ligand concentration leads to a reduction in the population of the octamer and also leads to the increase in tetrameric association (Supplementary Table 1). Overall, the ITC, sizeexclusion chromatography, and DLS experiments are consistent with a Phe-mediated dissociation of the MtbLrp hexadecamer into initially an octamer, which further dissociates partially into lower-order oligomers with increase in the ligand concentration. The Gly102Thr mutant adopts an open quaternary structure The Gly102Thr mutant was crystallized under similar conditions as the native protein. The mutant was found to crystallize in a completely different space group. The structure was solved by molecular replacement approaches using the MtbLrp dimer as the search model. The crystals diffract relatively

`Open' and `Closed' Quaternary Structure of MtbLrp

1011

Fig. 3. Quaternary associations from the crystal structures. (a) Gly102Thr, (b) Glu104Ala, and (c) E. coli Lrp (PDB ID: 2GQQ). The respective figures in the lower panel are schematic representations depicting the angles between the dimers and calculated with the help of CALCOM.22

weakly, and data could be processed to  4 Å, which is enough to follow the gross changes in oligomeric association (Supplementary Fig. 2). There are two dimers in the asymmetric unit, and the other two dimers that form part of the octamer are generated through crystal symmetry. The surprising result was that the closed octameric association observed in the native protein was disrupted (Fig. 3). An inspection of the subunit association revealed that it mimics the open quaternary structure observed in the case of the E. coli Lrp­DNA complex.8 The E. coli protein adopts the conformation to suggestively bind to the target promoter pap operon sequence that consists of Lrp binding sites separated by nonbinding regions (Fig. 4).8 In the crystal structure of the mutant, one of

the inter-dimer interfaces is pulled apart and the closest distance at the C level between two dimers is only about 24 Å. The overall r.m.s.d. between the E. coli and the present mutant structures is 3.6 Å. The CD and GH dimers are further apart in the mutant with an angle of 144° compared to the E. coli case where the angle is 122.5°. This leads to a relative constriction of the angles between the CD and AB dimers by about 9° (and obviously in the symmetryrelated GH and EF dimers) in the mutant compared to the E. coli complex. The angles between the AB and EF dimers are relatively unchanged at 73° and 74.5° in the mutant and E. coli structures, respectively. All the described angles are deviations from the 90° observed in the case of the closed octamer

Fig. 4. Superposition of the E. coli Lrp­DNA complex structure to Gly102Ala mutant. The Gly102Ala adopts the open quaternary association to suggestively bind to the target pap operon that is also schematically shown after the model by de Los Rios et al.8 The blue, cyan, and orange colors on the periphery indicate the three binding sites of the operon while the number of base pairs indicated therein corresponds to those that separate the center of the 2-fold axes of the individual dimers from each other in the E. coli Lrp­DNA complex model.

1012

`Open' and `Closed' Quaternary Structure of MtbLrp

Fig. 5. Close-up of the Type II binding site in the crystal structure of the Glu104Ala mutant. The structure is superimposed onto the MtbLrp­His complex. Shaded circles identify the mutated residues in the two subunits of the dimer while the arrow shows the change in the side-chain orientation of Arg A134 while no such change occurs in Arg B134. Some polar interactions of His in its complex are shown by dotted lines.

association observed in other structures including native MtbLrp and the Glu104Ala mutant structures. Each monomer of MtbLrp has an accessible surface area of around 10,350Å2, of which 2800Å2 gets buried during the dimer formation and an additional 1200­1300Å2 in the subsequent association to form the octamer. The breaking of the octameric symmetry in MtbLrp observed in the Gly102Thr mutant renders the interfaces inequivalent. The interface between the CD and AB dimers exhibit a reduction of about 200 Å2 in the buried surface area at 1053 Å2 in the mutant compared to  1250Å2 buried area in the native MtbLrp. The buried surface area at the interface between the AB and EF dimers in the mutant reduces by about half compared to the native protein and is about 670 Å2. Overall, the Gly102Thr mutant structure represents direct evidence that a change at the effector-binding site, in this case, a point mutation, can lead to drastic changes to the quaternary association. The MtbLrp Glu104Ala mutant exhibits nonsymmetrical interaction effects The Glu104Ala mutant was crystallized under similar conditions as the native protein, and the crystals are also isomorphic. The overall structure of the mutant is consequently similar to that of MtbLrp with an r.m.s.d. of 0.176 Å for C atoms. Surprisingly, dissimilar effects on the side-chain conformations of some interacting residues in both subunits were observed as a result of the mutation (Fig. 5). In the native structure, Glu104 in the A subunit forms salt bridges with Arg A134 and Arg B134 (from the dimeric counterpart). In the B subunit, on the other hand, Glu B104 forms ionic interactions only with

Arg B134 of the same chain. In the crystal structures of the complexes,11 Glu104 of the A subunit is involved in ligand binding at site I and Glu104 of the B subunit along with Arg A134 and Arg B134 are involved in ligand interactions at binding site II. Mutation of Glu104 to Ala results in the loss of all ionic interaction and that leads to a change in the side-chain orientation of Arg A134. Thus, a new set of interactions is formed involving Glu103. Incidentally, the latter residue interacts with ligands at binding site II and not at binding site I. The possible functional implications of the mutational results, especially the nonsymmetrical interaction effects, will be discussed later. We attempted co-crystallization with Phe and His to probe whether the mutant retains affinity for the ligands. It was found that the mutant loses the ability to bind ligands at both sites as revealed by the presence of only residual electron density in the respective structures. MtbLrp­Lys complex The structure of the MtbLrp­Lys complex was refined to 2.5 Å. The overall structure and quaternary association are conserved, and indeed, the MtbLrp­Lys complex exhibits an r.m.s.d. of 0.24 Å with respect to the native structure. Data collection and refinement statistics for the complex as also mutants are listed in Table 1. The initial 2Fo - Fc and Fo - Fc maps computed after rigid-body refinement (see Supplementary Fig. 3a) clearly shows density for Lys at four out of eight possible binding sites of Type I, whereas no density is observed in the intradimer binding site (Type II, Supplementary Fig. 1). The most favored and additionally allowed regions of the Ramachandran plot contain 90.3%

`Open' and `Closed' Quaternary Structure of MtbLrp Table 1. Data collection and refinement
MtbLrp­Lys A. Data collection Space group Unit cell: a, b, c (Å) Resolution (Å) Total number of reflections Unique reflections Completeness (%) Redundancy Rsym (%) I/I B. Refinement statistics Number of reflections Rcryst/Rfree (%) Number of atoms Protein Ligand Water B-factor Protein Ligand Water r.m.s.d. Bond length (Å) Bond angle (°) Ramachandran plot (%) Most favored Additionally allowed P42212 100.9, 100.9, 99.2 2.5 (2.50­2.64) 100,752/14,617 18,364/2628 99.9/100 5.5/5.6 9.4/63.2 14.3/2.7 17,382 19.0/22.7 2239 10 50 44.8 64.6 43.8 0.026 2.5 89.1 10.9 Glu104Ala P42212 100.7, 100.7, 99.6 2.2 (2.32­2.2) 133,581/19,221 24,011/3593 91.3/94.7 5.6/5.3 9.7/76.0 12.9/2.2 25,538 20.7/21.7 2231 -- 75 41.3 -- 36.6 0.021 2.3 89.1 10.9

1013

Gly102Thr C2221 83.8, 189.3, 124.1 4.1 (4.32­4.1) 23,928/2549 7569/965 94.4/83.7 3.2/2.6 13.8/40.7 8.6/2.2 6809 38.8/38.1 4476 -- -- 38.1 -- -- 0.19 11.3 92.2 7.1

and 9.7% of non-proline and Gly residues, respectively. A snapshot of the Lys binding site is in Fig. 6, while a detailed list of polar interactions is in Supplementary Table 2. The  amino group of the side chain interacts with Asp82, Tyr106, and Arg126, where the latter residue belongs to a neighboring subunit. The main-chain carboxylate atoms of Lys are stabilized by polar interaction involving Ser135 OG and N. Other interactions include that of Thr133 OG1 and O with the mainchain carboxylate atom of Lys. The interactions of the main-chain atoms of Lys understandably are similar to those exhibited by other amino acids

such as Phe and His at this site reported earlier.11 The 75­83 loop, which is advantageously positioned to control the formation of higher oligomers and identified initially in the MtbLrp­Phe complex, exhibits about 1.60 Å deviation compared to the native structure. This deviation was about 3.7 Å in the case of the Phe complex.11 Identification of relatively rigid and flexible regions With the availability of the Lrp homolog crystal structures from a variety of sources, it is worthwhile

Fig. 6. Interactions of Lys in its complex with MtbLrp. The protein is shown in cartoon representation. Hydrogen bonds are indicated by broken lines. Selected binding site residues are labeled and plotted in stick representation. Red spheres indicate water molecules.

1014

`Open' and `Closed' Quaternary Structure of MtbLrp

Fig. 7. Rigid and flexible regions of the Lrp octamer (cartoon representation) calculated using the program ESCET.23 The regions in blue correspond to flexible regions while those in red are relatively rigid. The flexibility in the core of the protein (ligand-binding domain) might be linked to the structural changes that occur upon ligand/effector binding necessary for the respective regulatory functions of these proteins.

to identify relatively rigid and flexible regions in the structure of the protein. This information is expected to give functional insights especially since the regulatory roles performed by these proteins are generally thought to involve an interplay between gross quaternary structural changes and finer changes in the tertiary structure.21 Since the functional unit of the protein is a dimer, we compared the dimers across the respective crystal structures to identify conformationally invariant regions using the program ESCET. The program uses a parameter  that defines the positional uncertainties in the coordinates of individual atoms while calculating an error-scaled difference distance matrix, to divide protein subunits into relatively rigid and flexible regions. A value of 4.5 was used for  in the calculations. About 50% of residues were classified as rigid by the program. When the respective regions were mapped onto the octamer, it was found surprisingly that the ligand-binding domain

at the core of the structure is flexible while the DNA binding region at the N-terminal domain was largely classified as rigid (Fig. 7). The results support the view that changes in oligomerization domain contributes in a major way to the binding of the protein to different promoter regions to perform its regulatory role. This is in contrast to the other possibility that changes in the relative spatial disposition of the DNA binding motifs or conformational changes to the motif itself might play a major role in the regulatory functions of the protein.

Discussion
The crystal structures of the mutants yield novel insights to the functioning of MtbLrp. We had earlier predicted, based on crystal structures of the MtbLrp­Phe complex, that binding of Phe could dissociate any oligomeric supra-association of

`Open' and `Closed' Quaternary Structure of MtbLrp

1015 Thus, Lrp proteins can apparently adopt open quaternary structures in the presence of selected ligands to bind to specific target promoter sequences to perform their regulatory roles. Another strategy to fine-tune the binding to target DNA sites could involve changes to the relative spatial disposition of the HtH motif at the N-terminal domain. The functional unit in this class of proteins is a dimer, and consequently, even a relatively small change in the spatial disposition of the motif in one subunit will expectedly be amplified twice in the dimer following symmetry. We had earlier identified a novel ligand-binding site at the intra-dimer interface where bound ligands could conceivably induce such changes. The Glu104Ala mutant presents an interesting case in this context where the residue is involved in interactions with ligands in Type II and Type I sites of MtbLrp. The mutation should, in principle, lead to symmetric changes in the two subunits constituting the dimer. Nevertheless, the distinct nonsymmetrical changes that were observed in the interaction pattern of the mutated residue as outlined earlier suggests that the ligandbinding event in the protein (dimer) has the ability to control the relative spatial disposition of the two HtH motifs in a more precise manner than just the 2fold change expected from symmetry. This might be a consequence of the fact that often the sequence of the target binding sites of these proteins exhibits only pseudo-2-fold symmetry necessitating fine control. Many members of the Lrp family of proteins are known to bind to different ligands to perform their diverse regulatory functions. It is important to understand how it can distinguish between different ligands and to understand the structural consequences of the binding event; for example, the E. coli Lrp is known to bind at least to Leu, Ala, Val, and Pro, whose binding can effect a positive/negative regulation of the target genes.3,4 We had earlier reported that MtbLrp binds to Phe and His with the highest affinities.11 The present work shows that it surprisingly binds to Lys and is able to distinguish between Arg to which it does not bind. An examination of the structure of the Lys complex shows that the  amino group interacts with the side chain of Asp82 and Tyr106, among others (Supplementary Table 2). A superposition of Arg onto the ligand leads to unacceptable steric contacts especially involving the terminal NH1 and NH2 atoms of its side chain and presumably prevents its binding (Supplementary Fig. 3b). The binding of Lys induces  1.6 Å maximal displacements in the 75­83 loop, which is strategically positioned to control the formation of higher-order oligomers.11 This is less than half that observed in the case of the MtbLrp­ Phe complex where the displacement of the loop was  3.7 Å. The observed differential structural effects are in line with the general observation that the binding of different ligands elicits distinct regulatory responses.8 This was also observed to be the case in the effects on oligomerization as discussed below.

octamers placed adjacent to each other based on a displacement of the 75­83 loop in MtbLrp.11 Such an association was observed in earlier electron microscopy experiments in the presence of DNA and the Bacillus subtilis LrpC to form spherical nucleosomelike structures.24 The ITC, DLS, and size-exclusion chromatography experiments present a concerted picture of a specific Phe-mediated transition between the hexadecameric form of MtbLrp and octameric/lower-order oligomer forms. The ITC experiments were initiated with a view to determine the binding constants and other parameters, but although the interactions were specific, these could not be quantified due to changes in the oligomeric association during the course of the experiment. Another group recently showed that the binding of Leu dissociated the hexadecameric association observed in MtbLrp in the presence of DNA to an octamer.12 We did not observe such a type of transition in the absence of DNA with Leu, unlike the Phe case. Even the MtbLrp­Leu complex reported by us earlier11 did not show any large displacement of the 75­83 loop observed in the Phe complex. Clearly, some ligands such as Leu can mediate differential effects in the presence of DNA while no such effects occur in the absence of the DNA substrate. Addition of ligands such as His or Lys also does not lead to the dissociation of the hexadecamer (data not shown). However, more studies involving the binding of the different ligands especially in the presence of target DNA regions are awaited. The Gly102Thr mutant surprisingly adopts an open quaternary structure unlike the native protein. The mutant was crystallized under the same conditions as the native protein as also the other mutants and amino acid complexes. As a rule, proteins exhibit closed quaternary structures and the few known deviations from this rule have been attributed to specific functional reasons. A similar open quaternary association was observed in the E. coli Lrp structure that was crystallized in the presence of DNA8 although the substrate itself was disordered. The authors had attributed interactions with the DNA present in the crystal to the deviations in the octameric association observed in the case of other bacterial Lrp structures. It was speculated that interactions of the N-terminal DNA binding domain of the protein with the multiple binding sites of the pap regulatory operon, a part of which was cocrystallized, could result in the observed deviation from oligomeric symmetry. The present structure where a single point mutation of a residue in the ligand-binding loop results in a stable, open quaternary association suggests that ligand binding at the distal C-terminal domain can also induce symmetry deviations as opposed to the substrateinduced structural change observed in the E. coli Lrp­DNA complex. Indeed, in a recent review,21 the authors mention that an analogous deviation from the closed octameric structure was observed in the Pyrococcus FL11 Lrp crystallized in the presence of Arg, although the report is yet to be published.

1016

`Open' and `Closed' Quaternary Structure of MtbLrp

Fig. 8. Close-up of the Gln binding site at the N-terminal domain. The Gln binding site in the Nterminal DNA binding domain of the S. tokodaii Grp (yellow, PDB ID: 2E7W) superposed onto the P. furiosus Lrp­DNA complex (orange, PDB ID: 2EIC). The MtbLrp and E. coli proteins are also superposed and shown in green and purple, respectively. Broken lines indicate the interactions of Gln with Lys31 and Ser32 of S. tokodaii while Ser36 corresponds to the MtbLrp protein. The superposition clearly supports that the ligand is within `striking' distance of the DNA and might perform a dual role of either stabilizing/destabilizing the DNA­ protein interactions. The location of this ligand-binding site vis-a-vis the other identified sites in the Lrp/AsnC family of proteins is indicated in Supplementary Fig. 1.

An analysis of available Lrp structures suggests that although the overall protein architectures are surprisingly conserved, they are exquisitely adapted to perform their respective individual roles. A common feature in them is revealed by the present analysis involving relatively rigid and flexible regions. The study surprisingly reveals that the ligand-binding domains situated at the core of the protein are more flexible compared to the DNA binding N-terminal domain located on the outside of the octamer. It is to be expected normally that the core of the protein's structural architecture is relatively rigid, while residues closer to the surface, such as the loops, are more flexible. The reverse situation in Lrp proteins underscores the importance of flexibility at the ligand-binding domain. The flexibility might be linked to the structural changes that occur upon ligand/effector binding, which can also give rise to quaternary structural changes that are necessary for the regulatory functions of these proteins. Against the backdrop of this common feature of flexibility in the ligand-binding domains, many individual Lrp proteins possess unique effectorbinding sites. Binding of ligands to spatially conserved sites often elicit differential structural consequences; for example, in the S. tokodaii Grp­Gln complex, the authors observed a switch-type conformational change involving residues in the corresponding loop as the 75­83 loop in MtbLrp, which exhibits displacements in the presence of ligands. These changes pursuant to Gln binding in the S. tokodaii protein have not been linked to the oligomeric transitions unlike in MtbLrp but rather to a stabilization of the octameric association.13 In the same study, a new effector-binding site was identified in the N-terminal domain close to the DNA binding motif (Type IV, Supplementary Fig. 1). The bound Gln mainly interacts with Lys31 and Ser32 of S. tokodaii Grp. When the latter structure was

superposed onto the P. furiosus Lrp­DNA complex (Fig. 8), we find that the Gln ligand is situated in an advantageous position to interact with the DNA and exhibits several interactions less than 4 Å with the superposed DNA. Thus, ligands bound at the Type IV site can either stabilize or disrupt interactions with target promoter regions, leading us to propose a dual role for ligands in this site. Hexadecameric to octameric transitions have been observed in the E. coli Lrp also in the presence of Leu, but this is apparently mediated in a distinct manner. DLS and fluorescence experiments supported by mutational analysis reveal that binding of Leu to a low-affinity site in the protein-induced dissociation of the hexadecamers to octamers20 while binding to a high-affinity site (Type I in MtbLrp, Supplementary Fig. 1) did not elicit this response. Presently, only the E. coli Lrp­DNA structure is available8 for bacterial sources and further studies are necessary to understand the structural consequences of the ligand binding to both sites in the protein. Overall, it is increasingly apparent that despite high structural/architectural similarities, individual Lrp proteins employ a protein-specific strategy/ adaptation such as the incorporation of specific ligand-binding sites or the adoption of even open quaternary associations like that reported here to perform their respective regulatory roles.

Materials and Methods
Construction of mutants, expression, and purification Rv3291c was cloned, expressed, and purified as reported earlier.11,25 PCR-based techniques were used to generate the MtbLrp mutants (Gly102Thr and Glu104Ala) using the oligos R102: 5-TCTTCAGTGGCCACCGAGTAACAGGAC-3, F102: 5-TCGGTGGCCACTGAAGAGAGCTACGTC-3 and R104: 5-GTAGCTCGCTTCGC-

`Open' and `Closed' Quaternary Structure of MtbLrp CGGCCACCGAGTAA-3, F104: 5-GTGGCCGGCGAAGCGAGCTACGTCT-3, respectively. The integrity of the clones was verified by sequencing. Mutants were cloned in pET21d with NcoI and HindIII restriction sites and transformed into BL21(DE3) competent cells. Growth and purification conditions for the Glu104Ala were similar to those of the native protein. Gly102Thr was found to be in soluble aggregates and, therefore, was grown under slightly modified, optimized conditions involving induction with 0.2 mM IPTG and culture growth at low rpm for 12 h. Crystallization and data collection Co-crystallization of MtbLrp was carried out as reported earlier to assess the binding of ligands11 using the hanging drop technique against reservoirs containing 100 mM 4-morpholineethanesulfonic acid (Mes), pH 6.0, 0.75 M lithium acetate (LiAc) at 22 °C, and ligand at a concentration of 2 mM. The Glu104Ala mutant was crystallized in an analogous manner except that the concentration of LiAc used was 1 M. The crystals of the Gly102Thr mutant were stable only when grown in the presence of 5­10% glycerol, and the concentration of LiAc was reduced to 0.5 M. Data for the Glu104Ala mutant were collected using a MAR345 detector at room temperature from crystals mounted in quartz capillaries and using a RIGAKU-RU300 X-ray generator. Data for the Gly102Thr mutant were collected at both room temperature and at 100 K using capillary-mounted and flashfrozen crystals, respectively, using a RIGAKU MicromaxHF X-ray generator coupled to a MAR345-DTB detector. A 1:1 solution of ethylene glycol and reservoir was used to flash freeze the crystals for the lowtemperature data collection. Data were processed using the MOSFLM and SCALA26 programs implemented in the CCP4 package.27 Structure determination and refinement The crystals of the Glu104Ala mutant diffract to 2.2 Å and were refined using the coordinates of the native MtbLrp structure [Protein Data Bank (PDB) ID: 2IVM] shorn of the water molecules. The first four residues at the N-terminal are disordered. Refinement of the Mtb­Lys complex was also carried out similarly. The structure of the Gly102Thr mutant was determined by molecular replacement methods implemented in the CCP427 program Phaser. These crystals diffract to  3.8 Å. The MtbLrp dimer coordinates (PDB ID: 2IVM) were used as the search model in the space group C2221. The final model consists of two dimers in the asymmetric unit. A random set consisting of 10% of the data was set aside for cross validation. Extensive rigid-body refinements were carried out where the Nterminal and C-terminal domains were defined as rigid or where the dimers or the individual chains were defined as rigid entities. The rigid-body refinements were carried out using REFMAC528 and resulted in R and Rfree values of 38.8% and 38.1%, respectively. Keeping in mind the modest resolution of the data and also the fact that we were interested mainly in the novel quaternary structure observed in the mutant, we proceeded with the structure analysis. Even at the lower resolution, the electron density maps suggest that the loop 100­106 adopts different conformations in the individual subunits and the density for the first four N-terminal amino acids was also not discernable. Isothermal titration calorimetry

1017

Binding of amino acids to MtbLrp and its mutants was probed via ITC experiments using a VP-ITC instrument from Microcal, LLC (Northampton, MA). Prior to the ITC measurements, buffer, proteins, and amino acid solutions were degassed for 20 min at 25 °C with gentle stirring under vacuum and carefully loaded into the cells and syringe to prevent the formation of bubbles. Binding experiments were performed under conditions similar to those used in crystallization, viz. 750 mM LiAc and 100 mM Mes, pH 6.0.11 Purified proteins were also dialyzed against the same buffer for the experiments. The MtbLrp was placed in the sample cell (2.0 mL) at a concentration of 1.05 mg/mL (30 M assuming a dimeric population), and 5-L aliquots of amino acid solution at 4.8 mM were injected stepwise into the sample cell with 300 s delay between two consecutive injections. During the titration, the reaction mixture was continuously stirred at 290 rpm. Saturation of protein by amino acid binding was indicated when the observed heat change generated by any additional titration of amino acid into the protein sample solution became identical with the background heat of titration. A similar procedure was applied for the mutants. Size-exclusion chromatography analysis Changes to the quaternary association of MtbLrp and mutants in the presence of amino acids were studied by using size-exclusion chromatography and DLS, respectively. A Superdex S-200 column (GE Biosciences), calibrated with low and high molecular weight range markers, was mounted on an AKTA-FPLC system (GE Biosciences) for the experiments. The column was equilibrated with a buffer containing 100 mM Mes (pH 6.0) and 750 mM LiAc and supplemented with the required molar ratio of Phe for the respective experiments. Protein concentration of 1 mg/mL was used in the experiments. The samples were pre-equilibrated with the required amino acid concentration for 1 h. The partition coefficient (Kav) was plotted as a function of log Mr of the standard proteins according to the equation Kav = Ve À Vo =Vt À Vo ð1Þ

where Ve is the elution volume of the protein, Vo is the void volume of the column, and Vt is the total column volume; Mr is the molecular weight. DLS studies Selected protein fractions from the size-exclusion chromatography column were subjected to the DLS analysis. A Malvern instrument (M/s Malvern) and the company-provided Malvern DLS v5.03 software were used in the analysis. The instrument was calibrated using a standard set of protein markers. The molecular weight and the hydrodynamic radius of the protein particles were calculated as per the recommendations of the manufacturer. Protein samples were filtered using a 0.22-m filter (M/s Millipore) before the DLS experiments. Structural analysis Rigid and flexible domains on the protein were delineated by the error-scaled difference distance matrix approach implemented in the program ESCET.23 A value

1018
of 4.5  was used for the calculations. The following coordinate sets were downloaded from the PDB for the analysis: 1RI7, 2EIC, 1I1G, 2GQQ, 2CG4, 2CFX, and 2P5V. Sequence alignments were carried out using Align.29 The angles between the dimers of the octamer were calculated as follows: First, the centers of masses of the N-terminal domains (residues 1­65) and C-terminal domains (residues 66­150) of each dimer were calculated using CALCOM.22 Subsequently, vectors passing through the centers of masses of the respective N-terminal and Cterminal domains of the dimers were calculated. The angles between the vectors correspond to the angles between the dimers. Figures were generated using PyMOL.30 Surface area calculations were carried out using NACCESS implemented in the CCP4 program suite27 and the PISA server.

`Open' and `Closed' Quaternary Structure of MtbLrp 5. Leonard, P. M., Smits, H. J., Sedelnikova, S. E., Brinkman, A. B., de Vos, W. M., van der Oost, J. et al. (2001). Crystal structure of the Lrp-like transcriptional regulator from the archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus. EMBO J. 20, 990­997. 6. Koike, H., Ishijima, S. A., Clowney, L. & Suzuki, M. (2004). The archaeal feast/famine regulatory protein: potential roles of its assembly forms for regulating transcription. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 2840­2845. 7. Yokoyama, K., Ishijima, S. A., Koike, H., Kurihara, C., Shimowasa, A., Kabasawa, M. et al. (2007). Feast/ Famine regulation by transcription factor FL11 for the survival of the hypothermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus OT3. Structure, 15, 1542­1554. 8. de Los Rios, S. & Perona, J. J. (2007). Structure of the Escherichia coli leucine-responsive regulatory protein Lrp reveals a novel octameric assembly. J. Mol. Biol. 366, 1589­1602. 9. Thaw, P., Sedelnikova, S. E., Muranova, T., Wiese, S., Ayora, S., Alonso, J. C. et al. (2006). Structural insight into gene transcriptional regulation and effector binding by Lrp/AsnC family. Nucleic Acids Res. 34, 1439­1449. 10. Ren, J., Sainsbury, S., Combs, S. E., Capper, R. G., Jordan, P. W., Berrow, N. S. et al. (2007). Structure and transcription analysis of a global regulator from Neisseria meningitidis. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 14655­14664. 11. Shrivastava, T. & Ramachandran, R. (2007). Mechanistic insights from the crystal structures of a feast/ famine regulatory protein from M. tuberculosis H37Rv. Nucleic Acids Res. 35, 7324­7335. 12. Reddy, M. C. M., Gokulan, K., Jacobs, W. R., Jr., Ioerger, T. H. & Sacchettini, J. C. (2008). Crystal structure of Mycobacterium tuberculosis LrpA, a leucine-responsive global regulator associated with starvation response. Protein Sci. 17, 159­170. 13. Kumarevel, T., Nakano, N., Ponnuraj, K., Gopinath, S. C. B., Sakamoto, K., Shinkai, A. et al. (2008). Crystal structure of glutamine receptor protein from Sulfolobus tokodaii strain 7 in complex with its effector L-glutamine: implications of effector binding in molecular association and DNA binding. Nucleic Acids Res. 36, 4808­4820. 14. Betts, J. C., Lukey, P. T., Robb, L. C., McAdam, R. A. & Duncan, K. (2002). Evaluation of a nutrient starvation model of Mycobacterium tuberculosis persistence by gene and protein expression profiling. Mol. Microbiol. 43, 717­731. 15. Slayden, R. A., Knudson, D. L. & Belisle, J. T. (2006). Identification of cell cycle regulators in Mycobacterium tuberculosis by inhibition of septum formation and global transcriptional analysis. Microbiology, 152, 1789­1797. 16. Landgraf, J. R., Wu, J. & Calvo, J. M. (1996). Effects of nutrition and growth rate on Lrp levels in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 178, 6930­6936. 17. Tripathi, S. M. & Ramachandran, R. (2006). Direct evidence for a glutamate switch necessary for substrate recognition: crystal structure of lysine -aminotransferase (Rv3290c) from Mycobacterium tuberculosis. J. Mol. Biol. 362, 877­886. 18. Parti, R. P. S., Shrivastava, R., Srivastava, S., Subramanian, A. R., Roy, R., Srivastava, B. S. & Srivastava, R. (2008). A transposon insertion mutant of Mycobacterium fortuitum attenuated in virulence and persistence in a murine infection model that is complemented by Rv3291c of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Microb. Pathog. 45, 370­376.

Acknowledgements
T.S. is a Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, India, research fellow. We acknowledge the Central Instrumentation Facility and Dr. Rajiv Bhat, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India, for use of the ITC instrument. This work was funded by the Department of Biotechnology, India, via grant GAP0018. The computational work is supported by Council of Scientific and Industrial Research network grant CMM0017. This is communication number 7652 from the Central Drug Research Institute.

Supplementary Data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/ j.jmb.2009.07.084

References
1. Calvo, J. M. & Matthews, R. G. (1994). Leucine responsive regulatory protein, a global regulator of metabolism in Escherichia coli. Microbiol. Rev. 58, 466­490. 2. Yokoyama, K., Ishijima, S. A., Clowney, L., Koike, H., Aramaki, H., Tanaka, C. et al. (2006). Feast/famine regulatory proteins (FFRPs): Escherichia coli Lrp, AsnC and related archaeal transcription factors. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 30, 89­108. 3. Brinkman, A. B., Dhalke, I., Tuininga, J. E., Lammers, T., Dumay, V., de Heus, E. et al. (2000). An Lrp-like transcription regulator from archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus is negatively autoregulated. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 38160­38169. 4. Tani, T. H., Khodursky, A., Blumenthal, R. M., Brown, P. O. & Matthews, R. G. (2002). Adaptation to famine: a family of stationary-phase genes revealed by microarray analysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 99, 13471­13476.  http://www.rcsb.org  http://www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/prot_int/cgi-bin/piserver

`Open' and `Closed' Quaternary Structure of MtbLrp 19. Chen, S., Rosner, M. H. & Calvo, J. M. (2001). Leucineregulated self-association of leucine-responsive regulatory protein (Lrp) from Escherichia coli. J. Mol. Biol. 312, 625­635. 20. Chen, S. & Calvo, J. M. (2002). Leucine-induced dissociation of Escherichia coli Lrp hexadecamers to octamers. J. Mol. Biol. 318, 1031­1042. 21. Kawashima, T., Aramaki, H., Oyamada, T., Makino, K., Yamada, M., Okamura, H. et al. (2008). Transcription regulation by Feast/Famine regulatory proteins, FFRPs, in archaea and eubacteria. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 31, 173­186. 22. Costantini, S., Paladino, A. & Facchiano, A. M. (2008). CALCOM: a software for calculating the centre of mass of protein. Bioinformation, 2, 271­272. 23. Schneider, T. R. (2002). A genetic algorithm for the identification of conformationally invariant regions in the protein molecules. Acta Crystallogr., Sect. D: Biol. Crystallogr. 58, 195­208. 24. Beloin, C., Jeusset, J., Revet, B., Mirambeau, G., Le Hegarat, F. & Le Cam, E. (2003). Contribution of DNA conformation and topology in right handed DNA

1019
wrapping by the Bacillus subtilis LrpC protein. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 5333­5342. Shrivastava, T., Kumar, S. & Ramachandran, R. (2004). Cloning, expression, purification and crystallization of a transcriptional regulatory protein (Rv3291c) from Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv. Acta Crystallogr., Sect. D: Biol. Crystallogr. 60, 1874­1876. Leslie, A. G. W. (1992). Joint CCP4 + ESF-EAMCB Newsletter on Protein Crystallography, No. 26. Collaborative Computing Project No. 4.. (1994). The CCP4 suite: program for protein crystallography. Acta Crystallogr., Sect. D: Biol. Crystallogr. 50, 760­763. Murshudov, G. N., Vagin, A. A. & Dodson, E. J. (1997). Refinement of macromolecular structures by the maximum-likelihood method. Acta Crystallogr., Sect. D: Biol. Crystallogr. 53, 240­245. Cohen, G. E. (1997). Align: a program to superimpose protein coordinates, accounting for insertion and deletion. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 30, 1160­1161. DeLano, W. L. (2002). The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System. DeLano Scientific, San Carlos, CA.

25.

26. 27. 28.

29. 30.

