Peptides 30 (2009) 2374­2379

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Peptides
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/peptides

Inhibiting the inhibitors: Retro-inverso Smac peptides
Julia Hossbach a, Elke Michalsky a, Peter Henklein b, Marten Jaeger a, Peter T. Daniel c,d, Robert Preissner a,*
a

´ ¨tsmedizin Berlin, Institute of Physiology, Structural Bioinformatics Group, Arnimallee 22, 14195 Berlin, Germany Charite ­ Universita ´ ¨tsmedizin Berlin, Institute of Biochemistry, 10117 Berlin, Germany Charite ­ Universita c ´ ¨tsmedizin Berlin, Department of Hematology, Oncology and Tumour Immunology, Berlin-Buch, Germany Charite ­ Universita d ¨ck Max Delbru Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany
b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Article history: Received 4 May 2009 Received in revised form 4 August 2009 Accepted 4 August 2009 Available online 12 August 2009 Keywords: Apoptosis Smac Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins Computational docking

Resistance against apoptosis-inducing anti-cancer drugs remains a severe problem in therapy. One reason is the overexpression of inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs), a group of proteins responsible for the prevention of apoptosis induction by inactivation of initiator caspases. The natural inhibitor of the IAPs is the protein Smac, which impedes the binding to the caspases. Although Smac is a potent inhibitor, Smac peptides are not very stable in vivo and thus not applicable in therapy. Bioinformatical methods were applied to design Smac-derived peptides to break the therapy resistance in IAP high-expressing tumor cells. The exchange of amino acids in the Smac peptides AVPI and AVPF against unnatural amino acids leads to an improvement of the apoptosis sensitivity. The variety of Smac peptides was filtered by computational docking. Moreover, Smac-derived peptides with sufficient binding to the IAPs were tested in IAP-expressing Hodgkin Lymphoma cell lines. ß 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction Apoptosis, a form of programmed cell death, is an essential mechanism for physiological stability, necessary for a normal development and the suppression of oncogenesis. The effector molecules of apoptosis are caspases, proteases with a cysteine in their active center. The initiation of caspases leads to a cascade that finishes in the activation of the effector caspases and finally cell death. A disturbance in the complex regulation of apoptosis might lead to a variety of diseases as cancer or autoimmune diseases. Therefore, key regulators of apoptosis have become interesting targets for the elucidation of new therapeutic treatments for cancer [6]. Certain cancer types are a challenge for molecular treatment due to the fact that a group of proteins, the inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs), is highly expressed. The members of the IAP family are able to inhibit the extrinsic as well as the intrinsic apoptotic pathways [8,27]. They were originally identified in baculoviruses, where they prevent insect-virus induced apoptosis. Based on their

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +49 030 8445 1649. E-mail addresses: Julia.Hossbach@charite.de (J. Hossbach), Elke.Michalsky@charite.de (E. Michalsky), Peter.Henklein@peptides.de (P. Henklein), pdaniel@mdc-berlin.de (P.T. Daniel), Robert.Preissner@charite.de (R. Preissner). 0196-9781/$ ­ see front matter ß 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.peptides.2009.08.001

structural features, the IAPs are divided in three groups. The first class is characterized by the presence of three BIR (baculoviral IAP repeat) domains and a zinc finger region. Within this group proteins like XIAP, cIAP1, cIAP2, ILP-2 und ML-IAP can be found [9,12]. The best studied inhibitor of apoptosis proteins is XIAP (Xlinked IAP), a member of this group [5]. The third of the three BIR domains selectively binds initiator caspase 9, and the linker region between BIR1 and 2 is responsible for the binding of the effector caspases 3 and 6 [7]. In the second class, proteins like NAIP can be detected. NAIP is able to inhibit caspases 3 and 7. It does not have a zinc finger region, but also three BIR domains. In class three, the proteins Survivin and BRUCE can occur. These proteins have only a part of a BIR domain and function merely as a regulator of mitosis and not apoptosis. Therefore, a high amount of these proteins can be found in cancer cells [12]. The high expression of these proteins is responsible for difficulties in the treatment of certain cancer types, like Hodgkin Lymphoma. This type of cancer is very resistant against typical medication, especially against apoptosis-inducing reagents like etoposide [15]. The IAPs are regulated by a protein called Smac/DIABLO which can bind IAPs at the BIR domain and therefore avoid the inhibition of the caspase activity [22]. This protein is released from mitochondria in response to apoptotic stimuli and directly interacts with the IAPs [19]. Structural data revealed that alone the four N-terminal residues AVPI are responsible for the binding

J. Hossbach et al. / Peptides 30 (2009) 2374­2379

2375

of Smac to the BIR domain of the IAPs [17]. Natural Smac peptides are limited in their in vivo stability [21] and solely have a moderate binding affinity to the BIR domain [17]. Yet, it has been shown that the replacement of the Isoleucine by a Phenylalanine leads to an improvement of the efficiency and binding affinity of Smac peptides towards the BIR domain [10]. It has been shown that inhibitors against IAPs are very efficient in the induction of apoptosis in tumorigenic cells. A variety of Smac peptides and mimetics has been developed and shows promising results [3,11,18,21]. Here we present a new approach to identify Smac peptides which can be used to target the IAP family for cancer therapy. Toward the idea to improve the efficiency of Smac peptides, we discovered a series of peptides containing unnatural amino acids as well as reverse peptides that bind the IAP family members. The efficiency of these peptides was tested by virtual docking and cell experiments. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Design and synthesis of Smac peptides The original Smac peptide sequences, AVPI and AVPF, as well as the reverse sequences, IPVA and FPVA, were modified by replacing the residues at single or multiple positions by D-amino acids. The observation that the contact of the Smac peptide to the protein seems to be more tight at the N-terminal positions [17] lead to the idea to modify the I/F residues first. For further alterations, only the middle positions were converted from L- to D-amino acids to prevent proteloytic degradation from the termini. This procedure resulted in a library of partially modified retro-inverso, retro, and inverso isomers of Smac peptides. The peptides were synthesized by Fmoc-strategy on an ABI 433 peptide synthesizer. After synthesis the peptides were deprotected with trifluoracetic acid, containing 5% of water, precipitated with diethyl ether and lyophilisized. All peptides were purified by HPLC on a 20 Â 250 mm preparative C18 column and the isolated fractions by MS identified. The peptides shown in Table 1 were used for screening by virtual docking. Peptides with a moderate and high docking score were selected for further testing in cell assays. 2.2. Docking

peptide model, 20 docking runs and a total number of 100 000 genetic operations were performed. The ``early-termination'' option was disabled. Including knowledge available from the literature about the binding mode [17], several constraints were introduced, namely: (1) one substructure-based distance constraint to direct the contact of the peptide N-terminus towards the carboxyl group of protein residue E314; (2) four protein H-bond constraints to force the formation of hydrogen bonds at positions G306, T308 (two hydrogen bonds), W323 of the protein; (3) three region constraints to force hydrophobic contacts at positions T308, W310, W323. 2.3. Cell culture Hodgkin Lymphoma cell lines L1236 and L428, pcDNA3caspase-3-transfected and control vector (pcDNA3-transfected) MCF-7 cells were grown in RPMI-1640 medium, supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 100 U/ml penicillin and 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany) at 37 8C fully humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere. Confluent cells were subcultured every five days after detaching the cells with a Trypsin/EDTA ¨ solution (Sigma; Munchen, Germany). 2.4. Measurement of apoptotic cell death by flow cytometry Hodgkin Lymphoma cells were seeded at a density of 105 cells/ ml and treated with the indicated concentrations of Smac peptides. After 72 h, the cells were collected, washed with PBS at 4 8C and fixed in PBS/2% (vol/vol) formaldehyde on ice for 30 min. Following the fixation, the cells were incubated with ethanol/PBS (2:1, vol/ vol) for 25 min, pelleted and resuspended in PBS containing 40 mg/ ml RNase A. They were incubated for 30 min at 37 8C, pelleted and finally resuspended in PBS containing 50 mg/ml PI. Then the nuclear DNA fragmentation was quantified by flow cytometric determination of hypodiploid DNA using a FACScan (Becton Dickinson; Heidelberg, Germany). Finally, data was analyzed with the help of the CELLQuestPro software. The results are rendered in percentage of hypodiploid cells (subG1), which reflects the number of apoptotic cells. 3. Results 3.1. Design of Smac peptides

For all peptides, computer models were built and subsequently docked to the 3D structure of the BIR 3 domain of XIAP (Protein Data Bank [2] code: 1g3f; [17]) applying the Gold program. This docking software utilizes a genetic algorithm to explore the full range of ligand conformational flexibility with partial flexibility of the protein [13]. The GoldScore scoring function (fitness function in genetic algorithm terminology) assesses four binding features: protein-ligand hydrogen bond energy, protein-ligand Van der Waals energy, ligand internal Van der Waals energy and ligand torsional strain energy. ° The active site of the protein was located by defining a 10 A radius around the original ligand from the PDB structure 1g3f, which is the nine residue peptide AVPIAQKSE from Smac. For each
Table 1 Selected peptides for virtual docking. avPf avPi fPva fPVA iPVa avPF aVpf aVpi fpVa iPva iPVA aVpf AVPf avpf fPva ipVa aVPf aVpi AVPi fPVa iPva fPva

All versions of AVPF and AVPI peptides modified with D-amino acids, as described in Section 2, have been designed for further testing by docking studies. Within this work, lower case letters will be used for D-amino acids. 3.2. Docking of Smac peptides To make a prediction about the binding affinity of the compounds that have been designed, the molecules were virtually docked into the binding groove of XIAP, a protein from the family of inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (PDB code: 1g3f). Docking of avPf, fPVA, AVPi and fPva yields a higher GoldScore than of the remaining compounds, which implies an improved binding to the target protein, whereas ipVa and avpi exhibit a medium GoldScore (see Fig. 1). The peptide AVPI and the already published substance AVPF [16] docked into the binding groove of XIAP are shown in Fig. 2. The binding mode of AVPI to the BIR3 domain of XIAP has been investigated previously by NMR structural analysis [4,23]. This peptide was used as reference ligand for the modeling of all other peptides. AVPF shows improved binding abilities compared to the original peptide (see Fig. 1) [10]. It has a much deeper contact to

Peptides selected for virtual docking experiments. Lower case letters represent Damino acids, capital letters L-amino acids.

2376

J. Hossbach et al. / Peptides 30 (2009) 2374­2379

Fig. 1. The GoldScore, for original and modeled Smac peptides, was calculated by using the docking program Gold (a). The compounds in bold letters are the original structure AVPF and AVPI. The compound in italic letters represents the compound with a GoldScore higher than AVPF. For each compound the value of apoptotic cells after a treatment of 72 h with 50 mM compound is presented. In part (b) a dot plot of the GoldScore and the corresponding amount of apoptotic cells at a concentration of 50 mM peptide is shown.

the hydrophobic pocket of the BIR3 domain (Fig. 2, green circle) which might be responsible for the better binding. Docking results of modified peptides with a higher GoldScore than AVPI are shown in Fig. 3. In Fig. 3a, the improved binding of Valine in peptide AVPi, pointing to the hydrophobic pocket instead of Alanine, is demonstrated. Fig. 3b shows the slightly closer contact of the modified peptide fPVA to the protein XIAP. Again, Valine instead of Alanine points in the hydrophobic pocket. The modified peptide avPf (Fig. 3c) has a closer contact to the protein than the original peptide which results in the highest GoldScore

among these peptides. The side chain of Phenylalanine is deeply buried in the hydrophobic pocket, leading to a tight connection responsible for the very effective binding. The peptide fPVA (Fig. 3d) has a different binding mode; Proline instead of Alanine points into the hydrophobic pocket. Phenylalanine contacts Trp323 (green circle) and Tyr324 (red circle). The theoretically predicted binding abilities of the Smac peptides have been further investigated in apoptosis assays in cell lines in order to verify the results from computational modeling.

Fig. 2. Crystal structure of AVPI (a) and docking result of AVPF (b) are displayed. AVPF is docked to XIAP (PDB code: 1g3f) using the docking program Gold. The green circle demonstrates that Phenylalanine is deeply buried in the hydrophobic pocket. Part (c) shows the amount of hypodiploid cells in Hodgkin Lymphoma cell lines L1236 and L428 after 72 h treatment with the original compounds AVPI (a) and AVPF (b). As these substances have been dissolved in DMSO the apoptosis effect induced by DMSO, which was used at the corresponding Smac peptides concentration, is included for comparison. Apoptosis was determined by measuring fragmentation of genomic DNA (hypodiploid cells) by flow cytometry. The values represent means Æ S.D. (n = 3). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)

J. Hossbach et al. / Peptides 30 (2009) 2374­2379

2377

Fig. 3. Docking results of AVPi (a), fPVA (b), avPf (c) and fPva (d) in XIAP. In part (a), the improved binding of Valine in peptide AVPI, pointing to the hydrophobic pocket instead of Alanine (green circle) in AVPI (see a), is shown. Part (b) depicts the slightly closer contact of the modified peptide fPVA to the protein XIAP. Again, Valine instead of Alanine points in the hydrophobic pocket. The modified peptide avPf (c) has a closer contact to the protein than the original peptide. The side chain of phenyalanine is deeply buried in the hydrophobic pocket (green circle), leading to a tight connection responsible for the very effective binding. In part (d), Proline instead of Alanine points into hydrophobic pocket. Phenylalanine contacts Trp323 (green circle) and Tyr324 (red circle). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)

3.3. Smac peptide-induced apoptosis and sensitization of apoptosisinducing agents in Hodgkin Lymphoma cell lines For the apoptotic cell assays two Hodgkin Lymphoma cell lines have been chosen. These cell lines have a high XIAP expression and are therefore suitable for testing the apoptosis-inducing effects of the Smac peptides as well as testing the sensitization of IAP highexpressing cells toward apoptosis-inducing medication. The original substances show no or only a very weak induction of apoptosis (see Fig. 2). After considering the DMSO effect it is clearly visible that AVPI only exhibits weak induction of apoptosis, while AVPF is not able to induce apoptosis in the Hodgkin Lymphoma cell lines L1236 and L428 at a concentration of 50 mM. To verify the docking results all peptides from Table 1 were tested in the IAP-expressing cell line L1236 at a concentration of 50 mM to identify peptides which were suitable for further testing. Thereby the docking results could be approved and these peptides were chosen for further investigation. In cell line L1236 an induction of apoptosis, measured by the amount of hypodiploid cells, can be detected for the newly designed peptides (see Fig. 4). The peptide avPf with the highest GoldScore is able to induce about 65% hypodiploid cells at a concentration of 50 mM. Cell line L428 shows a slight increase in the amount of hypodiploid cells. Those compounds with a GoldScore lower than the original Smac peptide AVPI did not reveal any apoptosis-inducing effect (data not shown). Furthermore, a sensitizing effect of Smac peptides could be demonstrated. The peptides avPf and AVPi could break resistance towards etoposide in L1236 cells. Induction of apoptosis by Smac-derived peptides depends on the presence of a caspase 3 activity, as shown in Fig. 5. MCF-7 cells do not possess caspase 3 activity and therefore apoptosis cannot be

induced. In MCF-7 caspase 3 cells up to 30% hypodiploid cells could be detected at a concentration of 50 mM of different modified Smac peptides. The original peptides AVPI and AFPF were not able to induce any apoptosis in MCF-7 caspase 3 cells (data not shown). 4. Discussion Resistance towards therapeutics remains a severe problem within cancer therapy. The resistance in diverse cancer types results from a high expression of members of the inhibitor of apoptosis proteins family. These proteins are responsible for the inhibition of caspase activity and consequently prevent the induction of apoptosis after of apoptosis-inducing medication [1]. The natural inhibitor of the IAP-members is Smac, which is able to bind the IAPs via their BIR domain and thereby inhibits the binding between the IAPs and the caspases, as they use the same domains [26]. These characteristics make Smac very attractive as a drug in cancer therapy, but due to the fact that the Smac peptide is not very stable it is not convenient as a drug [16]. We could prove that the natural Smac peptide AVPI is not an efficient inducer of apoptosis. Thereby, we could show one prosperous strategy to improve the efficiency of Smac peptides through the substitution of amino acids against unnatural D-amino acids. For the experimental validation only the four N-terminal amino acids of Smac have been used, since it has been shown that only this part binds to the BIR3 domain of XIAP [17]. The exchange of amino acids consequentially leads to a different conformation of the peptide and therefore changes the binding abilities to the target molecule XIAP. To elucidate Smac peptides that still bind effectively to XIAP, the modified Smac peptides were modeled and computationally docked into XIAP. With aid of the GoldScore we were able to identify Smac peptides with sufficient binding to XIAP. Our docking

2378

J. Hossbach et al. / Peptides 30 (2009) 2374­2379

Fig. 4. Amount of hypodiploid cells in Hodgkin Lymphoma cell lines L1236 and L428 after treatment with (a) fPVA and (b) avPf. Part (c) shows the sensitization of cell lines towards apoptosis-inducing agent etoposide by Smac peptides AVPi (c) and avPf (d) additionally treated with 0.1 mg/ml etoposide. The results were given in percentage of hypodiploid cells, which reflects the number of apoptotic cells. The values represent means Æ S.D. (n = 3). The apoptosis-inducing effect of the solvent DMSO is already included in the values.

results support furthermore the data from Li et al. [16], that AVPF shows improved binding to XIAP, as phenylalanine has a much deeper contact to the hydrophobic pocket than isoleucine in the original peptide. We could also show that not only the binding of the peptide to the target molecule is necessary for the induction of apoptosis, as AVPF is not able to induce a significant amount of hypodiploid cells in Hodgkin Lymphoma cell lines, although it shows effective binding to XIAP in the computational model. For the testing of suitable peptides in cell assays, Hodgkin Lymphoma cell lines have been established. These cell lines are adequate test systems, as Hodgkin Lymphoma cells are characterized by a high expression of IAPs. Therefore, two Hodgkin

Lymphoma cell lines with a high expression of XIAP have been chosen: L1236 and L428 [14]. Peptides with a comparatively moderate GoldScore could not induce apoptosis in these cell lines, but the peptides fPVA, AVPf and avPf were able to induce a significant amount of hypodiploid cells (which represent apoptotic cells) in the IAP high-expressing cell line L1236. Cell line L428 has an additional mechanism of therapy resistance. Thomas et al. [24] showed that besides the IAP expression the anti-apoptotic protein c-Flip is responsible for therapy resistance in L428 cells. Therefore an inactivation of the IAPs does not lead to an activation of apoptosis in L428. The

Fig. 5. Amount of hypodiploid cells in MCF-7 and MCF-7 caspase 3 cells after 72 h treatment with different Smac peptides at a concentration of 25 and 50 mM. MCF-7 cells without caspase 3 activity do not show any amount of hypodiploid cells under the influence of modified Smac peptides (a). A caspase 3 activity leads to an induction of apoptosis in MCF-7 cells treated with modified Smac peptides (b). The results are given in percentage of hypodiploid cells, which reflects the number of apoptotic cells. The values represent means Æ S.D. (n = 3). The apoptosis-inducing effect of the solvent DMSO is already included in the values.

J. Hossbach et al. / Peptides 30 (2009) 2374­2379

2379

apoptosis-inducing effect of the Smac peptides in L1236 but not in L428 demonstrates the IAP binding affinities of the Smac peptides. Another effect of the modified Smac peptides is the sensitization of L1236 cells toward apoptosis-inducing drugs. We could show that under the influence of the modified Smac peptides, etoposide could induce apoptosis at a dosage that is not efficient without the Smac peptides. Etoposide is an established anti-cancer drug which inhibits topoisomerase II and leads cells into an apoptotic state [25]. Although etoposide is commonly successfully used in cancer therapy, it is not efficient in IAP-high-expressing tumors, like Hodgkin Lymphoma. The high amount of inhibitors of apoptosis proteins prevents these cells to undergo apoptosis and etoposide remains without an effect. We managed to evade this resistance towards therapy by the application of modified Smac peptides. In MCF-7 cells, we were able to verify a caspase 3 dependence of the apoptosis induced by Smac peptides. These peptides were not able to induce apoptosis in the MCF-7 cells, as this cell line does not have any caspase 3 activity [20]. Admittedly, the same peptides could induce apoptosis up to 30% (at a concentration of 50 mM) in MCF-7 cells with a caspase 3 activity. Inhibitors of apoptosis proteins are able to inhibit caspase 3 and thereby prevent the initiation of apoptosis. Therefore, the inability to induce apoptosis in caspase 3 deficient cells is an indirect proof for the binding of the modified Smac peptides to the IAPs. By virtue of the presented data, the modification of Smac peptides by unnatural amino acids is a sufficient way to increase their efficiency. The modification does not change the functionality of the Smac peptides, as their activity is depending on the presence of IAPs and caspase 3, as could be shown. We were able to demonstrate that computational modeling and docking is an effective tool to elucidate modified Smac peptides that bind effectively to the target proteins. Furthermore, we revealed that these peptides are able to induce apoptosis in IAP high-expressing cells and are able to sensitize these cells towards medication. Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Deutsche Krebshilfe, Sonderforschungsbereich 449, Investionsbank Berlin and Bundesminis¨ terium fur Bildung und Forschung. References
[1] Abe S, Hasegawa M, Yamamoto K, Kurata M, Nakagawa Y, Suzuki K, et al. Rapid induction of IAP family proteins and Smac/DIABLO expression after proapoptotic stimulation with doxorubicin in RPMI 8226 multiple myeloma cells. Exp Mol Pathol 2007;83:405­12. [2] Berman HM, Bhat TN, Bourne PE, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Weissig H, et al. The Protein Data Bank and the challenge of structural genomics. Nat Struct Biol 2000;7(Suppl.):957­9. [3] Cossu F, Mastrangelo E, Milani M, Sorrentino G, Lecis D, Delia D, et al. Designing Smac-mimetics as antagonists of XIAP, cIAP1, and cIAP2. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2009;378:162­7.

[4] Degterev A, Lugovskoy A, Cardone M, Mulley B, Wagner G, Mitchison T, et al. Identification of small-molecule inhibitors of interaction between the BH3 domain and Bcl-xL. Nat Cell Biol 2001;3:173­82. [5] Eckelman BP, Salvesen GS, Scott FL. Human inhibitor of apoptosis proteins: why XIAP is the black sheep of the family. EMBO Rep 2006;7:988­94. [6] Elmore S. Apoptosis: a review of programmed cell death. Toxicol Pathol 2007;35:495­516. [7] Fakler M, Loeder S, Vogler M, Schneider K, Jeremias I, Debatin KM, et al. Small molecule XIAP inhibitors cooperate with TRAIL to induce apoptosis in childhood acute leukemia cells and overcome Bcl-2-mediated resistance. Blood 2009;113:1710­22. [8] Fulda S. Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins in hematological malignancies. Leukemia 2009;23:467­76. [9] Fulda S. Targeting inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) for cancer therapy. Anticancer Agents Med Chem 2008;8:533­9. [10] Gao Z, Tian Y, Wang J, Yin Q, Wu H, Li YM, et al. A dimeric Smac/diablo peptide directly relieves caspase-3 inhibition by XIAP dynamic and cooperative regulation of XIAP by Smac/Diablo. J Biol Chem 2007;282: 30718­27. [11] Heckl S, Sturzu A, Regenbogen M, Beck A, Feil G, Gharabaghi A, et al. A novel polyarginine containing Smac peptide conjugate that mediates cell death in tumor and healthy cells. Med Chem 2008;4:348­54. [12] Hunter AM, LaCasse EC, Korneluk RG. The inhibitors of apoptosis (IAPs) as cancer targets. Apoptosis 2007;12:1543­68. [13] Jones G, Willett P, Glen RC, Leach AR, Taylor R. Development and validation of a genetic algorithm for flexible docking. J Mol Biol 1997;267:727­48. [14] Kashkar H, Haefs C, Shin H, Hamilton-Dutoit SJ, Salvesen GS, Kronke M, et al. XIAP-mediated caspase inhibition in Hodgkin's lymphoma-derived B cells. J Exp Med 2003;198:341­7. [15] Kashkar H, Seeger JM, Hombach A, Deggerich A, Yazdanpanah B, Utermohlen O, et al. XIAP targeting sensitizes Hodgkin lymphoma cells for cytolytic T-cell attack. Blood 2006;108:3434­40. [16] Li L, Thomas RM, Suzuki H, De Brabander JK, Wang X, Harran PG. A small molecule Smac mimic potentiates TRAIL- and TNFalpha-mediated cell death. Science 2004;305:1471­4. [17] Liu Z, Sun C, Olejniczak ET, Meadows RP, Betz SF, Oost T, et al. Structural basis for binding of Smac/DIABLO to the XIAP BIR3 domain. Nature 2000;408:1004­ 8. [18] Lu J, Bai L, Sun H, Nikolovska-Coleska Z, McEachern D, Qiu S, et al. SM-164: a novel, bivalent Smac mimetic that induces apoptosis and tumor regression by concurrent removal of the blockade of cIAP-1/2 and XIAP. Cancer Res 2008;68:9384­93. [19] Martinez-Ruiz G, Maldonado V, Ceballos-Cancino G, Grajeda JP, MelendezZajgla J. Role of Smac/DIABLO in cancer progression. J Exp Clin Cancer Res 2008;27:48. [20] Onuki R, Kawasaki H, Baba T, Taira K. Analysis of a mitochondrial apoptotic pathway using Bid-targeted ribozymes in human MCF7 cells in the absence of a caspase-3-dependent pathway. Antisense Nucleic Acid Drug Dev 2003;13: 75­82. [21] Oost TK, Sun C, Armstrong RC, Al-Assaad AS, Betz SF, Deckwerth TL, et al. Discovery of potent antagonists of the antiapoptotic protein XIAP for the treatment of cancer. J Med Chem 2004;47:4417­26. [22] Rajalingam K, Oswald M, Gottschalk K, Rudel T. Smac/DIABLO is required for effector caspase activation during apoptosis in human cells. Apoptosis 2007;12:1503­10. [23] Sattler M, Liang H, Nettesheim D, Meadows RP, Harlan JE, Eberstadt M, et al. Structure of Bcl-xL-Bak peptide complex: recognition between regulators of apoptosis. Science 1997;275:983­6. [24] Thomas RK, Kallenborn A, Wickenhauser C, Schultze JL, Draube A, Vockerodt M, et al. Constitutive expression of c-FLIP in Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells. Am J Pathol 2002;160:1521­8. [25] Treszezamsky AD, Kachnic LA, Feng Z, Zhang J, Tokadjian C, Powell SN. BRCA1BRCA2-deficient cells are sensitive to etoposide-induced DNA double-strand breaks via topoisomerase II. Cancer Res 2007;67:7078­81. [26] Verhagen AM, Coulson EJ, Vaux DL. Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins and their relatives: IAPs and other BIRPs. Genome Biol 2001;2. REVIEWS3009. [27] Vucic D. Targeting IAP (inhibitor of apoptosis) proteins for therapeutic intervention in tumors. Curr Cancer Drug Targets 2008;8:110­7.

