Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1768 (2007) 2478 ­ 2490 www.elsevier.com/locate/bbamem

Role of 57­72 loop in the allosteric action of bile salts on pancreatic IB phospholipase A2: Regulation of fat and cholesterol homeostasis
Bao-Zhu Yu a , Rafael J. Apitz-Castro b , Mahendra K. Jain a,, Otto G. Berg c,
c

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716, USA b Department of Biophysics, IVIC, Apartado 21827, Caracas, Venezuela Department of Molecular Evolution, Uppsala University Evolutionary Biology Center, Uppsala, Sweden Received 28 February 2007; received in revised form 8 May 2007; accepted 22 May 2007 Available online 26 May 2007

a

Abstract Mono- and biphasic kinetic effects of bile salts on the pancreatic IB phospholipase A2 (PLA2) catalyzed interfacial hydrolysis are characterized. This novel phenomenon is modeled as allosteric action of bile salts with PLA2 at the interface. The results and controls also show that these kinetic effects are not due to surface dilution or solubilization or disruption of the bilayer interface where in the mixed-micelles substrate replenishment becomes the rate-limiting step. The PLA2-catalyzed rate of hydrolysis of zwitterionic dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine (DMPC) vesicles depends on the concentration and structure of the bile salt. The sigmoidal rate increase with cholate saturates at 0.06 mole fraction and changes little at the higher mole fractions. Also, with the rate-lowering bile salts (B), such as taurochenodeoxycholate (TCDOC), the initial sigmoidal rate increase at lower mole fraction is followed by nearly complete reversal to the rate at the pre-activation level at higher mole fractions. The rate-lowering effect of TCDOC is not observed with the (62­66)-loop deleted PLA2, or with the Naja venom PLA2 that is evolutionarily devoid of the loop. The rate increase is modeled with the assumption that the binding of PLA2 to DMPC interface is cooperatively  promoted by bile salt followed by allosteric kcat -activation of the bound enzyme by the anionic interface. The rate-lowering effect of bile salts is attributed to the formation of a specific catalytically inert EB complex in the interface, which is noticeably different than the 1:1 EB complex in the aqueous phase. The cholate-activated rate of hydrolysis is lowered by hypolidemic ezetimibe and guggul extract which are not interfacial competitive inhibitors of PLA2. We propose that the biphasic modulation of the pancreatic PLA2 activity by bile salts regulates gastrointestinal fat metabolism and cholesterol homeostasis. © 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Abbreviations: Analytical parameters are defined in Scheme A1 in Appendix A. Structures of the bile salts and conjugates are given in Figure 1. DMPC, 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-3-glycerophospho-choline; DMPM, 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-3-glycerophospho-methanol; DOC, deoxycholate; DTPC, 1,2-ditetradecyl-rac-3-glycerophosphocholine; i-face, the interface binding surface of PLA2; LPC, 1-myristoyl-sn-3-glycerophospho-choline; MA, myristic acid; MJ33, 1hexadecyl-3-(trifluoroethyl)-rac-glycero-2-phosphomethanol; PGU, 2-dodecanylamino-hexanol-2-phosphoglycol; PLA2, group IB phospholipase A2 from pig pancreas; POPC, 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-3-glycerophospho-choline; products, LPC+MA (1:1); TCDOC, taurochenodeoxycholate; TDOC, taurodeoxycholate; TMA-DPH, trimethylammonium-diphenylhexatriene; WT, wild type PLA2  We dedicate this work to Gerardus Horreus de Haas (1931­2006) who established the ground rules for Interfacial Enzymology.  Corresponding authors. Tel.: +1 302 831 2968; fax: +1 302 831 6335. E-mail address: mkjain@udel.edu (M.K. Jain). 0005-2736/$ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.bbamem.2007.05.019

Gastrointestinal uptake of dietary fat and its metabolic consequences is a major human health concern [1­3]. Fat emulsion in the digestive tract encounters in stages bile salts secreted with the gastric, pancreatic and intestinal enzymes including pancreatic IB phospholipase A2 (PLA2)1 and lipases. The resulting changes in emulsion properties are likely to influence the interfacial kinetics of action of gastrointestinal enzymes [4­9], and therefore play a role in the processing and uptake of the emulsion components [1,3,10­13]. Triglycerides provide most of the fat-derived calories and phospholipids account for b5%. On the other hand, fat uptake is modified under conditions where bile salt and PLA2 secretion is affected, such as in pancreatitis, cholestasis, formation of gallstone, and gall bladder surgery. A role for the processing of dietary

B.-Z. Yu et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1768 (2007) 2478­2490

2479

phospholipid in the uptake of cholesterol and fat is also suggested in the PLA2 deficient mice or the effect of inhibitors of PLA2 [1,3,14,15]. These observations suggest a role of bile salts and pancreatic PLA2 in the regulation of digestion, uptake and excretion of dietary fat. Our hypothesis is that the gastrointestinal substrate for the pancreatic PLA2 is the phospholipid monolayer surrounding the dietary fat emulsion with a core of nonpolar triglycerides and cholesterol esters. Action of PLA2 on the monolayer would change the surface area and charge. The decrease in the surface area would increase the particle size so as to retain the total volume of the nonpolar components in the hydrophobic core of a reduced number of larger particles. Changes in the surface composition, as well as the area, volume and dispersity of emulsion, initiated by PLA2 and bile salt would therefore regulate the emulsion behavior at appropriate stages in the gastrointestinal tract. Constraints on interfacial kinetic behavior of the lipolytic enzymes [6,16,17] are such that the processing of emulsion surface would alter susceptibility and accessibility of the emulsion components. In turn regulation of the accessibility, metabolism, and absorption of the emulsion components is likely to influence the ultimate balance of the uptake versus excretion of emulsion with far reaching health consequences. The species-specific composition and concentration of gastrointestinal bile salts and conjugates (Fig. 1) appears to depend on the dietary and disease states. Little attention has been paid to the structure-specific kinetic effects of bile salts. Anionic amphiphiles, including bile salts, change the rate of hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine vesicles by pancreatic PLA2 [18­22] by promoting the binding of PLA2 and its allosteric activation [16,17,23]. In this paper we report a novel kinetic effect of certain bile salts. Depending on their structure, bile salts show a mono- or biphasic concentration-dependent effect on the PLA2 catalyzed rate of hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine zwitterionic interface. Results are interpreted in terms of the model in Appendix adopted from the interfacial kinetic paradigm [16,17]. The rate-lowering bile salts (B) apparently form catalytically inert EB complex in the interface. Properties of the corresponding EB complex in the aqueous phase, as well

as the premicellar complexes with other amphiphiles, provide insights into the behavior of EB, as well as the relationship of the bile-salt binding to the events of the active site, i-face and the allosteric site. Results in this paper also show that several other compounds specifically lower the cholate activated PLA2catalyzed rate. The effect of ezetimibe (Fig. 1) is of interest because it is prescribed to lower intestinal cholesterol absorption in humans [24­29]. Together we propose that the kinetic effects of bile salts and other compounds on the PLA2-catalyzed hydrolysis of dietary phospholipid regulate the gastrointestinal uptake of dietary fat and cholesterol.
2. Materials and methods
Bile salts (Sigma) were crystallized in ethanol to N98% purity. Preparation and characterization of pig pancreatic IB PLA2 [30], and Trp-substitution mutants of W3F PLA2 [31] have been described. Human pancreatic IB PLA2 was from Suren Tatulian (Orlando, FL). The 62­66 loop deleted PLA2 and Naja venom PLA2 DEIII were from Bert Verheij (Utrecht, The Netherlands). Ezetimibe, the active component of the Zetia pills (Schering-Plough) was extracted and purified. Its solubility limit of b20 M in pH 8 buffer precluded detailed studies. The components of guggul resin were fractionated by taking advantage of solubility, crystallization, and chromatography on silica gel and reverse phase column. Guggulosterones, cembrenes and other known [32] as well as unknown compounds were structurally characterized by spectroscopic methods. Sources of lipids and reagents as well as rationale for the choice of the experimental conditions and protocols are established [19,20,33]. Specific conditions and key protocols relevant to this study are outlined with suitable references.

2.1. Kinetic measurements
Aqueous dispersion of phospholipid was sonicated in a bath type sonicator, and virtually transparent vesicle suspension was annealed at room temperature [18,19]. Reaction progress for the PLA2-catalyzed hydrolysis of the sonicated DMPC (1 mM) vesicles was measured by pH-stat titration (Radiometer) with 1 mM 2-aminopropanediol base. The reaction mixture (4 ml) in the nitrogenpurged closed atmosphere in a thermostated glass reaction vessel contained 5 mM CaCl2 for DMPC (or 0.5 mM CaCl2 for DMPM), 1 mM NaCl, and 0.1 mM EDTA at pH 8.0 and 24 ± 0.1 °C [23,34­36]. Anomalous reaction progress observed in plastic vessel is not interpretable [37]. Reaction was initiated with about 2 pmole PLA2 in 1­5 l stock solution in 4 M NaCl and 2 mM (diether) dihexyl-phosphatidylcholine to minimize surface absorption. In

Fig. 1. Structures of (from left) masticadienolic acid, ezetimibe, and bile salts where hydroxyl groups at 3, 7 and 12 normally in  orientation except for 7-OH of ursodeoxycholate. Tauro-bile acids conjugated with taurine (as shown) and glyco-bile acids are conjugated with glycine (­NH­CH2­COO-).

2480

B.-Z. Yu et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1768 (2007) 2478­2490

this paper our focus is on the pre-burst rate obtained from the minimum slope in the reaction progress during the delay. Under most conditions this region lies between the initial pH-jump that subsides within 2 min and the onset of the burst phase after 10 min. With suitable precautions estimated uncertainty in the reported rates is 10%. The pH-stat protocol was also used for monitoring the rate of hydrolysis of DMPM (0.4 mM) vesicles in the presence of polymyxin B [35,38,39], or of mixed-micelles of 1 mM POPC with bile salts in 1:2 ratio [20,40], or of dioctanoylphosphatidylcholine micelles under the low salt conditions [41]. If suitably adopted and controlled, these kinetic assays provide significant mechanistic insights [16].

2.2. Fluorescence measurements
Fluorescence emission spectrum or time course of the intensity change from tryptophan or the energy transfer probe TMA-DPH were measured in the ratio mode on SLM-Aminco AB2 in a 1 cm cuvette containing 1.6 ml stirred buffer with 1 or 2 M PLA2 in 10 mM Tris, 5 mM CaCl2 and 20 mM NaCl at pH 8.0 and 24 °C. The slit-widths were 4 nm with excitation at 280 nm. The change in the fluorescence signal is expressed either as F - F0 or Fmax (=F/F0 - 1). Specific conditions and rationale are based on the results of earlier studies [42­46].

2.3. Isothermal calorimetric measurements
ITC titration of PLA2 with b1 mM (below the CMC) bile salt titrant was carried out with Microcal calorimeter (model VP-itc) with cell volume of 1.42 ml stirred at 300 rpm [42,45]. Successive injections were made every 5 min. Standard software was used for the peak integration. The heat change associated with the dilution of the titrant (bile salt) in the absence of the enzyme was subtracted from the heat change in the presence of 8.5 M PLA2. The net heat change per injection in the presence of PLA2 was integrated to obtain the bile salt concentration versus the total heat change plot.

modified not only by bile salts [20] but also by other wide ranging perturbations of the interface including the presence of products, other amphiphiles, annealing history, and size of vesicles [16,17,20,35,36,47­51]. Therefore it is necessary to establish certain constraints for the analysis of the stationary phase reaction progress [16,49] for the ensemble averaging of the turnover path. Detailed interfacial kinetic analysis also requires that the microscopic variables be ascertained. The model in the Appendix for the analysis of the effects of bile salts on the stationary phase rate from the reaction progress in Fig. 2 is based on the requirement that enzyme exchange between vesicles is sufficiently fast so that for each binding event only a small number of substrates are hydrolyzed. In this way, most vesicles will be hydrolyzed to the same extent and each active enzyme will "see" the same environment. This assumption is supported by the Kd value of about 0.2 mM under the kinetic conditions for the pre-burst rate, and it is likely to be lower with added bile salt and with accumulated products. Additional constraints and controls are summarized below. 3.1. Stationary-phase reaction progress Several features of the reaction progress in Fig. 2 are of interest. The rate in the pre-burst stationary phase is obtained from the mid-region of the delay phase where about 2% of the total substrate is hydrolyzed. The burst of activity at the end of the delay is due to in situ formation of a critical mole fraction of the products of hydrolysis [16,18,19,21,49,52,53], which is about 0.08 in DMPC vesicles at 24 °C. In the absence of an additive, the pre-burst rate is b10 s- 1 compared to the burst rate of 140 s- 1 when 6 to 10% of the substrate is already hydrolyzed. If DMPC substrate is covesiculated with N 0.08 mole fraction products of its hydrolysis, the delay is b1 min. Also the initial rate with these ternary vesicles is comparable to the burst rate. During the pre-burst phase of the reaction progress, the rate of vesicle-to-vesicle exchange of DMPC is negligible on the time scale of the reaction progress. Vesicle-to-vesicle exchange of the products formed in situ is possible within the delay period. However, net transbilayer and vesicle-to-vesicle exchange of both products formed in situ is considerably slower than that of the individual products. Microscopic variables underlying the delay and the burst rate are not established. In the model the product formed in situ during the delay has several effects. The pre-burst rate and the delay time are sensitive indicators of the changes in Kd of PLA2 bound to the interface. For DMPC vesicles Kd is about 3 mM (in units determined by the concentration of interface expressed as monomer DMPC concentration). Here the key consideration is that the pre-burst rate shows a 5th order dependence on the interfacial anionic charge density, which we attribute to a dependence of Kd (Appendix). A high Kd value assures rapid enzyme exchange between vesicles. Therefore with a 1000-fold excess of vesicles, the pre-burst phase of the reaction is likely to occur in the microenvironment for each enzyme molecule where the anionic charge from the product formed in situ is uniformly distributed.

3. Results The allosteric mechanism for the mono- and biphasic effect of bile salt of PLA2 is characterized on the stationary phase reaction progress during the course of hydrolysis of zwitterionic DMPC vesicles by pancreatic PLA2. Typical results are shown in Fig. 2. We have shown that such complex curves [18,19] are

Fig. 2. The PLA2 (2 pmol) catalyzed hydrolysis of reaction progress curve for the hydrolysis of 1 mM DMPC vesicles at 24 °C (continuous line) alone, or in the presence of 0.05 mM (dotted line top) cholate or (dashed line) tauroursodeoxycholate (TUDOC) in 2 mM CaCl2 at pH 8.0 and 24 °C. The burst of activity in the top two curves occurs after a delay of 10 and 20 min, respectively. The pre-burst rates are slopes in the first 5 min or less. A small background drift is not subtracted from the curves but it is not included in the reported rates.

B.-Z. Yu et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1768 (2007) 2478­2490

2481

3.2. Pre-burst rate depends on the concentration and structure of bile salt The delay is expected to be shorter and the stationary preburst rate higher as Kd decreases in the presence of anionic bile salts. As shown in Fig. 2, this is the case for DMPC vesicles in the presence of 0.05 mM cholate. Surprisingly however, in the presence of 0.05 mM tauro-ursodeoxycholate (TUDOC), the delay increases and the pre-burst rate is also noticeably lower. The concentration dependence of the pre-burst rate on DMPC vesicles in the presence of eight bile salts are summarized in Fig. 3. The key result is that the pre-burst stationary phase rate depends on the concentration as well as on the structure of the bile salt. Depending on the structure of the bile salt, the rate increases up to 15 fold between 0.02 and 0.06 mM. Also depending on the structure of the bile salt, at the higher concentrations, the pre-burst rate decreases to the level which in some cases at 0.15 mM is the same as in the absence of bile salt. For a detailed characterization of the rate increase and ratelowering effects of bile salts, our focus is on the effect of cholate and TCDOC on the pre-burst rate. In the absence of bile salt, the pre-burst rate is less than 10 s- 1. In the presence of 0.05 mM cholate, the maximum rate is 140 s- 1 and changes little at the higher concentration. The peak rate at 0.04 mM TCDOC is about 80 s- 1 and decreases at the higher concentrations. At 0.2 mM TCDOC the rate is approximately the same as the rate in its absence. 3.3. Model for mono- and biphasic kinetic effects of bile salts Reaction progress in Fig. 2 is obtained under conditions where the vesicle-to-enzyme ratio is about 1000 with vesicle size of 10,000 in the outer layer. With modest binding of the enzyme to vesicles, the reaction progress in the stationary phase occurs via the interfacial reaction path with predictable change in the turnover processivity in relation to the dissociation

Fig. 4. Rate of PLA2 (1.5 pmole) catalyzed hydrolysis of DMPC (1 mM) vesicles with (unfilled squares) cholate or (filled diamonds) TCDOC. Fits for three models based on Scheme A1 (Appendix) are shown. Some indepen dently determined parameters are used in all fits: K0 = KM = 0.65 mole fracM  tion, k0 = 20 s- 1, kcat = 240 s- 1, K0 = 3 mM, KEB = 0.005 mM for TCDOC, and cat d KEB N 1 mM for cholate. Parameters estimated from the fit with cholate are n = 5,  Ka = 0.024 mole fraction, KEB  1 mole fraction, K = 0.1 mM. (Model A:a) Continuous line is the fit for TCDOC with ideal partitioning and Hill number 1.5  for the formation of EB, KEB = 0.03 mole fraction, n = 5, Ka = 0.02 mole fraction, K = 0.1 mM. (Model A:b) Dotted line is with ideal partitioning and Hill  number 1 for EB, KEB = 0.022, n = 5, Ka = 0.02 mole fraction, K = 0.1 mM. (Model B) Dashed line is the fit with nonideal partitioning that saturates at  XB = 0.037 mole fraction, K = 0.02 mM, KEB  1, n = 5, Ka = 0.023.

Fig. 3. Effect of bile salt concentration on the PLA2 catalyzed pre-burst rate of hydrolysis of DMPC vesicles (under the conditions in Fig. 2) in the presence of (from top at about 0.07 mM) #1 cholate, #2 deoxycholate, #3 glycocholate, #4 glyco-DOC, #5 urso-DOC, #6 tauro-DOC, #7 taurocheno-DOC, and #8 taurourso-DOC. In some of these cases the pre-burst rate is not adequately resolved from the burst rate. Estimated noise level and uncertainty in the measured rates is about 10% and likely to be different in different regions of these curves.

constant, Kd, of the enzyme from the interface. The ensemble averaging with such assumptions and independently determined interfacial turnover parameters [16,48,49] reasonably describes the complex reaction progress. As shown in Fig. 4, a model developed in Appendix provides adequate fit for the monophasic effect of cholate concentration and the biphasic effect of TCDOC concentration on the preburst rate. The difference can be attributed to a change in a single step of the scheme A1 within which the alternatives for the falling phase are also considered. The rate increase is attributed to the enhanced binding of the enzyme to DMPC interface in the presence of bile salts or the products of hydrolysis, to the allosteric effect of the interface on the substrate binding, and to the chemical step of the interfacial turnover path [19,42,45,53]. The rate is modeled with the stationary phase assumptions where Kd for the bound enzyme decreases with the bile salt concentration. During the observed reaction progress, the variables in the microenvironment of the bound enzyme are estimated with the assumption that the enzyme and bile salt exchange as predicted by Kd and the partition coefficient K', while product inhibition, as well as equilibration rates of substrate and products, are assumed to be negligible [16,17,19,53]. Surface dilution is considered on the basis of bulk concentrations of the amphiphiles present and formed in the reaction mixture. The fit for the rising phase in Fig. 4 is attributed to enhanced binding of the enzyme with a fifth order dependence on the bile  salt mole fraction in the interface and to the kcat -activation of the bound enzyme by the anionic surface charge. The dissociation constant Kd for PLA2 bound to DMPC vesicles is 3 mM which decreases with the mole fraction of the products

2482

B.-Z. Yu et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1768 (2007) 2478­2490

 of hydrolysis [53] or bile salt [20] in the interface. The kcat activation by the interfacial anionic charge is 15-fold [54]. The forward and reverse steps of the E to E equilibrium control the effect of bile salts on the rate. Its description requires knowledge of the partition coefficients of bile salts, as well as the mole fraction of the accumulated product and their distribution in the vesicle population during the course of the reaction progress. These variables of the interfacial surface charge density determine the fraction of PLA2 in the catalytically active E form which is assumed to be constant after the onset of the stationary phase reaction progress. Values of these variables in the microenvironment of E are not known. For ensemble averaging of the turnover events at the interface during the preburst rate we assume that the variables are also averaged by the conditions in the reaction mixture. Modeling of the falling phase requires the assumption that PLA2 forms a specific EB (or EB) complex that effectively competes out the activated E state. The results show that KEB, the dissociation constant of EB, is such that it would promote the E EB shift at equilibrium. However, the measured value of KEB (ca 5 M) is not sufficiently low, or the estimated concentration of B in the aqueous phase is not sufficiently high, to compete with the strongly interface-bound E complex. Thus, the falling phase may be dominated by an inactive EB complex in the interface that forms when B binds specifically to E without disrupting interfacial binding. Two of the fits in Fig. 4 are for the models (A:a and A:b) where EB dominates in the falling phase of the effect of TCDOC. Assuming ideal partitioning, the falling phase cannot be reproduced with EB alone. Depending on the solute, the ratio of EB to EB could change. In model B it is assumed that the partitioning of bile salt is non-ideal and saturated at high concentration, but the biphasic effect is observed only with EB formed in solution. Without independent evidence it is not possible to choose one of these models, nor can it be ruled out that they may be related at the mechanistic level. There is uncertainty about the second order effects related to the nonideal partitioning, distribution and dispersity of the products and the additives in the bilayer. Rigorous interpretation of the reaction progress with significant amounts of products formed in situ would require understanding of the local concentration, distribution and phase mixing of the products and bile salts, and their effects on the PLA2 binding and activation. 3.4. Additional constraints for modeling kinetic effects of bile salts The boundary conditions for modeling the mono- and biphasic effects of bile salts are provided by the results and controls outlined below. For the calculation of the mole fraction of the added bile salt, we assume that bile salts are distributed on both sides of DMPC bilayer. Even if it is not so, the kinetic effects of bile salt are not due to asymmetric distribution because comparable reaction progress were observed with 0.06 mole fraction cholate codispersed with DMPC before the formation of vesicles. Also the reaction progress for the hydrolysis of DMPC with or without added bile salt is not

noticeably affected by the transmembrane potential induced by gradients of K+, Na+ or Ca2+ ions with valinomycin, monensin, or A23187 (calcimycin), respectively. The monophasic or biphasic effects of bile salts on the PLA2-catalyzed pre-burst rate are essentially complete below 0.15 mole fraction bile salt in DMPC vesicles. Such effects of less than 0.25 mole fraction cholate or TCDOC are not noticeable on the processive interfacial turnover rate in the scooting mode on DMPM vesicles [23,39], or on micelles of short chain phosphatidylcholines at high salt concentration in the pseudo-scooting mode [41]. These results show that the kinetic contribution of the surface dilution of substrate by bile  salts is small. It is consistent with KM = 0.35 mole fraction for DMPM [23] or 0.65 mole fraction for phosphatidylcholines [41]. Comparable kinetic effects of competitive inhibitors with these substrates also show that the bile salts do not change the  K to KM ratio [16,34]. These results rule out a direct effect of I   bile salts on the interfacial turnover parameters KM or kcat .  by the interface and kcat -activation  Allosteric activation of KM by surface charge is explicitly considered for modeling the rate activation. The monophasic and biphasic kinetic effects of bile salts on DMPC vesicles are not due to mixed-micellization or a change in the organization of the bilayer. The rate decrease due to mixed micellization is observed if the substrate replenishment becomes rate-limiting [16,36]. In our assay the kinetic effect of bile salt is essentially complete below 0.15 mole fraction (Fig. 3), whereas vesicle disruption and mixed-micellization begin at N0.3 mole fraction bile salt [55,56]. Also, the CMC of bile salts (0.8 to 5 mM range) do not correlate with the onset of the rising phase, or the peak rate, or the bile salt concentration at the peak rate. TCDOC lowers the PLA2 catalyzed rate of hydrolysis of dioctanoylphosphatidylcholine micelles with 2 mM CaCl2 under  the low-salt conditions where the enzyme is not fully kcat activated [41]. In this assay, cholate does not have a significant effect. The effect of cholate versus TCDOC is also different with POPC + bile salt (3:7 mole ratio) substrate [40], where the initial linear region of the reaction progress is the stationary-phase reaction progress. In this assay, the initial rate of hydrolysis of POPC with cholate is 150 s- 1 compared to 15 s- 1 with TCDOC, which is comparable to the difference at 0.1 mole fraction cholate versus TCDOC in DMPC vesicles (Fig. 3). The kinetic effects of bile salts on the hydrolysis of DMPC vesicles are not due to the gel­fluid phase change or the formation of mixed micelles. Anomalous effect of the gel­fluid thermotropic phase change on the delay during the hydrolysis of saturated phosphatidylcholine vesicles is dramatic and well characterized [16,18,19]. These effects are not seen on the burst rate of hydrolysis of DMPC containing the products, or the processive turnover rate on DMPM vesicles [57,58]. Also both below and above the transition temperature of 24 °C for DMPC vesicles, the rate increase is monophasic with cholate and biphasic with TCDOC (results not shown). Between 16 and 29 °C the peak rate increases about 10-fold with both bile salts with no anomalous effect at the phase transition temperature. The maximum rate with TCDOC is at 0.013 mM at 16 °C, and at 0.13 mM at 29 °C.

B.-Z. Yu et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1768 (2007) 2478­2490

2483

3.5. The rate-lowering effect of TCDOC depends on the 62­66 loop of PLA2 If the kinetic effect depends on the structure of the bile salt (Fig. 3), selectivity is also expected from the structure of PLA2. Results in Fig. 5a show that the rate of hydrolysis by human pancreatic IB PLA2 increases with cholate, and the rate increase with TCDOC is just noticeable. In Fig. 5b, the rate-lowering effect of TCDOC is not seen with the PLA2 mutant of pig PLA2 in which the 62­66 loop is deleted. For PLA2 the monophasic rate increase with cholate is comparable to WT but with a modest shift to lower concentration and with 40% lower peak rate. Also the cholate and TCDOC concentration dependence of the DE2 PLA2 (from venom of Naja melanoleuca) catalyzed rate of hydrolysis of DMPC is monophasic (results not shown). DE2 PLA2 is evolutionarily without the 62­66 loop [59]. These results suggest that the 62­66 loop in pancreatic PLA2 has evolved for selective binding of the rate lowering bile salts, presumably via an effect on the binding of  the second calcium and allosteric kcat -activation. The pre-burst rate for the hydrolysis of DMPC vesicles by PLA2 increases 10fold when the second calcium binding is saturated with kinetic 2 KCa = 5 mM. For the E71N mutant, the rate activation is about 4-

Fig. 6. Concentration (log scale) dependence of the effect of (filled diamonds) masticadienolic acid, (triangles) ezetimibe and (circles) TCDOC on the normalized rate of hydrolysis of 1 mM DMPC vesicles containing 0.05 mM cholate by pig pancreatic IB PLA2; and also (squares) the effect of ezetimibe on the hydrolysis of DMPM.
2 fold with KCa = 1.8 mM (results not shown). These results are in 2 accord with the KCa values for the hydrolysis of dioctanoylphosphatidylcholine micelles by E71N and D66D mutants [60].

3.6. Structural selectivity of the rate-lowering compounds The origin of the rate-lowering effect via a specific site on PLA2 predicts a structural selectivity that would be different than the effect of competitive inhibitors [16,17,34]. This expectation is affirmed by results in Fig. 6 where TCDOC, ezetimibe, and masticadienolic acid lower the pre-burst rate of hydrolysis of DMPC in the presence of 0.05 mM cholate. Note that the rate-lowering efficacies of ezetimibe and TCDOC are different with human (Fig. 5a) and pig PLA2 (Fig. 6). Score of other compounds, including aristolochic acid and aspirin that cocrystallize with PLA2 [61], did not show an effect on the preburst rate or the processive interfacial turnover rate. Of the ratelowering compounds, only masticadienolic acid has a modest affinity for the active site of pig PLA2 with 50% inhibition of processive turnover on DMPM vesicles at 0.02 mole fraction [62]. Analogs of masticadienolic acid could be useful as mixedinhibitors to study coupling of the bile-salt binding site with the active-site events. Also of interest are the components [32] of guggul resin of Commiphora mukul that has hypolipidemic effect [63,64]. About 70% of its PLA2 rate-lowering activity is extracted (Soxhlet) with hexane and remains in the nonvolatile fractions. Further fractionation showed that the activity is mainly due to six out of more than 100 components in the extract. Among the compounds that we have identified so far cambrenes were significantly more active than guggulosterones. Together these results suggest that the rate-lowering effect is due to the formation of a specific complex with PLA2 at the interface rather than the aqueous phase (Appendix).
Fig. 5. (a) The rate of hydrolysis of 1 mM DMPC vesicles by human IB PLA2 with added (squares) cholate or (triangles) TCDOC. As also shown the rate at 0.05 mole fraction cholate changes with added (circles) TCDOC or (diamonds) ezetimibe. (b) Rate of hydrolysis of DMPC (1 mM) vesicles by PLA2 (PLA2 with 62­66-loop deleted) with added (squares) cholate or (triangles) TCDOC.

3.7. Specific binding of bile salt to PLA2 mutants Several independent methods showed that bile salts form EB in the aqueous phase. Isothermal calorimetric results in Fig. 7a

2484

B.-Z. Yu et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1768 (2007) 2478­2490

depends on the position of Trp in the mutant. Trp-substitution near the N-terminus has a significant effect on KEB suggesting that the (1,10)-helix plays a role in the binding of B. KEB for PLA2 is larger, which is consistent with the result that TCDOC does not show the rate-lowering effect with PLA2 (Fig. 5b). However, the change in K EB alone cannot quantitatively account for the loss of rate-lowering effect suggesting that the kinetic effect is due to EB. It is not unlikely that the specificity for the bile salt binding to the E form may qualitatively parallel the binding to the interface bound forms of the enzyme (Scheme A1). Bile salts do not significantly protect catalytic H48 from alkylation in the presence or absence of calcium [65,66]. For example, in the presence of 0.2 mM cholate or TCDOC the alkylation time increases by about 15% both in the presence or absence of calcium. Also accessibility of Trp-3 for the quenching by succinimide or the oxidation by N-bromosuccinimide [31] does not change noticeably in the presence of 0.2 mM bile salts. These results suggest that the EB complex is formed without binding of bile salt to the active site, and that bile salts do not cluster on the i-face. 3.8. Rate-lowering bile salts quench fluorescence of TMA-DPH bound to PLA2 Results in Fig. 8 show that the rate-lowering bile salts quench the fluorescence signal from TMA-DPH bound to PLA2. The decrease in the signal intensity depends on the concentration as well as the structure of the bile salt. The rank ordering in Fig. 8 compares favorably with the rate-lowering effect of the bile salts at 0.1 mM (Fig. 3), i.e. in both assays cholate is least effective and TUDOC and TCDOC are most effective. The signal from TMA-DPH bound to free PLA2 or to EB and Ei# is not significantly influenced by the binding of calcium to the catalytic site, or by the occupancy of the active

Fig. 7. (a) Exothermic heat change on the titration of 8.5 M PLA2 with (diamonds) cholate or (triangles) TCDOC. Fit parameters (obtained by including the depletion of TCDOC titrant) are: KEB 9 M, H-12 kcal/mole, S, 3.5 cal/ mole/deg. Results not shown gave for TUDOC KEB b 2 M, H-16 kcal/mole; UDOC, KEB 37 M, H-12 kcal/mole; and for TDOC, KEB 38 M, H14 kcal/mole. (b) TCDOC concentration dependent change in the Trp emission (355 nm) intensity of PLA2 mutants: From top (up triangles) W3F/R6W, (squares), WT/3W, (diamonds) W3F/M20W, and (inverted triangles, bottom) W3F/K10W. The fits are for a single hyperbola and the parameters are summarized in Table 2.

show exothermic heat change on the titration of PLA2 with TCDOC, but no heat change is observed with cholate. Results with TCDOC could be fitted to a single hyperbola with apparent KEB of 9 M. ITC titration with TUDOC, TDOC or UDOC gave KEB values in the 2 to 40 M range with enthalpy change of - 12 to - 16 kcal/mole. These results suggest that the binding of the rate-lowering bile salts is largely enthalpy driven with a modest entropy change. As shown in Fig. 7b, titration of PLA2 with TCDOC is accompanied by a modest change in the Trp emission of PLA2 and Trp-mutants. Cholate had no effect on the emission from Trp-3 or Trp-6 (results not shown). The change in the Trp-3 emission intensity with TCDOC concentration is adequately fitted to a single hyperbola with Hill coefficient of 1 ± 0.2. KEB for TCDOC is modestly lower and Fmax is higher at pH 4 than at pH 8. The effect of TCDOC on the Trp-3 emission does not depend on the presence of calcium. As summarized in Table 1 KEB values for TCDOC and TDOC are noticeably different for the mutants, and the maximum change in the intensity Fmax

Table 1 Binding parameters a for the binding of TCDOC and TDOC to Trp-mutantsof PLA2 Mutant TCDOC KEB WT(3 W) proPLA2 62­66 R6 M K10 M R6M/K10 M A1W/W3F L2W/W3F R6W/W3F K10W/W3F L19W/W3F M20W/W3F K53W/W3F K56W/W3F K63W/W3F K87W/W3F
a

Tauro-DOC Fmax 0.15 0.20 0.13 0.05 0.07 0.02 0.67 0.23 0.30 - 0.24 0.13 - 0.01 2 - 0.22 - 0.025 0.11 - 0.02 KEB 30 Fmax 0.11

6 27 41 150 8 ? 210 18 50 4 3 75 15 21 3 200

N100 N100 10 0 0.02 4 10 44 - 0.02 33 35 2

0.1 - 0.02 - 0.07 - 0.27 0.26 - 0.06 - 0.06 - 0.02

Uncertainty in the parameters, if Fmax N0.05, is 20% with r2 N0.9.

B.-Z. Yu et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1768 (2007) 2478­2490

2485

Table 2 Changes in the Trp-emission spectra associated with the formation of the E# i complexes of PLA2 with decylsulfate Mutant WT(3 W) 3 W/6 M 3 W/10 M 3 W/6,10 M 6W 10 W 19 W 20 W without TCDOC E#, 1 E#, 1 E#, 1 # E1, E#, 1 E# 2 E# 2 E# 2 # E2 E# 2 with 0.2 mM TCDOC E# 2 E#, E# 1 2 none # # E1, E2 E# 2 E# 2 E# 2 # E1, E#, E# 2 3

none E#, E# 1 2 E#, E#, E# 1 2 3

Fig. 8. Effect of bile salts on the signal at 445 nm (excitation 280 nm) from an equimolar mixture of PLA2 and TMA-DPH (1 M each) in 2 mM calcium and 10 mM Tris at pH 8.0. The rank order for the apparent bile salt concentration for 50% quenching is (from top): cholate N DOC N glycoDOC N urso-DOC N TauroDOC N tauocheno-DOC N taurourso-DOC. These changes are not observed with W3F mutant (not shown).

site. Thus the signal change strongly depends on the experimental conditions, possibly because several factors contribute to the signal. For such reasons it is not possible to model and analyze the TMA-DPH quenching results [42,45]. Available evidence suggests that TMA-DPH remains bound to the enzyme in the EB and Ei# complexes. The signal from TMA-DPH bound to PLA2 is considerably smaller. Therefore it appears that the quenching of the probe signal is due to a change in the local energy transfer environment. This interpretation is consistent with the effect of cholate on TMADPH bound to Trp-mutants. Cholate has a modest effect on the signal from TMA-DPH bound to PLA2 with Trp-3 (Fig. 8), yet cholate significantly quenches the signal from TMA-DPH bound to the 10 W, 19 W and 20 W substitution mutants of W3F PLA2 (results not shown). We conclude that both cholate and TCDOC interact with PLA2 in the aqueous phase with significantly different consequences on the environment of TMA-DPH bound to PLA2. 3.9. Amphiphile interactions of PLA2 in the presence of bile salts Formation of a single EB complex of PLA2 with bile salt is noticeably different than the decylsulfate binding behavior. Sequential and cooperative binding of decylsulfate to the i-face of PLA2 to form three premicellar Ei# complexes is described as [45]: E  E#  E#  E# 1 2 3
n1 ;K1 n2 ;K2 n3 ;K3 þN1 A V þN2 A V þN3 A V

involves interactions of PLA2 with wide ranging amphiphiles at the interface. As shown in Fig. 9, TCDOC, DOC, or cholate (results not shown) modify the decylsulfate binding monitored as the change in the signal from TMA-DPH bound to PLA2. In the absence of bile salt, the effect of decylsulfate is biphasic [45]. The quenching up to about 0.3 mM decylsulfate is due to the # formation of E1 that is apparently not influenced by 0.2 mM DOC or cholate. In the presence of 0.2 mM TCDOC, the signal from PLA2 + TMA-DPH is small, and it changes little up to 0.3 mM decylsulfate. This is expected if TMA-DPH bound to PLA2 is quenched with TCDOC (Fig. 8) or with decylsulfate (Fig. 9), i.e. TCDOC and decylsulfate have a comparable effect, and the effect of cholate and DOC is different. As also shown in Fig. 9 in the presence of TCDOC and DOC # the signal increase above 0.5 mM parallels the formation of E2 # and E3 but at lower concentration than with decylsulfate alone. The difference in the environment of TMA-DPH in these premicellar complexes suggests a difference in the energy transfer efficiency associated with the cooperative binding of decylsulfate enhanced by both the bile salts. This interpretation is qualitatively consistent with other results. As shown in Fig. 10, intramolecular energy transfer from W3 to anthranoloxy acceptor covalently bound to K87 [67] is significantly modified in the presence of other amphiphiles below their CMC. Here the

Decylsulfate does not bind to the active site, however binding # of active site directed inhibitors is allosterically activated in E2 # and E3 . Therefore it is of interest to examine if bile salts and other rate lowering compounds influence the decylsulfate binding to PLA2 Table 2. Results with mixtures of amphiphiles are of interest also because Model A1 (Appendix)

Fig. 9. Decylsulfate concentration dependent change of the emission intensity from 1 M TMA-DPH mixed with 1 M PLA2 (diamonds) alone or containing 0.2 mM (circles) TCDOC or (squares) DOC at pH 6.9 in EGTA buffer. In the absence of PLA2 the signal intensity increases above the CMC suggesting that the signal intensity increases by the partitioning of the probe.

2486

B.-Z. Yu et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1768 (2007) 2478­2490

Fig. 10. Decylsulfate titration curves for 1 M 87-anthranaloxy-PLA2 alone (circles), or in the presence of 1 M WT PLA2 without any other amphiphile (unfilled circles), or in the presence of 0.25 mM diheptanoyl phosphatidylcholine (filled squares), or 0.2 mM cholate (unfilled triangles), or 0.2 mM TCDOC (filled diamonds) in pH 8 Tris buffer containing 0.05 mM Zn+. Characterization 2 of the labelled PLA2 and the controls for the interpretation of results are described before [67,68].

signal change is expected only if two or more PLA2 molecules are within the energy transfer distance. Thus results in Fig. 10 # show that the E2 complexes with decylsulfate are clustered, and # # E1 and E3 complexes are not. The shift in the presence of cholate and TCDOC suggests that both promote the decylsulfate binding to the i-face. Additional shift is observed in the presence of diheptanoylphosphatidylcholine which is bound to the active site but it is not hydrolyzed in the presence of Zn2+ [68]. Similar qualitative effects of bile salts are apparent in the decylsulfate titration curves with the Trp mutants. These results are also supported by the isothermal calorimetric titration where the decylsulfate binding curve changes to different extents in the presence of TCDOC as well as DOC or cholate. 4. Discussion The rate-lowering effect of certain bile salts on the pancreatic PLA2 catalyzed hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine vesicles is a novel kinetic phenomenon. We suggest that the mono- and biphasic kinetic regulation by bile salts and other dietary components is relevant to the gastrointestinal processing of phospholipids that could ultimately control the uptake and excretion of fats and cholesterol. Structural specificity of the rate-lowering effect of bile salts and other compounds provides leads for the design of drugs that could potentially modulate gastrointestinal cholesterol and fat uptake via a well characterized molecular target. The broader significance of the kinetic effects of bile salts, and the major issues that remain to be addressed, is discussed below. 4.1. Physiological significance It is certain that the dietary fat emulsion changes with gastrointestinal passage, however detailed understanding of the state of the physiological substrate of pancreatic PLA2 is lacking. The likely target of PLA2 secreted by pancreas is the

phospholipid monolayer on the surface of the fat emulsion modified by bile salts. The monolayer on the emulsion surface would contain amphiphilic phospholipids and cholesterol, whereas nonpolar cholesterol esters and glycerides will be sequestered in the hydrophobic core. Thus modification of the emulsion by bile salts and resulting changes in the interfacial activity of the lipolytic enzymes could influence the fat absorption and excretion [3,13,15,25]. This expectation is consistent with the result that PLA2 inhibitors [1,12] and the PLA2 knockout mice [3] promote excretion of dietary fat. The PLA2 rate-lowering effect of ezetimibe and guggul components may also be related to their effects on fat uptake. It is however intriguing that ezetimibe lowers the gastrointestinal uptake of dietary cholesterol but not the uptake of other lipidic components [29]. Such effects of ezetimibe are attributed to its glucuronylated form, which may also be related to other systemic effects of ezetimibe including potentiation of the effect of statins by inhibiting its efflux [29,69­71]. Also at concentrations N 20 M, well above its aqueous solubility limit, ezetimibe is reported to bind to acylCoA-cholesterol acyltransferase, apical drug efflux pumps, aminopeptidase N, and to a Niemann­Pick C1 like protein which appears to be involved in the intestinal cholesterol uptake. 4.2. Relationship of bile salt binding to the i-face events TCDOC does not lower the PLA2 catalyzed rate, which suggests that the 62­66 loop in pancreatic PLA2 has evolved for regulation by bile salts. Also the 57­72 loop regulates the low affinity calcium binding that increases the pre-burst rate in the presence of bile salts. The assay conditions to characterize the kinetic effect of bile salts are optimized to take advantage of the kinetic contribution of the loop and the second calcium site. This loop could also play a role in the charge compensation of anionic K53 and K56 by the anionic interface that leads to  allosteric kcat activation [54]. Several residues on this loop form the i-face which could control the active site via the hydrogenbonding network. It remains to be determined how the binding of certain bile  salts interferes with the kcat -activation step. Available results provide some insight. Enhanced decylsulfate binding to the iface results not only from the occupancy of the active site, but also in the presence of bile salts. If bile salts bind to an independent regulatory site, the extent of allosteric activation from such binding could depend on the structure of the amphiphile bound to the regulatory site. Thus the challenge is to model and characterize interplay between the active site, i-face and the bile salt binding site. 4.3. Kinetic effect of bile salts The zwitterionic phospholipid bilayer interface used to monitor the biphasic effect of bile salts on the pre-burst rate mimics the monolayer interface of dietary emulsion. One of the key conditions for the kinetic consequences modeled in this paper (Appendix) is high Kd for PLA2 bound to such zwitterionic interface. Kd controls both the rate increase and

B.-Z. Yu et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1768 (2007) 2478­2490

2487

the rate decrease. The rate increase is due to the enhanced  binding (lower Kd) and kcat -activation of the bound enzyme by the anionic charge on the interface. The rate-lowering effect is due to the reversal of E to EB, (EB) or EB complex in which B is bound to a specific site that impairs turnover rate. Other mechanisms, including non-ideal partitioning of bile salts, are plausible but cannot be tested at this stage. Potent hydrophobic rate-lowering compounds are likely to be ideally and nearly completely partitioned in the interface, and therefore their complex with the enzyme at the interface has impaired turnover rate. Weight of the available evidence with PLA2 suggests that the rate-lowering effect is dominated by catalytically impaired EB which may be kinetically related but not identical to EB in the aqueous phase. Although not conclusive, such processes that control the interface-to-interface exchange of enzyme are useful for a general understanding of the kinetic regulation of stationary phase reaction progress of interfacial enzymes [16,18,19]. The pre-burst rate increases 15 fold in the presence of certain bile salt (Fig. 3), as also seen with other anionic amphiphiles [5,6,16,17,19,50]. The effect of anionic B in the interface on Kd is modeled with:
0 Kd ¼ Kd =½1 þ ðXB =KÞn 

plexes. Within such limitations, premicellar complexes with decylsulfate provide insights. For example bile salts do not interfere with but do modify the stepwise and cooperative binding of decylsulfate to the i-face of PLA2. Also bile salts do not interfere with the binding to the active site of PLA2 in the premicellar complexes. These results suggest that specific binding of bile salts could modulate the function of the allosteric site for  the kcat -activation of ES [54]. Formation of EB and Ei# does not require calcium that is obligatorily required for the occupancy of the active site. However, binding of inhibitors to the active site is # # activated with the formation of E2 but not of EB or E1 . 4.5. Non-ideal partitioning and other possibilities Biphasic effect of TCDOC is also predicted with certain assumptions about its non-ideal partitioning and distribution in the interface. There is no reliable method to measure partition coefficient of bile salt in vesicles, let alone test the non-ideality assumption. It is still worth considering the possible significance of non-ideal partitioning because it could be relevant under certain conditions or may be responsible for some second-order effects especially in the context of the emulsion properties. As mentioned above, the mole fraction of anionic B in the zwitterionic interface controls Kd. For the sake of argument, if B is present only in the outer monolayer of vesicle, its asymmetric expansion would saturate when more B cannot be accommodated in relation to the inner monolayer or the core of the emulsion. If such surface saturation occurs at about 0.04 mole fraction and mixed-micellization occurs at N0.2 mole fraction, added B in the middle range could: (a) Remain in the aqueous phase and participate in the E to EB equilibrium. (b) Or extra B could still accumulate in the interface in a different form that participates in the E to EB equilibrium. Such possibilities are neither mutually exclusive nor unique. Also without independent evidence they cannot be distinguished from second order kinetic effects. To recapitulate, regulation of pancreatic PLA2 activity by bile salts provides a viable basis to understand the physiological role of pancreatic PLA2 and bile salt. In this search, kinetic results, as well as the properties of EB and other premicellar complexes, have provided significant functional and structural insights into the coupling of the active-site events with other interactions. Understanding of the bile salt binding site of EB or EB will be useful for realizing the pharmacological potential of the pancreatic PLA2 as a target for the regulation of fat and cholesterol homeostasis. 5. Note added in proof Y. Pan and B. Bahnson (J. Mol. Biol. 369, 439­450, 2007) have reported that there is no discernible effect of bile salt structure crystallographic structure of their complex with PLA2. As developed in this paper these results are not consistent with

where n is the number of B interactions that give the interfaceactivated E for the interfacial turnover. Thus with n = 5 at XB = K = 0.03 mole fraction, Kd would be lower by a factor of two. Kd would be 32-fold lower at XB/K = 2. On DMPM interface the surface charge density corresponds to XB = 1. With XB/K N 30, the Kd would be subnanomolar, which is consistent with the highly processive interfacial turnover in the scooting mode [23,57,72]. Structurally, n = 5 is consistent with the five anion binding sites on the i-face of PLA2 [73]. 4.4. Bile salts bind to PLA2 at the interface Results with premicellar complexes suggest that decylsulfate binding is altered but not blocked in the presence of bile salts. Also activation of active binding and the chemical step is # # observed with E2 and E3 complexes in the absence or presence # of bile salts but not with EB or E1 complexes. Beyond this we have not found a reliable way to characterize the interaction of the rate-lowering compounds with PLA2 at the interface. Properties of EB show a parallel with the interfacial kinetic effects of bile salts which suggests that a comparable complex may also be formed at the interface under the kinetic conditions. Since many of the rate-lowering compounds are very hydrophobic, they would also form interfacial complexes, and it is unlikely that their concentration in the aqueous phase could be sufficient for desorbing the bound enzyme to the aqueous phase. E in the aqueous phase is neither identical to the premicellar Ei# nor to the interface-activated E form of PLA2. It can be speculated that EB and its premicellar complexes differ from the (E), EB and (EB) forms postulated in Appendix to model the kinetic effects of the bile salts. We also do not know the microscopic variables that control the underlying equilibria between such states in the interface or in the premicellar com-

2488

B.-Z. Yu et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1768 (2007) 2478­2490

the activation or the PLA2 rate lowering efficacies of bile salts, and they do not even correlate with the solution properties of the EB complexes. Acknowledgements This research was supported by the Swedish Research Council (OGB) and an Investment Grant from Hira Nidhi, India (MKJ). Appendix A. The kinetic model The reaction diagram (A1) between enzyme (E), bile salt (B) and lipid includes most of the enzyme states that have been identified [16,17]: E is enzyme free in solution, EB is the specific and stoichiometric enzyme­bile­salt complex in solution; (E) is enzyme bound at the vesicle surface without activation, E is the fully activated enzyme interacting with a number of B-molecules in the interface. The branch (ES) describes the low enzyme activity in the absence of bile salt (or product) and ES is the fully activated branch.

 Here XB is the mole fraction of bile salt in the interface, and Bf  its free concentration in solution. The factor 1 - XB describes the dilution of substrate in the interface due to partitioning of bile salt; there could also be a contribution from a steady-state presence of product which has been neglected in this equation. M = 1 mM is the concentration of DMPC (if we consider only the concentration of accessible lipid in the outer layer, this number would be ca. 0.6 mM and some parameter values would change in a similar way). A.1. Partitioning of B The dependence of the turnover on the total concentration of added bile salt, B T, depends crucially on the mode of partitioning of bile salt in the vesicles. Assuming that each molecule of B that binds in the interface removes N lipids from further binding (saturable binding sites), one finds: 1 ðN þ 2ÞBT þ M þ K V XB * ¼ d 2 ðN þ 1ÞðBT þ M Þ þ K V sffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi) ( 4BT ½ðN þ 1ÞðBT þ M Þ þ K V Â 1À 1À ½ðN þ 2ÞBT þ M þ K V2 and Bf ¼ BT À MXB *=ð1 À XB *Þ ðA3bÞ

ðA3aÞ

ðA1Þ Scheme A1: Paradigm for the kinetic effects of bile salts. The top row shows the solution states, the middle row shows the interface-associated states that have not developed the activating interactions with B. The leftmost column shows all states with a B-molecule bound specifically; these contribute only for some bile salts, e.g. TCDOC. All binding parameters necessary for the calculations are shown in this diagram. Key boundary conditions within this paradigm are experimentally described in the text and analytically modelled in the appendix. If the state (EB) in Scheme A1 is removed from consideration, the binding polynomial for the enzyme is Z ¼1þ Bf K EB  n   * M 1 À XB * XB 1 À XB * XB * þ þ 0 1þ þ 1þ 0 KM * KEB * Ka Kd KM ðA2aÞ and the initial stationary (steady-state) phase turnover rate for the enzyme:  n   * M 0 1 À XB * XB 1 À XB * 1 þ kcat * v ¼ 0 kcat 0 KM * Z Ka Kd KM ðA2bÞ

K is the dissociation constant for B from the interface (partitioning). Setting N = -1 in Eq. (3) recovers the expression  for ideal partitioning where Bf = KXB holds. If partitioning is  saturable with N = 30 there would be a maximum XB = 0.03. A.2. Stationary rates in the presence of bile salts As there are no clean ways of measuring the amount of bile salt in the interface, we have tested the model calculations in two extreme limits: (A) Ideal partitioning (N = -1 in Eq. (3))  where XB and Bf increase throughout the whole range of added  B; (B) saturable binding where XB increases to a maximum level around 0.03 (N = 32 in Eq. (3)) and Bf in solution is nearly zero until this limit is reached and excess B enters solution only thereafter. Both pictures can be used to describe the bile­salt dependence of the PLA2 turnover on DMPC vesicles, albeit with different sets of assumptions (cf. Fig. 4). With addition of TCDOC or cholate, the turnover shows a cooperative increase around 25 M that can be described in the reaction scheme, Eq. (1), as an interfacial activation step due to enzyme­bile salt interactions with Hill parameter n = 5 and Ka = 0.025­0.035 mole fraction. Addition of more bile salt leads to a levelling off of activity in the case of cholate and to a sharp downturn in activity in the case of TCDOC. With ideal partitioning this downturn could come from the specific binding of B to E forming the inactive EB complex in the interface. The different behaviour of cholate could come from the fact that cholate does not form the specific EB or EB complexes. For one set of calculations (model A above) we assume that the downturn for TCDOC is caused by formation

B.-Z. Yu et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1768 (2007) 2478­2490

2489

of the inactive EB. However, it is difficult to generate a sharp downturn mimicking the effect of TCDOC in the falling phase from a 1:1 complex with B as shown in Fig. 4 where the dotted line is for a 1:1 complex and a better fit (solid line) can be achieved by introducing a Hill number 1.5 for the formation of EB from E. In a second set of calculations (model B above) we assume saturable partitioning of bile salt in the interface; then the interpretation of the biphasic turnover in the presence of TCDOC is more straightforward. EB can start to compete with the active E complex only when the concentration of B in solution starts to build up after the partitioning has been saturated. This would give a sharp downturn in enzyme activity in the presence of TCDOC, but not for cholate which does not form EB (Fig. 2). The theoretical curve with saturable partitioning shown in Fig. 4 (dashed line) is from Eqs. (A2) and (A3) using N = 27 in Eq. (A3a). Other parameter values 0 0  used are K = 0.02 mM, Kd = 3 mM, kcat = 240 s- 1, kcat = 20 s- 1, 0  = 0.65 mole fraction, Ka = 0.023 mole fraction, n = 5; KM = KM with TCDOC, solid curve, KEB = 0.005 mM and KEB1 assumed. The parameter space is large and the curves are not best fits; they were generated from reasonable assumptions and adjustments of parameter values from the experimental results (if available) and chosen such that the difference in Fig. 4 between TCDOC and cholate can be described by a single  parameter: the specific KEB for EB or KEB for EB. Also note 0 0  /kcat, KM and KEB have been that the parameters K, Kd , kcat determined independently. Substrate interactions with unac0  tivated (KM) and unactivated (KM ) enzyme are assumed to be 0 comparable because differences in KM have very little influence on the overall rate. References
[1] R. Homan, B.R. Krause, Established and emerging strategies for inhibition of cholesterol absorption, Curr. Pharm. Des. 3 (1997) 29­44. [2] C.M. Mansbach, P. Tso, A. Kuksis, Eds, Intestinal Lipid Metabolism, Kluwer Academic Press, Plenum Publishers, New York., (2000). [3] B.L. Richmond, A.C. Boileau, S. Zheng, K.W. Huggins, N.A. Granholm, P. Tso, D.Y. Hui, Compensatory phospholipid digestion is required for cholesterol absorption in pancreatic phospholipase A(2)-deficient mice, Gastroenterology 120 (2001) 1193­1202. [4] K. Mackay, J.R. Starr, R.M. Lawn, J.L. Ellsworth, Phosphatidylcholine hydrolysis is required for pancreatic cholesterol esterase- and phospholipase A2-facilitated cholesterol uptake into intestinal Caco-2 cells, J. Biol. Chem. 272 (1997) 13380­13389. [5] H.M. Verheij, A.J. Slotboom, G.H. de Haas, Structure and function of phospholipase A2, Rev. Physiol. Biochem. Pharmacol. 91 (1981) 91­203. [6] R. Homan, M.K. Jain, Biology, pathology and interfacial enzymology of pancreatic phospholipase A2., Kluwer Academic Press, Plenum Pub., New York, (2000). [7] A.B.R. Thomson, R.M. Kelan, M.L. Garg, M.T. Clandinin, Intestinal aspects of lipid absorption: in review, Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 67 (1989) 179­191. [8] B. Sternby, A. Nilsson, Carboxyl ester lipase (bile salt-stimulated lipase), colipase, lipase, and phospholipase A2 levels in pancreatic enzyme supplements, Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 32 (1997) 261­267. [9] T. Hamada, I. Ikeda, K. Takashima, M. Kobayashi, Y. Kodama, T. Inoue, R. Matsuoka, K. Imaizumi, Hydrolysis of micellar phosphatidylcholine accelerates cholesterol absorption in rats and Caco-2 cells, Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 69 (2005) 1726­1732.

[10] S.B. Rosenblum, T. Huynh, A. Afonso, H.R. Davis Jr., N. Yumibe, J.W. Clader, D.A. Burnett, Discovery of 1-(4-fluorophenyl)-(3R)-[3-(4-fluorophenyl)-(3S)-hydroxypropyl]-(4S)-(4 -hydroxyphenyl)-2-azetidinone (SCH 58235): a designed, potent, orally active inhibitor of cholesterol absorption, J. Med. Chem. 41 (1998) 973­980. [11] J. Earl, P. Kirkpartick, Ezetimibe, Nat. Rev., Drug Discov. 2 (2003) 97­98. [12] R. Homan, K.L. Hamelehle, Phospholipase A2 relieves phosphatidylcholine inhibition of micellar cholesterol absorption and transport by human intestinal cell line Caco-2, J. Lipid Res. 39 (1998) 1197­1209. [13] K.W. Huggins, A.C. Boileu, D.Y. Hui, Protection against diet-induced obesity and obesity-related insulin resistance in group 1B PLA2-deficient mice, Am. J. Physiol.: Endocrinol. Metab. 283 (2002) E994­E1001. [14] R. Homan, K.L. Hamelehle, Phospholipase A2 relieves phosphatidylcholine inhibition of micellar cholesterol absorption and transport by human intestinal cell line Caco-2, J. Lipid Res. 39 (1998) 1197­1209. [15] K.W. Huggins, A.C. Boileau, D.Y. Hui, Protection against diet-induced obesity and obesity-related insulin resistance in Group 1B PLA2-deficient mice, Am. J. Physiol.: Endocrinol. Metab. 283 (2002) E994­E1001. [16] O.G. Berg, M.K. Jain, Interfacial Enzyme Kinetics, Wiley, London, 2002. [17] O.G. Berg, M.H. Gelb, M.D. Tsai, M.K. Jain, Interfacial enzymology: the secreted phospholipase A2-paradigm, Chem. Rev. 101 (2001) 2613­2654. [18] G.C. Upreti, M.K. Jain, Action of phospholipase A2 on unmodified phosphatidylcholine bilayers: organizational defects are preferred sites of action, J. Membr. Biol. 55 (1980) 113­121. [19] R. Apitz-Castro, M.K. Jain, G.H. De Haas, Origin of the latency phase during the action of phospholipase A2 on unmodified phosphatidylcholine vesicles, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 688 (1982) 349­356. [20] M.K. Jain, J. Rogers, H.S. Hendrickson, O.G. Berg, The chemical step is not rate-limiting during the hydrolysis by phospholipase A2 of mixed micelles of phospholipid and detergent, Biochemistry 32 (1993) 8360­8367. [21] M.K. Jain, G.H. De Haas, Activation of phospholipase A2 by freshly added lysophospholipids, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 736 (1983) 157­162. [22] M.K. Jain, B.Z. Yu, A. Kozubek, Binding of phospholipase A2 to zwitterionic bilayers is promoted by lateral segregation of anionic amphiphiles, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 980 (1989) 23­32. [23] O.G. Berg, B.Z. Yu, J. Rogers, M.K. Jain, Interfacial catalysis by phospholipase A2: determination of the interfacial kinetic rate constants, Biochemistry 30 (1991) 7283­7297. [24] J. Earl, P. Kirkpatrick, Ezetimibe, Nat. Rev., Drug Discov. 2 (2003) 97­98. [25] W. Kramer, F. Girbig, D. Corsiero, A. Pfenninger, W. Frik, G. Jahne, M. Rhein, W. Wendler, F. Lottspeich, E.O. Hochleitner, E. Orso, G. Schmitz, Aminopeptidase N (CD13) is a molecular target of the cholesterol absorption inhibitor ezetimibe in the enterocyte brush border membrane, J. Biol. Chem. 280 (2005) 1306­1320. [26] H.R. Davis Jr., L.J. Zhu, L.M. Hoos, G. Tetzloff, M. Maguire, J. Liu, X. Yao, S.P. Iyer, M.H. Lam, E.G. Lund, P.A. Detmers, M.P. Graziano, S.W. Altmann, Niemann­Pick C1 Like 1 (NPC1L1) is the intestinal phytosterol and cholesterol transporter and a key modulator of whole-body cholesterol homeostasis, J. Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 33586­33592. [27] U. Seedorf, T. Engel, A. Lueken, G. Bode, S. Lorkowski, G. Assmann, Cholesterol absorption inhibitor Ezetimibe blocks uptake of oxidized LDL in human macrophages, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 320 (2004) 1337­1341. [28] J.W. Clader, D.A. Burnett, M.A. Caplan, M.S. Domalski, S. Dugar, W. Vaccaro, R. Sher, M.E. Browne, H. Zhao, R.E. Burrier, B. Salisbury, H.R. Davis, 2_Azetidinone cholesterol absorption inhibitors: structure­activity relationships on the heterocyclic nucleus, J. Med. Chem. 39 (1996) 3684­3693. [29] G. Schmitz, A. Schmitz-Madry, P. Ugocsai, Pharmacogenetics and pharmacogenomics of cholesterol-lowering therapy, Curr. Opin. Lipidol. 18 (2007) 164­173. [30] M.M. Thunnissen, E. Ab, K.H. Kalk, J. Drent, B.W. Dijkstra, O.P. Kuipers, R. Dijkman, G.H. de Haas, H.M. Verheij, X-ray structure of phospholipase A2 complexed with a substrate-derived inhibitor, Nature 347 (1990) 689­691. [31] Y. Tsai, B.-Z. Yu, Y. Wang, J.W. Chen, M.K. Jain, Desolvation map of the iface of phospholipase A2, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1758 (2006) 653­665. [32] L.O. Hanus, T. Rezanka, V.M. Dembitsky, A. Mousssaieff, Myrrh-- Commiphora chemistry, Biomed. Papers 149 (2005) 3­28.

2490

B.-Z. Yu et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1768 (2007) 2478­2490 G.H. De Haas, Interaction of phospholipase A2 and phospholipid bilayers, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 688 (1982) 341­348. B.Z. Yu, M.J. Poi, U.A. Ramagopal, R. Jain, S. Ramakumar, O.G. Berg, M.D. Tsai, K. Sekar, M.K. Jain, Structural basis of the anionic interface preference and kcat activation of pancreatic phospholipase A2, Biochemistry 39 (2000) 12312­12323. M.C. Carey, Bile salt structure and phase equilibria in aqueous bile salt and bile salt­lecithin systems, Hepatology 4 (1984) 138S­142S. D.M. Small, The physical chemistry of cholanic acids, in: P.P. Nair, D. Kritchevsky (Eds.), The Bile Acids: Chemistry, Physiology, and Metabolism, vol. I, Plenum Press, New York, 1971. M.K. Jain, J. Rogers, D.V. Jahagirdar, J.F. Marecek, F. Ramirez, Kinetics of interfacial catalysis by phospholipase A2 in intravesicle scooting mode, and heterofusion of anionic and zwitterionic vesicles, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 860 (1986) 435­447. M.K. Jain, J. Rogers, J.F. Marecek, F. Ramirez, H. Eibl, Effect of the structure of phospholipid on the kinetics of intravesicle scooting of phospholipase A2, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 860 (1986) 462­474. J.H. van Eijk, H.M. Verheij, R. Dijkman, G.H. de Haas, Interaction of phospholipase A2 from Naja melanoleuca snake venom with monomeric substrate analogs. Activation of the enzyme by protein­ protein or lipid­ protein interactions? Eur. J. Biochem. 132 (1983) 183­188. C.J. van den Bergh, A.C. Bekkers, H.M. Verheij, G.H. de Haas, Glutamic acid 71 and aspartic acid 66 control the binding of the second calcium ion in porcine pancreatic phospholipase A2, Eur. J. Biochem. 182 (1989) 307­313. N. Singh, T. Jabeen, A. Pal, S. Sharma, M. Perbandt, C. Betzel, T.P. Singh, Crystal structures of the complexes of a group IIA phospholipase A2 with two natural anti-inflammatory agents, anisic acid, and atropine reveal a similar mode of binding, Proteins 64 (2006) 89­100. M.K. Jain, B.Z. Yu, J.M. Rogers, A.E. Smith, E.T. Boger, R.L. Ostrander, A.L. Rheingold, Specific competitive inhibitor of secreted phospholipase A2 from berries of Schinus terebinthifolius, Phytochemistry 39 (1995) 537­547. N.L. Urizar, D.D. Moore, GUGULIPID: a natural cholesterol-lowering agent, Annu. Rev. Nutr. 23 (2003) 303­313. G.V. Satyavati, Gum Guggul (Commiphora mukul)--The success story of an ancient insight leading to a modern discovery, Indian J. Med. Res. 87 (1988) 327­335. M.K. Jain, B.Z. Yu, J. Rogers, G.N. Ranadive, O.G. Berg, Interfacial catalysis by phospholipase A2: dissociation constants for calcium, substrate, products, and competitive inhibitors, Biochemistry 30 (1991) 7306­7317. B.Z. Yu, O.G. Berg, M.K. Jain, The divalent cation is obligatory for the binding of ligands to the catalytic site of secreted phospholipase A2, Biochemistry 32 (1993) 6485­6492. M.K. Jain, G. Ranadive, B.Z. Yu, H.M. Verheij, Interfacial catalysis by phospholipase A2: monomeric enzyme is fully catalytically active at the bilayer interface, Biochemistry 30 (1991) 7330­7340. B.Z. Yu, J. Rogers, G.R. Nicol, K.H. Theopold, K. Seshadri, S. Vishweshwara, M.K. Jain, Catalytic significance of the specificity of divalent cations as KS and kcat cofactors for secreted phospholipase A2, Biochemistry 37 (1998) 12576­12587. M.F. Stolk, M.C. Becx, K.C. Kuypers, C.A. Seldenrijk, Severe hepatic side effects of ezetimibe, Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 4 (2006) 908­911. E. Doherty, P.J. Lumb, G. Chik, A.S. Wierzbicki, Ezetimibe-induced hyperlipidaemia, Int. J. Clin. Pract., Suppl. (2005) 3­5. J.M. Havranek, A.R. Wolfsen, G.A. Warnke, P.S. Phillips, Monotherapy with ezetimibe causing myopathy, Am. J. Med. 119 (2006) 285­286. F. Ramirez, M.K. Jain, Phospholipase A2 at the bilayer interface, Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 9 (1991) 229­239. Y.H. Pan, T.M. Epstein, M.K. Jain, B.J. Bahnson, Five coplanar anion binding sites on one face of phospholipase A2: relationship to interface binding, Biochemistry 40 (2001) 609­617.

[33] B.Z. Yu, J. Rogers, M.D. Tsai, C. Pidgeon, M.K. Jain, Contributions of residues of pancreatic phospholipase A2 to interfacial binding, catalysis, and activation, Biochemistry 38 (1999) 4875­4884. [34] M.K. Jain, W.J. Tao, J. Rogers, C. Arenson, H. Eibl, B.Z. Yu, Active-sitedirected specific competitive inhibitors of phospholipase A2: novel transition-state analogues, Biochemistry 30 (1991) 10256­10268. [35] M.K. Jain, J. Rogers, O. Berg, M.H. Gelb, Interfacial catalysis by phospholipase A2: activation by substrate replenishment, Biochemistry 30 (1991) 7340­7348. [36] M.K. Jain, B.Z. Yu, J. Rogers, M.H. Gelb, M.D. Tsai, E.K. Hendrickson, H.S. Hendrickson, Interfacial catalysis by phospholipase A2: the ratelimiting step for enzymatic turnover, Biochemistry 31 (1992) 7841­7847. [37] B.Z. Yu, O.G. Berg, M.K. Jain, Hydrolysis of monodisperse phosphatidylcholines by phospholipase A2 occurs on vessel walls and air bubbles, Biochemistry 38 (1999) 10449­10456. [38] Y. Cajal, O.G. Berg, M.K. Jain, Direct vesicle­vesicle exchange of phospholipids mediated by polymyxin B, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 210 (1995) 746­752. [39] Y. Cajal, J. Rogers, O.G. Berg, M.K. Jain, Intermembrane molecular contacts by polymyxin B mediate exchange of phospholipids, Biochemistry 35 (1996) 299­308. [40] W. Nieuwenhuizn, P. Steenbergh, G. de Haas, The isolation and properties of two prephospholipase A2 from porcine pancreas, Eur. J. Biochem. 40 (1973) 1­7. [41] O.G. Berg, J. Rogers, B.Z. Yu, J. Yao, L.S. Romsted, M.K. Jain, Thermodynamic and kinetic basis of interfacial activation: resolution of binding and allosteric effects on pancreatic phospholipase A2 at zwitterionic interfaces, Biochemistry 36 (1997) 14512­14530. [42] O.G. Berg, B.Z. Yu, R.J. Apitz-Castro, M.K. Jain, Phosphatidylinositolspecific phospholipase C forms different complexes with monodisperse and micellar phosphatidylcholine, Biochemistry 43 (2004) 2080­2090. [43] M.K. Jain, B.P. Maliwal, G.H. DeHaas, A.J. Slotboom, Anchoring of phospholipase A2: the effect of anions and deuterated water, and the role of N-terminus region, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 860 (1986) 448­461. [44] B.Z. Yu, R. Apitz-Castro, M.D. Tsai, M.K. Jain, Interaction of monodisperse anionic amphiphiles with the i-face of secreted phospholipase A2, Biochemistry 42 (2003) 6293­6301. [45] O.G. Berg, B.Z. Yu, C. Chang, K.A. Koehler, M.K. Jain, Cooperative binding of monodisperse anionic amphiphiles to the i-face: phospholipase A2-paradigm for interfacial binding, Biochemistry 43 (2004) 7999­8013. [46] M.K. Jain, B.P. Maliwal, Spectroscopic properties of the states of pig pancreatic phospholipase A2 at interfaces and their possible molecular origin [published erratum appears in Biochemistry 1994 Jul 19;33(28): 8618], Biochemistry 32 (1993) 11838­11846. [47] M.K. Jain, R.C. Apitz-Castro, Lag phase during the action of phospholipase A2 on phosphatidylcholine modified by alkanols, J. Biol. Chem. 253 (1978) 7005­7010. [48] M.K. Jain, O.G. Berg, The kinetics of interfacial catalysis by phospholipase A2 and regulation of interfacial activation: hopping versus scooting, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1002 (1989) 127­156. [49] B.Z. Yu, T.E. Polenova, M.K. Jain, O.G. Berg, Premicellar complexes of sphingomyelinase mediate enzyme exchange for the stationary phase turnover, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1712 (2005) 137­151. [50] Y. Cajal, O.G. Berg, M.K. Jain, Origins of delays in monolayer kinetics: phospholipase A2 paradigm, Biochemistry 43 (2004) 9256­9264. [51] Y. Cajal, O.G. Berg, M.K. Jain, Product accumulation during the lag phase as the basis for the activation of phospholipase A2 on monolayers, Langmuir 16 (2000) 252­257. [52] M.K. Jain, D.V. Jahagirdar, M. Van Linde, B. Roelofsen, H. Eibl, Solute-induced acceleration of transbilayer movement and its implications on models of blood­brain barrier, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 818 (1985) 356­364. [53] M.K. Jain, M.R. Egmond, H.M. Verheij, R. Apitz-Castro, R. Dijkman,

[54]

[55] [56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63] [64]

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69] [70] [71] [72] [73]

