ARTICLE IN PRESS
European Journal of Cell Biology 89 (2010) 351­364

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

European Journal of Cell Biology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.de/ejcb

Ponsin interacts with Nck adapter proteins: implications for a role in cytoskeletal remodelling during differentiation of skeletal muscle cells
Katja Gehmlich a,n, Katrin Hayess a,1, Christof Legler b, Sophie Haebel c, Peter F.M. Van der Ven a,b, ¨ Elisabeth Ehler d, Dieter O. Furst a,b
a

Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Cell Biology, University of Potsdam, Germany Department of Molecular Cell Biology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany c Interdisciplinary Center of Mass Spectrometry of Biopolymers, University of Potsdam, Potsdam-Golm, Germany d King's College London, The Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics and the Cardiovascular Division, London, UK
b

a r t i c l e in fo
Article history: Received 1 August 2009 Received in revised form 26 October 2009 Accepted 29 October 2009 Keywords: Ponsin Nck Skeletal muscle cell differentiation Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) Protein phosphorylation

abstract
Skeletal muscle differentiation is a complex process: It is characterised by changes in gene expression and protein composition. Simultaneously, a dramatic remodelling of the cytoskeleton and associated cell­matrix contacts, the costameres, occurs. The expression and localisation of the protein ponsin at cell­matrix contacts marks the establishment of costameres. In this report we show that skeletal muscle cells are characterised by a novel ponsin isoform, which contains a large insertion in its carboxyterminus. This skeletal muscle-specific module binds the adapter proteins Nck1 and Nck2, and increased co-localisation of ponsin with Nck2 is observed at remodelling cell­matrix contacts of differentiating skeletal muscle cells. Since this ponsin insertion can be phosphorylated, it may adjust the interaction affinity with Nck adapter proteins. The novel ponsin isoform and its interaction with Nck1/2 provide exciting insight into the convergence of signalling pathways at the costameres, and its crucial role for skeletal muscle differentiation and re-generation. & 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

Introduction Skeletal muscle cell differentiation is a remarkable and unique process: Upon induction of the myogenic programme, migratory, proliferating precursor cells cease to divide, fuse into multinucleated myotubes and mature into contractile muscle fibres (reviewed in (Le and Rudnicki, 2007)). These processes involve complex networks of coordinated changes in gene expression and protein composition. Understandably, skeletal muscle differentiation is therefore accompanied by a striking remodelling of the cytoskeleton and associated cell­matrix contact structures: While proliferating and migrating myoblasts have small, rapidly turnedover cell-matrix contacts, the focal adhesions, mature myotubes are characterised by highly organised cell­matrix structures called costameres (Pardo et al., 1983). However, the underlying regulatory mechanisms controlling this transition, both in temporal and spatial dimensions, are not fully understood.

n Corresponding author. Centre for Cardiology in the Young, Department of Medicine, University College London, Paul O'Gorman building, Ground floor, 72 Huntley Street, London WC1E 6DD, UK. Tel.: + 44 207 679 6467; fax: + 44 207 679 6463. E-mail addresses: k.gehmlich@ucl.ac.uk, k_gehmlich@gmx.de (K. Gehmlich). 1 Present addres: Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, Center for Alternatives to Animal Experiments (ZEBET), 12277 Berlin, Germany.

We have shown recently that differentiating skeletal muscle cells express ponsin in nascent costameres shortly after onset of the myogenic programme (Gehmlich et al., 2007). In these structures, it interacts with typical focal adhesion components, such as paxillin, vinculin and focal adhesion kinase (FAK) (Gehmlich et al., 2007; Ribon et al., 1998a; Zhang et al., 2006). Simultaneously, ponsin is known as a crucial signalling molecule: it plays an important role in insulin signalling (Lin et al., 2001; Bernard et al., 2008; Lesniewski et al., 2007) and its involvement in the regulation of endocytosis has been shown more recently (Tosoni and Cestra, 2009). Additionally, ponsin appears to be essential for cell differentiation processes at least in adipose tissue and neurons (Langhorst et al., 2008; Ribon et al., 1998b). A still unresolved key question is, how exactly this protein is able to integrate such a variety of cellular processes and signalling pathways. At the molecular level, the sorbin homology domain in the amino-terminus (N-terminus) of ponsin mediates binding to flotillins, and thereby allows the association of ponsin with specialised membrane domains, the lipid rafts (Kimura et al., 2001). The three Src homology 3 (SH3) domains in the carboxyterminus (C-terminus) of ponsin mediate protein­protein interactions to a variety of intracellular cytoskeletal and signalling molecules such as paxillin, FAK, c-Abl, c-Cbl (reviewed in (Kioka et al., 2002)). As is typical for a scaffolding protein, most of these

0171-9335/$ - see front matter & 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.ejcb.2009.10.019

ARTICLE IN PRESS
352 K. Gehmlich et al. / European Journal of Cell Biology 89 (2010) 351­364

interactions are of weak and transient character. Depending on the local environment, the unique molecular set-up of ponsin allows for the assembly of highly specialised membrane-bound signalling complexes. However, the local availability of ligands cannot be the only factor controlling the assembly of these ponsin scaffold-associated protein complexes. One of the clues to the versatility of ponsin is the fact that the SORBS1 gene encoding ponsin is characterised by a remarkable number of alternatively spliced exons (Lin et al., 2001). Differently spliced ponsin isoforms could be a molecular implementation of tissue- and differentiation stage-specific scaffolds. In line with this, an alternatively spliced exon in ponsin has been shown to provide a protein kinase A binding site (Matson et al., 2005). In this report we show that differentiating skeletal muscle cells exclusively express a novel ponsin isoform which is characterised by a large C-terminal insertion between the second and third SH3 domain. A striking feature of this skeletal muscle-specific insertion is that it represents a docking module for Nck proteins. In addition, we demonstrate that this insertion is a substrate for protein kinase(s), which are active in differentiating skeletal muscle cells, and moreover, that the activity of these kinases can control the binding affinity of ponsin to Nck proteins. These findings shed new light on the complex process of cytoskeletal rearrangements at nascent costameres during myogenic differentiation.

et al., 2004). Purifications of His6- and GST-tagged proteins were performed using Ni-NTA agarose (Qiagen) or Glutathione-Uniflow Resin (BD Biosciences), respectively, according to the manufacturers' protocols. Antibodies The mouse monoclonal antibodies (mAb) anti-T7 and anti-GST (both Novagen), anti-GFP (Roche) or the rat mAb YL1/2 (a kind gift from Prof. J. Wehland, Braunschweig, Germany) were used for the detection of recombinant proteins. The following mAbs were used for endogenous protein detection: anti-focal adhesion kinase (FAK, BD Biosciences), mAB clone 8.8 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) recognising both Nck1 and Nck2 (Tu et al., 1998) and Vin11.5 against vinculin (Sigma). The antibody 653 (Van der Ven et al., 2000) was used to detect sarcomeric alpha-actinin. A rabbit polyclonal antibody specific for all ponsin isoforms was purchased from Upstate (via Biomol, characterised by Zhang et al. (2007)). A polyclonal mouse serum against ponsin was generated by immunising the animal with the purified recombinant ponsin protein fragment Ps SH3.2-C using standard techniques. To obtain an insertion-specific serum, partial antigen blocking assays were performed essentially as described (Geier et al., 2008), using purified recombinant ponsin protein fragment (Ps SH3.2-C DEx30,31) containing only the two SH3 domains. SDS-PAGE, Western blotting and immunodetection Sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), Western blotting and immunodetection were performed as described (Gehmlich et al., 2004). For two-dimensional electrophoresis, proteins were separated in the first dimension using non-equilibrium pH gradient electrophoresis (NEPHGE, Biorad Bio-Lyte ampholyte system, pH 7 - 10) essentially as described (O'Farrell et al., 1977). Western blot overlay assays For Western blot overlay assays, recombinant protein fragments were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. After blocking, membranes were overlaid with recombinant protein and bound protein was detected as described (Gehmlich et al., 2007). Yeast two-hybrid library screening Yeast two-hybrid experiments were essentially performed as described (Van der Ven et al., 2000). For submapping interactions, constructs encoding distinct portions of ponsin were cloned into the pACT2 vector and transformed into L40 yeast cells expressing the respective bait construct. Selection for reporter gene activation was performed according to the Matchmaker protocol in the presence of 0.5 mM 3-amino-triazole. To quantify the b-galactosidase activity, o-nitrophenyl b-D-galacto-pyranoside (ONPG) was used as a substrate in a liquid b-galactosidase assay as described (Geier et al., 2003). Cell culture and transient transfection experiments Culture of human skeletal muscle cells (HSkM), C2C12 and PtK2 cells and transient transfections with Fugene6 (Roche Diagnostics) have been described previously (Van der Ven et al., 2000). COS-1 cells were cultured and transfected with Escort IV (Sigma) as described (Lange et al., 2005). Transfected COS-1,

Materials and methods Polymerase chain reaction and generation of cDNA constructs Polymerase chain reactions (PCR), restriction enzyme-based cloning, plasmid transformation and purification were performed using standard protocols (Ausubel et al., 1987). cDNA libraries were purchased from BD Biosciences Clontech (human adult skeletal muscle and human adult cardiac cDNA libraries) and from Stratagene (human foetal heart cDNA library). Ponsin constructs used in yeast two-hybrid experiments, biochemical binding assays and transfection studies have been described elsewhere (Gehmlich et al., 2007). For transient double transfections, a ponsin cDNA fragment (Ps SH3.2-C) was cloned into pMYPR, a variant of the mammalian expression vector pMYPG (Van der Ven et al., 2000), in which the enhanced green fluorescent protein (GFP) sequence had been replaced by the monomeric red fluorescencent protein (mRFP) sequence (Campbell et al., 2002). The ponsin mutant constructs (P53H/ P54A, T49E and S69D) were generated using the QuikChange mutagenesis kit (Stratagene) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Full-length Nck1 and Nck2 cDNAs in pCB6 were kindly provided by Michael Way (Cancer Research UK, London, United Kingdom). For yeast two-hybrid experiments, the Nck1 and Nck2 full-length sequences as well as their individual SH3 domains were subcloned into a pLexA vector (Van der Ven et al., 2000). Two prokaryotic expression vectors pET23-T7 and pET23-EEF were used to express immuno- and His6-tagged recombinant proteins (Obermann et al., 1996, 1997), and pGEX-6P-1 (Amersham, Freiburg, Germany) was used for the expression of glutathione-S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins. Protein expression and purification For prokaryotic expression, constructs were transformed into Escherichia coli BL21(DE3)Codon Plus cells (Stratagene), and proteins were expressed essentially as described (Gehmlich

ARTICLE IN PRESS
K. Gehmlich et al. / European Journal of Cell Biology 89 (2010) 351­364 353

C2C12 and PtK2 cells were analysed for expression of the recombinant proteins 48 h after transfection. Immunofluorescence microscopy Cryosections of skeletal muscle from mdx mouse ((Bulfield et al., 1984; one year old, a kind gift of Dr Peter Zammit, Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, UK) and wildtype mouse muscles were cut on a Jung CM1800 Cryostat (10 mm, Leica, Wetzlar, Germany). Cryosections and HSkM cells were fixed in methanol-acetone for 5 min at À20 1C, and transfected PTK2 cells in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 10 min at room temperature, and subsequently permeabilised with 0.2 % Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 min. Cells were blocked with 10% normal goat serum (Sigma) in PBS prior to incubation with the first antibodies, diluted in 1% bovine serum albumin in PBS, for 1 h at room temperature. After washing with 0.1% Tween-20 in PBS, cells were incubated with secondary antibodies conjugated to fluorescent dyes as above. Following combinations were used: goat anti-mMouse antibody conjugated to AlexaFluor488 (Molecular Probes) and goat anti-rabbit antibody conjugated to TexasRed (Jackson ImmunoResearch) for epifluorescence microscopy; and goat anti-mouse IgG antibody conjugated to Cy3 and goat anti-rabbit antibody conjugated to Cy2 (both Jackson ImmunoResearch) for confocal microscopy. For mouse tissue sections, goat anti-mouse IgG Fab fragments conjugated to Cy3 (Jackson Immuno Research) were used. 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, Sigma) was used to visualise nuclei. After washing, cells were mounted in Mowiol (Calbiochem) or Tris-buffered glycerol with n-propyl gallate (Sigma) as anti-fading agent. Specimens were analysed and documented using an Axiophot2 photo-microscope (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) equipped with a 63 Â /1.25 oil PlanNeofluar lens, epifluorescence illumination and a cooled CCD camera (Visitron, Puchheim, Germany) or with a confocal microscope LSM510 (Carl Zeiss) equipped with argon and helium neon lasers using 40 Â /1.15 and 63 Â /1.32 oil immersion lenses. Preparation of cell extracts and immunoprecipitations Triton X-100 cell extracts from proliferating or differentiating HSkM cells were obtained by scraping HSkM cells of distinct differentiation stages from 10-cm dishes in PBS with protease inhibitors (Roche Diagnostics). After centrifugation at 900g for 5 min, the cell pellets were resuspended in ice-cold extraction buffer (1 % Triton X-100, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 2 mM EDTA, 138 mM sodium chloride, 5 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM potassium chloride, 0.5 mM sodium ortho-vanadate and protease inhibitors), and incubated on ice for 60 min. Subsequently, the extract was clarified by centrifugation at 50,000g at 4 1C for 15 min. For immunoprecipitations from COS-1 cells, cells were lysed similarly using extraction buffer supplemented with 60 mM octyl-b-glucopyranoside and 0.5% NP-40. Immunoprecipitations were performed as previously described (Gehmlich et al., 2007) using 1.5 mg anti-GFP mAb per experiment. For the demonstration of the endogenous ponsin­Nck1/2 complex, ponsin was precipitated as above from cell lysates of partially differentiated C2C12 cells (from 75-cm2 dishes) using 3 mg anti-ponsin antibody. In vitro kinase assays For phosphorylation assays, 5 mg of purified recombinant protein was incubated with 20 U active recombinant p42 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK, New England BioLabs) in 20 ml kinase buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 2 mM dithiothreitol, 0.01 % Brij 35, 0.5 mM sodium ortho-vanadate and protease inhibitors) containing 100 mM ATP (1 mCi [g-33P]ATP) for

30 min at 30 1C. The reaction was terminated by adding 5 ml of 5-fold concentrated SDS-sample buffer and boiling for 3 min. Subsequently, samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE. After drying the gels, incorporation of radioactivity was detected by autoradiography (Fujifilm, Tokyo, Japan). For phosphorylation using Triton X-100 extracts of cultured HSkM cells, 20 mg recombinant protein was mixed with 50 mg of extracted proteins and 5 mCi [g-33P]ATP in kinase buffer (total volume of 80 ml). Prior to SDS-PAGE, recombinant protein was immunoprecipitated using the anti-T7 mAb. For inhibition of p38 MAPK, the inhibitor SB203580 (Calbiochem) was directly added to the in vitro kinase mixture at a concentration of 10 mM. For two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, phosphorylation was performed either with recombinant MAPK or with cell extracts (10 mg extracted protein) and 1 mM unlabelled ATP.

HPLC/mass spectrometry In vitro phosphorylated protein and untreated protein were digested with 0.5 mg trypsin (sequencing grade; Boehringer Mannheim) in 50 ml of 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37 1C overnight. Peptides obtained by proteolytic cleavage were separated by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RPHPLC, SMART system, Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden) on a Pharmacia C2/C18 SC 2.1/10 column using a linear 0-50% (v/v) acetonitrile gradient containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (100 ml/min). Absorbance was monitored at 214 nm. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectra were obtained using a Reflex II MALDI-TOF instrument (Bruker-Daltonik, Bremen, Germany) in the reflector mode. For sample preparation, 1 ml of the eluate fractions of interest was mixed on target with 1 ml of matrix solution (2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid, 20 mg/ml in 20% (v/v) aqueous methanol) and dried under a gentle stream of air. Nanoelectrospray quadrupole time of flight (NanoESI Q-TOF) MS/ MS spectra were recorded using an API QSTAR pulsar I (Applied Biosystems/MDS Sciex, Toronto, Canada) hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. The ion of interest was selected in the Q1 quadrupole. Fragments were generated in the collision cell by collision with argon and analysed in the TOF mass analyser.

Results Skeletal muscle ponsin contains a large C-terminal insertion The ponsin gene displays high molecular complexity with 13 alternatively spliced exons out of a total number of 34 (Lin et al., 2001). In an attempt to clone a skeletal muscle full-length cDNA for ponsin via reverse transcriptase-PCR (Gehmlich et al., 2007), we identified a 278-amino-acid (aa) insertion between the second and third SH3 domain in the C-terminus (Fig. 1A, B). This insertion is mainly encoded by the alternatively spliced exon 30; only the C-terminal 20 aa are encoded by exon 31. The expression of this module in cDNA pools of human heart, skeletal muscle and foetal heart was analysed by PCR (Fig. 1C) using a primer pair flanking the insertion. Interestingly, the larger variant was only amplified from skeletal muscle cDNA pools (Fig. 1C left, lane 2), whereas from adult and foetal heart cDNA pools exclusively the variant lacking exons 30 and 31 was amplified (Fig. 1C left, lane 1 and 3). This indicates that the insertion is a skeletal muscle-specific module.

ARTICLE IN PRESS
354 K. Gehmlich et al. / European Journal of Cell Biology 89 (2010) 351­364

Fig. 1. Skeletal muscle ponsin contains a long C-terminal insertion. (A) Schematic drawing of the ponsin C-terminus indicating the position of the insertion, which is encoded by the alternatively spliced exons 30 and 31 (grey); the second and third SH3 domains are depicted as black boxes. The position of primers I-III used to amplify C-terminal portions of ponsin is indicated. (B) The amino acid sequence of the skeletal muscle specific insertion (capital letters), plus flanking sequences (small letters). The portion encoded by exon 31 is double-underlined (aa 259 ­ 278), the potential MAPK phosphorylation sites (SP/TP) are underlined and numbered. The proline-rich motif (aa 50­56), which was identified as a novel Nck-binding site, is printed in italics. The phosphorylated peptides (as identified by mass-spectrometry, see Fig. 9) are given in bold. The PQQP motif that is disrupted by the insertion, is boxed. (C) PCR products obtained with primer pairs I + III (left) or II + III (right), respectively, from different human cross-striated muscle tissue cDNA libraries. Lane 1, adult heart; lane 2, adult skeletal muscle; lane 3, foetal heart; lane 4 (ctr), no template. While ponsin transcripts are present in all tissues at comparable levels, the insertion is only detected in skeletal muscle tissue. Predicted amplicon sizes: primer combination I + III: 585 base pairs (bp) without the insertion, 1419 bp with the insertion; primer combination II + III: 261 bp. The position of marker bands in kbp is given at the left. (D) Western blot analysis of human skeletal muscle cells (differentiating for four days, HSkM 4d) and adult rat tissues: TA, tibialis anterior (fast skeletal muscle); SOL, soleus (slow skeletal muscle); and liver. Ponsin is detected as a single band in differentiating skeletal muscle cells, slow adult skeletal muscle and liver. The difference in size between skeletal muscle and non-muscle tissue (liver) is indicative for the presence of the skeletal muscle-specific insertion in skeletal muscle tissues. The position of marker bands in kDa is given at the left. (E) Expression of the skeletal muscle-specific insertion in pre-costameres of differentiating skeletal muscle cells. A polyclonal serum against the skeletal muscle-specific insertion and a pan-ponsin antibody recognising an N-terminal epitope stain pre-costameres of differentiating skeletal muscle cells (merged picture: pan-ponsin antibody green, anti-ponsin serum red). Bar: 10 mm. For control experiments underlining the specificity of the above serum, see Fig. 2.

In Western blots of differentiating skeletal muscle cells and adult slow skeletal muscle, ponsin was detected as a single band of approximately 150 kDa (Fig. 1D). This value is in good agreement with the predicted value (139.4 kDa) of the insertion-containing isoform. No variants without the skeletal musclespecific insertion (29.7 kDa smaller) were detected, whereas in non-muscle tissue, e.g. liver, only smaller ponsin variants without the insertion were detected. To provide further evidence, we raised an anti-serum against the skeletal muscle-specific insertion in ponsin (see Materials and methods). This anti-insertion serum labelled pre-costameres in differentiating skeletal muscle cells (Gehmlich et al., 2007), and this staining was undistinguishable from a commercial antiponsin antibody targeting an N-terminal epitope, recognising all ponsin isoforms (Fig. 1E, control experiments for the anti-insertion serum shown in Fig. 2). Hence, the skeletal muscle-specific ponsin isoform is located in pre-costameres of differentiating skeletal muscle cells.

Sequence analysis of the skeletal muscle-specific insertion in ponsin Secondary structure predictions failed to identify alpha-helical or beta-sheet fold regions in the 278 aa long insertion, suggesting that this module is relatively unstructured. The most conspicuous feature of the region encoded by exon 30 is a proline-rich motif (PPLPPLP; aa 50-56 of the insertion, Fig. 1B), which is homologous to the consensus sequence of SH3 domain-binding peptides (Macias et al., 2002). In addition, this poly-proline motif is embedded in a cluster of ten SP/TP sites, a sequence motif which is known to be potentially phosphorylated by MAPK (Davis, 1993).

The proline-rich region in the insertion mediates binding to Nck proteins No intra-molecular interactions between the proline-rich motif in the insertion and the three SH3 domains of ponsin were

ARTICLE IN PRESS
K. Gehmlich et al. / European Journal of Cell Biology 89 (2010) 351­364 355

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4 (4) (3) (2) (1) 1 2 3 2 3

proteins 1 2

anti-insertion 3 Ps SH3.1-C-GFP

GFP 1 2 3

anti-insertion Ps SH3.1-C

merge Ex30,31-GFP

GFP

anti-insertion

merge

of both Nck2 and the related Nck1 were used in yeast two-hybrid assays. When co-expressed with the Ps SH3.2-C bait, only the second SH3 domains of both Nck proteins resulted in activation of the reporter genes (Fig. 3B), whereas all other SH3 domains tested were essentially negative. The novel interaction between Nck proteins and the skeletal muscle-specific insertion of ponsin was confirmed in co-immunoprecipitation experiments: Ps SH3.2-C co-purified with both Nck1 and Nck2 GFP fusion proteins in COS-1 cells, whereas virtually no binding to the control protein GFP was observed (Fig. 4A). To confirm the binding sites, Western blot overlay experiments were performed. The binding site within the ponsin C-terminus was mapped to the skeletal muscle-specific insertion (Fig. 4B), while no binding was observed to a protein fragment lacking the insertion, (Ps SH3.2-C DEx30,31), despite the presence of the PQQP motif (Fig. 4B). As already indicated by the yeast two-hybrid experiments (Fig. 3A), further Western blot overlay experiments confirmed that the SH3 domains and the exon 31-encoded sequences are dispensable for binding of Nck2 (Fig. 4B and data not shown). In agreement with our yeast two-hybrid experiments, the second SH3 domain of Nck1 mediated binding to the proline-rich region in the ponsin fragment Ps SH3.2-C in Western blot overlay experiments, whereas no binding was observed with the first or third SH3 domain (Fig. 4C). Moreover, co-immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that endogenous Nck1/2 was found in a complex with precipitated endogenous ponsin protein of differentiating skeletal muscle cells (Fig. 4D). In summary, we have identified a novel protein­protein interaction between the second SH3 domain of both Nck1 and Nck2 to a proline-rich motif in the skeletal muscle-specific insertion in the C-terminal portion of ponsin.

Fig. 2. Control experiments confirming the specifity of the anti-insertion serum used in Fig. 1E. (A) Specificity of the serum against the muscle-specific insertion of ponsin in Western blot experiments. Recombinant ponsin fragments: lanes 1, negative control (ponsin SH3.1); lanes 2, Ps SH3.2-C DEx30,31 without the insertion; lanes 3, the insertion alone (Ps Ex30,31); and lanes 4, a longer fragment with the insertion (Ps SH3.2-C). Left panel, Ponceau S staining; right panel, immunoblot. (B) Specificity of the serum in immunofluorescence microscopy. PtK2 cells (which do not express endogenous ponsin) were transfected with Ps SH3.1-C-GFP or Ps SH3.1-C DEx30,31GFP and subjected to immunofluorescence microscopic analysis 48 h post transfection. Both constructs showed targeting to focal adhesions as indicated by the GFP fluorescence pattern. The insertion-specific serum only recognised the ponsin construct which contains the insertion. Bars: 10 mm.

Co-localisation of Nck proteins with ponsin in differentiating skeletal muscle cells To study the relevance of this interaction in a myogenic cell system, the myoblast cell line C2C12 was transfected with fulllength Nck1- or Nck2-GFP fusion proteins together with the Cterminal ponsin protein fragment Ps SH3.2-C fused to mRFP. In double transfected proliferating cells, the ponsin construct localised at focal adhesions, identified by staining for endogenous FAK (Fig. 5). In proliferating C2C12 cells, Nck1 and Nck2 were mainly diffusely distributed throughout the cytoplasm with only partial focal adhesion targeting. Upon induction of the myogenic programme by serum withdrawal, the cell­matrix contact localisation of Ps SH3.2-C became more prominent. Similarly, the localisation of Nck2 changed from a mainly diffuse cytoplasmic one to a more pronounced localisation at cell­matrix contacts. In contrast, such dramatic changes in protein distribution were not observed for Nck1. These data indicate that the interaction between ponsin and Nck2 in cell­ matrix contacts is differentially regulated during subsequent stages of differentiation of C2C12 cells. Endogenous ponsin was not expressed in proliferating skeletal muscle cells (Fig. 6A), but the onset of skeletal muscle differentiation induced the expression of ponsin. Co-localisation of endogenous ponsin with the costamere marker vinculin was observed in differentiating skeletal muscle cells, indicating that ponsin is a component of nascent costameres, see also (Gehmlich et al., 2007). As observed in transfection experiments, also endogenous ponsin and Nck1/2 partly co-localised in cell­matrix contacts of differentiating human skeletal muscle cells one day after the induction of the myogenic programme (Fig. 6B). With progression of myogenic differentiation, the extent of co-localisation increased, and four days

observed (data not shown). Consequently, the proline-rich motif (if functional) is a potential binding interface for muscle-specific ponsin-associated proteins. Previously, a PQQP motif was identified as the Nck2-binding site of ponsin (Cowan and Henkemeyer, 2001). Since this motif is disrupted by the insertion, ponsin variants lacking the insertion should bind Nck2, whereas the presence of the insertion would predict to disrupt this association (Fig. 1B). To test this hypothesis, yeast two-hybrid experiments were performed to investigate the association of Nck2 with a set of truncated ponsin constructs (Fig. 3A). Surprisingly, we did not detect any binding of Nck2 to a ponsin construct that contained the last two SH3 domains but lacked the insertion (Ps SH3.2-C DEx30,31) under our experimental conditions, despite of the presence of the PQQP motif mentioned above. Instead, all constructs containing at least the insertion strongly activated both reporter genes in yeast cells co-expressing Nck2. A series of further truncated constructs mapped the minimal Nck2-binding site within ponsin to aa 1-66 of the insertion, containing the proline-rich region (Fig. 3A). These findings suggested direct binding of the proline-rich region of ponsin to one (or more) of the three SH3 domains in the Nck protein. To test this hypothesis, each individual SH3 domains

ARTICLE IN PRESS
356 K. Gehmlich et al. / European Journal of Cell Biology 89 (2010) 351­364

Fig. 3. Yeast two-hybrid experiments mapping the Nck­ponsin interaction to the insertion in ponsin. (A) L40 yeast cells co-expressing the bait construct and different ponsin prey constructs were assayed for activation of the HIS3 and the b-galactosidase reporter genes (lacZ); + and - indicate activation or no activation of the reporter gene, respectively. Note that all ponsin constructs containing at least the praline-rich region of the insertion (grey shading) activated both reporter genes. (B) Mapping of the ponsin-binding site on Nck proteins. Using the ponsin construct Ps SH3.2-C, the individual SH3 domains of Nck1 and Nck2 were assayed for interaction. Only the second SH3 domains of both Nck1 and Nck2 caused activation of the reporter genes. The third SH3 domain of Nck2 was auto-activating and excluded from the experiment (nd, not done).

after induction of the myogenic programme both proteins colocalised in pre-costameres of the myotubes.

important role of the ponsin­Nck1/2 regeneration processes in vivo.

complex

during

Up-regulation of the ponsin-Nck1/2 complex in dystrophic muscles of mdx mice The co-localisation of ponsin and Nck1/2 at pre-costameres in differentiating skeletal muscle cells suggested that this protein complex might actively be involved in differentiation processes. In normal adult skeletal muscle, the expression of ponsin is low and restricted to slow fibres (Fig. 1D, compare (Zhang et al., 2007)), and the same appears to be the case for Nck1/2 (Fig. 7A). We speculated that re-generation processes in the skeletal muscle may induce a higher expression of the ponsin­Nck1/2 complex. To test this hypothesis, dystrophic muscles of mdx mice were analysed, as they are known to undergo numerous cycles of muscle de- and regeneration (Collins and Morgan, 2003). Indeed, the skeletal muscle isoform of ponsin was up-regulated at the costameres of dystrophic mdx muscle when compared to wildtype counterparts (Fig. 7; see also (Zhang et al., 2007)). Moreover, also Nck1/2 was up-regulated in the mdx model, pointing at an

The skeletal muscle-specific insertion in ponsin is a substrate of MAPK To dissect potential mechanisms which might regulate the recruitment of Nck proteins to pre-costameres in differentiating and regenerating skeletal muscle cells, we aimed at identifying molecular features of the skeletal muscle-specific insertion in ponsin. As mentioned above, the insertion contains a cluster of 10 SP/TP motifs (Fig. 1B). As these are known consensus sites for phosphorylation by MAPK family members, we assumed that the skeletal muscle-specific insertion might be a substrate of MAPKs. To test this hypothesis, a series of recombinant ponsin protein fragments was used in in vitro kinase assays. Upon incubation with recombinant MAPK in the presence of [g-33P]ATP, the individual SH3 domains showed no incorporation of radioactivity (Fig. 8A). However, phosphorylation of the longer C-terminal ponsin fragment Ps SH3.2-C was observed, indicating that SP/TP motifs in the skeletal muscle-specific insertion, but not the SH3

ARTICLE IN PRESS
K. Gehmlich et al. / European Journal of Cell Biology 89 (2010) 351­364 357

Fig. 4. Biochemical confirmation of the interaction between ponsin and Nck proteins. (A) Co-immunoprecipitation experiments. T7-tagged ponsin SH3.2-C fragment, which contains the insertion, was co-expressed with Nck1 or Nck2 protein fused to GFP in COS-1 cells. GFP alone was used as a control. After cell lysis, GFP fusion proteins were immunoprecipitated and bound ponsin fragment detected by Western blotting with anti-T7 antibody. Ps SH3.2-C was co-immunoprecipitated with both Nck1 and Nck2, but not with GFP alone. (B) Western blot overlay experiments. T7-tagged ponsin protein fragments (100 pmol each; see Fig. 3) were resolved by SDS-PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose and incubated with EEF-tagged Nck2 (0.2 mg/ml) in blocking solution. Bound Nck2 was detected with an anti-EEF antibody. Note that Nck2 bound the ponsin fragments containing the insertion (Ps SH3.2-C and Ps Ex30,31), but not the fragment without the insertion (Ps SH3.2-C DEx30,31). In a duplicate membrane, the ponsin fragments were detected with the anti-T7 antibody and the detection of the Nck2 protein via its EEF tag is shown on a control blot. (C) T7-tagged ponsin fragment Ps SH3.2-C, immobilised on nitrocellulose (see above) was incubated with individual Nck1 SH3 domains fused to GST. Bound protein was detected with an anti-GST antibody. Whereas the first SH3 domain only showed unspecific binding, the second SH3 domain specifically bound ponsin. Control experiments confirm the position of the immobilised ponsin fragment (anti-T7), and the absence of unspecific signals with the GST antibody (anti-GST). (D) Co-immunoprecipitation experiments. Endogenous Nck1/2 was co-precipitated with endogenous ponsin using cell extracts of differentiating C2C12 cells (IP, lane 1). In contrast, Nck1/2 protein was not found in control experiments omitting the ponsin antibody (ctr IP, lane 2). For comparison, the diluted lysate used for the immuno-precipitions was also blotted (lysate, lane 3).

domains are functional substrates for MAPK in vitro. This finding was confirmed by experiments using the insertion alone (Ps Ex30,31). Furthermore, the deletion construct Ps SH3.2-C DEx31 was phosphorylated to the same extent, and also the minimal Nck-binding region (aa 1-66 of the insertion, Ps PRR) was phosphorylated by MAPK indicating that at least some of the phosphorylation sites are located in close proximity to the minimal Nck-binding region in the insertion. To investigate whether ponsin might be phophorylated in muscle cells in vivo, extracts of proliferating myoblasts and differentiated myotubes were used instead of recombinant MAPK. While extracts from myoblasts only weakly phosphorylated the insertion, extracts from myotubes showed greatly increased activity (Fig. 8B). This suggests that in differentiating skeletal muscle cells protein kinases of the MAPK family are activated and are capable of phosphorylating SP/TP sites in the skeletal musclespecific insertion of ponsin. Subsequently, we analysed the phosphorylation events in the skeletal muscle-specific insertion of ponsin by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. The untreated fragment Ps SH3.2-C ran as a single distinct spot on NEPHGE-SDS-PAGE two dimensional gels (Fig. 8C). Upon phosphorylation with recombinant MAPK, the original spot virtually disappeared. Instead, four additional spots corresponding to lower pI values were found. This indicates that recombinant MAPK can simultaneously phosphorylate up to four SP/TP sites in the insertion. Two spots corresponding presumably to mono- and di-phosphorylated protein were also observed

(together with un-phosphorylated protein) when a cell extract of differentiating skeletal muscle cells (2 days after induction of the myogenic programme) was used as MAPK source.

Identification of T49 and S69 as phosphorylation sites within the insertion In mass spectra of a phosphorylated sample, two additional peaks An and Bn were identified (Fig. 9A, peptide A aa 72­92, and peptide B aa 45­71 of the insertion, respectively). Both peaks corresponded to mono-phosphorylated peptides indicating that T49 or S69 as well as S73 or T90 are phosphorylated by MAPK. In a more refined approach, tryptic peptides of phosphorylated and control Ps SH3.2-C were separated by HPLC (Fig. 9B left). Phospho-peptides with distinct retention behaviour (arrows in Fig. 9B right) were analysed by mass spectrometry: One fraction contained predominantly mono-phosphorylated peptide Bn, while the second contained both mono- (Bn) and di(Bnn) phosphorylated species of the same peptide (Fig. 9C). Hence, both T49 and S69 are phosphorylated by MAPK. Furthermore, the mono-phosphorylated peptide Bn was subjected to a nanoESI Q-TOF MS/MS experiment. The fragmentation spectrum revealed that essentially one of the putative phosphorylation sites (S69) is phosphorylated (data not shown). Therefore, it appears that although both sites can be phosphorylated, S69 is the preferred one.

ARTICLE IN PRESS
358 K. Gehmlich et al. / European Journal of Cell Biology 89 (2010) 351­364

GFP (Nck1/2)

Ps SH3.2-C mRFP

FAK

merge

Nck1
0d

Nck1
1d

Nck2
0d

Nck2
1d
Fig. 5. Co-transfection of ponsin with Nck proteins in proliferating and differentiating C2C12 cells. Nck1-GFP or Nck2-GFP (as indicated on the left) was co-transfected with ponsin SH3.2-C-mRFP in C2C12 myoblasts. Cells were kept under proliferating conditions (0 d), or were allowed to differentiate for 1 day (1 d). Cells were fixed 48 h posttransfection and assayed for the localisation of Nck1/2-GFP protein, ponsin-mRFP and endogenous FAK as a marker of focal adhesions (as indicated on top of the Figure). Merged pictures: Nck1/2 in green, ponsin in red, FAK in blue. Bars: 10 mm. The indicated areas are enlarged in the merged picture. Note that ponsin SH3.2-C-mRFP containing the skeletal muscle-specific insertion localises to cell­matrix contacts of proliferating and differentiating C2C12 cells. In contrast, Nck1 and Nck2 show only weak localisation to these structures in proliferating cells, while in differentiating C2C12 cells, Nck2, but not Nck1, shows increased co-localisation with ponsin.

Phosphorylation of the insertion alters its binding properties to Nck proteins Both identified MAPK substrate sites of the skeletal musclespecific insertion in ponsin, T49 and S69, are in very close proximity to the newly identified Nck-binding motif (see Fig. 1B). To test whether phosphorylation at these sites might modulate binding of the ponsin insertion to Nck proteins, the two point mutants T49E and S69D were generated in order to mimic phosphorylation events. As a negative control, another mutant protein was generated, in which the consensus SH3-binding motif in the proline-rich region was destroyed (P53H/P54A). In yeast two-hybrid experiments similar to those described in Fig. 3A, binding of the latter mutant was abolished, whereas both phospho-mimicking mutants still bound Nck2 (Fig. 10A). In a more quantitative approach, the b-galactosidase activity of yeast cells co-expressing one of the ponsin constructs together with the Nck2 bait construct was determined. As expected, the P53H/P54A mutant showed significantly reduced activity when compared with the wild-type ponsin construct (Fig. 10B). These findings indicate that the proline-rich region in the ponsin insertion indeed mediates binding to Nck proteins. Yeast cells expressing either of the phospho-mimicking mutants together with the bait construct showed higher b-galactosidase activity than the wild-type ponsin construct (1.6-fold for T49E and 2.0-fold for S69D; Fig. 10B). This indicates

that phosphorylation of SP/TP sites in close proximity to the core Nck-binding motif increases the binding strength to Nck proteins.

Discussion The expression of muscle-specific proteins or isoforms is a hallmark of the cytoskeletal remodelling that occurs during skeletal muscle differentiation, and one of many examples is the protein ponsin. The protein is absent in proliferating myoblasts, but its expression can be detected shortly after onset of myogenic differentiation ((Gehmlich et al., 2007; see also Fig. 6). Moreover, differentiating and adult skeletal muscle cells are characterised by a tissue-specific variant of ponsin which contains an insertion of 278 aa between the second and third SH3 domain in the Cterminus of the molecule. This module, which is encoded by the two alternatively spliced exons 30 and 31, was only found in skeletal muscle, but not in cardiac tissue or liver (Fig. 1). In contrast to a previous report (Zhang et al., 2007), we could detect only one dominating form of ponsin in Western blots of differentiating and slow adult skeletal muscles, indicating that previously observed multiple bands are rather degradation products of skeletal muscle ponsin than multiple isoforms. Using an insertion-specific antibody, we could show that skeletal muscle ponsin localises to specialised cell­matrix contacts, the pre-costameres (Fig. 1E). This suggested that the skeletal muscle-

ARTICLE IN PRESS
K. Gehmlich et al. / European Journal of Cell Biology 89 (2010) 351­364 359

vinculin 0d

ponsin

merge

1d

4d

Nck 0d

ponsin

merge

1d

4d

Fig. 6. Expression patterns of Nck1/2 and ponsin in proliferating and differentiating HSkM cells. (A) The localisation of vinculin and ponsin was analysed in proliferating HSkM cells (0 d) or in cells differentiated for 1 d or 4 d as indicated. Note that ponsin was not detectable in proliferating skeletal muscle cells (see also (Gehmlich et al., 2007)), while vinculin is found in focal adhesions. In differentiating skeletal muscle cells, vinculin and ponsin co-localise at pre-costameres. (B) Identical cultures of HSkM (see above) were assayed for localisation of Nck1/2 and ponsin. In contrast to ponsin, Nck1/2 is found in focal adhesions of proliferating skeletal muscle cells (0 d). In differentiating skeletal muscle cells, Nck1/2 and ponsin co-localise at pre-costameres (1 d and 4 d). Bars: 10 mm.

specific module might have important regulatory functions for the assembly and remodelling of these structures. Interestingly, the insertion disrupts a PQQP motif, found in ponsin variants lacking the insertion (Fig. 1B). This motif fits the PxxP consensus sequence that was demonstrated to bind SH3 domains (Macias et al., 2002), and that was reported to mediate binding to Nck2 (also called Grb4 (Cowan and Henkemeyer, 2001)). Surprisingly, our assumption that ponsin variants containing the

insertion would be defective in binding Nck2 turned out to be wrong. Whereas we could not confirm binding of such ponsin variants that lack the insertion to Nck2, another proline rich motif in the insertion of ponsin (aa 50-56) was shown to mediate strong binding to both Nck1 and Nck2 (Figs. 3 and 4). Our finding that in a mutant version of ponsin, in which the two core proline residues of this praline-rich motif were replaced (P53H/P54A), binding to Nck proteins was almost completely abolished (Fig. 10), confirmed the

ARTICLE IN PRESS
360 K. Gehmlich et al. / European Journal of Cell Biology 89 (2010) 351­364

ponsin

Nck1/2

DAPI

merge
dx co nt ro l

mdx

ponsin Nck1/2

control

-actinin

Fig. 7. Up-regulation of the ponsin­Nck1/2 complex in dystrophic muscle of mdx mice. (A) Immunofluorescence of cross-sections revealing significant up-regulation of ponsin and Nck1/2 at the costameres of re-generating fibres in mdx muscle (top) compared to control muscle (bottom). DAPI was used to visualise nuclei, and central nuclei in re-generating fibres are marked with arrowheads in the merged picture (ponsin, green; Nck1/2, red; DAPI, blue). Bar 25 mm. (B) Western blot of dystrophic leg muscle of mdx mice and control muscle. Both ponsin and Nck1/2 are clearly up-regulated in the dystrophic mdx muscle. Blotting for sarcomeric alpha-actinin served as a loading control.

Fig. 8. Phosphorylation of recombinant ponsin fragments by MAPK. (A) In vitro kinase assays using recombinant ponsin fragments (see Fig. 3) and purified MAPK. Right: purified, recombinant ponsin fragments. Left: Autoradiograph of an identical gel (prior to electrophoretic separation, ponsin fragments were incubated with p42 MAPK in the presence of [g-33P]ATP). Note that only fragments containing the ponsin fragment encoded by exon 30 (Ps SH3.2-C, Ps SH3.2-C DEx31 and Ps Ex30,31) showed incorporation of radioactivity, whereas the SH3 domains alone did not. Importantly, the N-terminal part of the insertion containing the proline-rich motif (Ps PRR) was also phosphorylated. n: contamination of bacterial protein in the preparation of Ps PRR. (B) Autoradiograph of immunoprecipitated recombinant ponsin insertion (Ps Ex30,31) after in vitro phosphorylation in the presence of [g-33P]ATP with cell extracts from HSkM cells. Incubation with cell extract of proliferating HSkM cells (0 d) resulted in little incorporation of radioactivity, whereas extracts of differentiating HSkM cells (2 d and 4 d, respectively) yielded stronger phosphorylation. Phosphorylation using recombinant MAPK under identical conditions is shown. Control: identical experiment with extract of differentiating HSkM cells (2 d) in the absence of recombinant protein. (C) Purified Ps Ex30,31 was incubated in the presence of ATP with p42 MAPK (MAPK) or cell extract of differentiating skeletal muscle cells (HSkM 2 d) or left untreated, respectively, and resolved by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. The positions of the unphosphorylated (u) and phosphorylated (P1-P4) protein spots are indicated. Note that phosphorylation with a muscle cell extract yields single and double phosphorylation, while purified MAPK gives also higher phosphorylated spots.

specificity of this interaction. The binding site on both Nck proteins was subsequently mapped to their second SH3 domain. We assume that the originally described binding between the PQQP motif in ponsin and Nck2 is comparatively weak, and hence

might be below the detection limit of our yeast two-hybrid and solid-phase binding assays. In contrast, it is obvious that a highaffinity interaction exists between the skeletal muscle-specific insertion of ponsin and Nck proteins.

m

ARTICLE IN PRESS
K. Gehmlich et al. / European Journal of Cell Biology 89 (2010) 351­364 361

Fig. 9. Identification of phosphorylation sites in the insertion of ponsin. The ponsin fragment Ps SH3.2-C was incubated with recombinant MAPK in the presence of ATP. Subsequently, it was digested with trypsin and subjected to MALDI-TOF analysis. An identical sample of the protein fragment incubated in the absence of MAPK served as unphosphorylated control. (A) Mass spectra of ponsin-derived peptides. In the sample that had been incubated with recombinant MAPK two phosphorylated peptides An and Bn were identified, while the intensity of the corresponding unphosphorylated peptides A und B was dramatically reduced. (B) Left: HPLC chromatogram of tryptic peptides of phosphorylated and unphosphorylated recombinant ponsin Ps Ex30,31. The region with striking differences in both chromatograms (boxed) is enlarged on the right. Arrows indicate fractions further analysed by mass spectrometry. (C) Analysis of HPLC elution fractions by mass spectrometry. In elution fraction #38 monophosphorylated peptide Bn was identified. In the subsequent elution fraction both mono- and double-phosphorylated peptides (Bnn) were detected.

The importance of Nck proteins for multiple cellular functions is highlighted by the effects of gene-targeting approaches in mice. The inactivation of either Nck1 or Nck2 alone does not result in an obvious phenotype, whereas a null mutation of both genes is

embryonic lethal at E9.5, indicating a crucial role for the Ncks in the development of mesoderm-derived tissues such as skeletal muscle (Bladt et al., 2003). Even though both proteins appear to have largely overlapping functions, it has been shown recently

ARTICLE IN PRESS
362 K. Gehmlich et al. / European Journal of Cell Biology 89 (2010) 351­364

WT

prey constructs: Ps SH3.2-C

bait: Nck2 P53H/ P54A S69D T49E p < 0.02 beta-galactosidase activity

p < 0.03 2.0 p < 0.002 1.0

0.0 WT P53H/P54A T49E S69D
Fig. 10. Phosphorylation of the insertion in ponsin influences its binding to Nck proteins. (A) L40 yeast cells co-expressing the Nck2 full-length bait construct and a ponsin prey construct (either Ps SH3.2-C wild type or the mutations indicated) were assayed for activation of the HIS3 reporter gene. Representative growth of one colony on selective media is shown. Note that disruptive mutation of the praline-rich motif (P53H/P54A) resulted in loss of binding to Nck2, whereas the phospho-mimicking mutations (T49E and S69D) did not. (B) Quantification of lacZ reporter gene expression for the same bait and prey combinations (see Materials and methods). b-Galactosidase activity was expressed as mean arbitrary units 7 standard deviation, with yeast cells co-expressing Nck2 and wild-type Ps SH3.2-C set to 1. The significance of the difference between the Ps SH3.2-C wild type and the mutants was tested by the Student's t test, and the p values are indicated.

that Nck2, but not Nck1, is required for neurite growth (Guan et al., 2007). In line with potentially differential functions of both proteins, we observed co-localisation of Nck2, but not of Nck1, with ponsin in differentiating skeletal muscle cells (Fig. 5). Nck proteins are involved in the regulation of actin dynamics, e. g. in response to cell receptor activation (Buday et al., 2002). Their Src homology 2 (SH2) domains interact with tyrosinecontaining peptides in a phosphorylation-dependent manner (Frese et al., 2006; Jones et al., 2006). Simultaneously, the SH3 domains can recruit a variety of ligands with proline-rich consensus motifs. Typical for adapter proteins, most of these interactions are of low affinity and have a transient character, allowing the temporary assembly of dynamic protein complexes. As an example, Nck proteins can locally promote actin polymerisation by recruiting components of the Arp2/3 complex (Buday et al., 2002; Weisswange et al., 2009; Smith and Li, 2004). Although tyrosine phosphorylation is a well characterised mechanism to control the affinity between Nck SH2 domains and their ligands, little is known about how the interactions of SH3 domains with their ligands are regulated. Here we report that in the skeletal muscle-specific ponsin insertion functional MAPK phosphorylation sites (threonine 49 and serine 69) are located in close proximity to the Nck-binding motif (Fig. 9). Moreover, we

observed altered binding properties of mutant ponsin proteins, mimicking phosphorylation events at these two residues. Both a T49E and an S69D mutant showed significantly increased binding to Nck proteins (1.6- or 2-fold, respectively, Fig. 10) when compared to the wild-type protein. Threonine 49 is in -1 position of the proline-rich motif that was shown to bind Nck1 and Nck2. It is predictable that the introduction of a negative charge by phosphorylation of this residue changes the electrostatic properties of the binding interface dramatically. The second phosphorylation site, serine 69, is only 13 aa C-terminal of the SH3-binding core motif. Even though it does not directly contribute to the minimal binding interface (mapped to aa 1-66), it may interact with positively charged residues on the surface of the SH3 domain. The conserved arginine of both Nck1 (position 121) and Nck2 (position 127) is the best candidate for these interactions (Hake et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2006). Since extracts from differentiating skeletal muscle cells contain kinases that can phosphorylate the specific insert of ponsin, phosphorylation events at these residues are likely to modulate the binding affinity between ponsin and Nck proteins in developing skeletal muscle cells. Whereas the consequences of the phosphorylation events on the interaction between ponsin and the Ncks have clearly been established, the nature of the kinase mediating the phosphorylation of the ponsin insertion remains more enigmatic: the consensus substrate motif (SP or TP) suggests that a kinase of the MAPK family is involved (Davis, 1993). We have shown that skeletal muscle cells express a MAPK-like activity, and more importantly, this phosphorylating activity towards the insertion of ponsin is considerably increased upon onset of myogenic differentiation (Fig. 8B). In addition, it appears that this endogenous protein kinase has higher substrate specificity and is more stringently controlled in its activity than recombinant, active MAPK (Fig. 8C). The differentiation-dependent activity pattern of this kinase suggests that it is a member of the p38MAPK family, as only this branch shows increased activation after induction of the myogenic programme (Lee et al., 2002; Perdiguero et al., 2007). However, the specific p38alpha and p38beta MAPK inhibitor SB203580 did not interfere with phosphorylation of the insertion (our unpublished observations). Interestingly, this compound does not inhibit p38delta (also called stress-activated protein kinase 3 or ERK6; (Cuenda et al., 1995; Court et al., 2002)), which is expressed in skeletal muscle tissue in a differentiation-dependent fashion, and in myogenic cell lines its over-expression promotes myotube formation (Lechner et al., 1996; Tortorella et al., 2003). Another candidate kinase is ERK5, which shows a similar differentiation-dependent activation pattern and is required for skeletal muscle differentiation (Dinev et al., 2001). Despite the fact that the immediate identification of the kinase involved is hindered by the absence of specific inhibitors for both ERK5 and ERK6, future research will focus on the identification of the kinase responsible for modulation of the binding between the insertion in ponsin and Nck proteins. In this paper, we present a novel, skeletal muscle-specific splice isoform of ponsin, with an insertion in its C-terminus. We show that this module mediates binding to Nck proteins, and that this interaction can be enhanced by phosphorylation at specific serine and threonine residues in the proximity of the binding interface by a yet unknown member of the MAPK family that is expressed in differentiated skeletal muscle cells. By identifying these three components of a multi-protein complex, this study provides further insight into the complexity of pre-costameric structures and the mechanisms that regulate their assembly during skeletal muscle differentiation: Ponsin integrates multiple signalling pathways regulating cytoskeletal dynamics. As an example, its expression and localisation is controlled by Rho GTPase activity, at least in lens tissue (Rao and Maddala, 2009), and over-expression of ponsin

ARTICLE IN PRESS
K. Gehmlich et al. / European Journal of Cell Biology 89 (2010) 351­364 363

induces stress-fibre formation (Rao and Maddala, 2009; Ribon et al., 1998a). In skeletal muscle, ponsin interacts with cytoskeletal components at the costameres, e.g. with vinculin, paxillin and FAK, via its SH3 domains (Gehmlich et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2006). Simultaneously, the insertion of ponsin can recruit Nck adapter proteins and associated protein complexes involved in the regulation of actin dynamics (such as Arp2/3). This process is controlled by a differentiation-dependent kinase activity. Moreover, the ponsin­ Nck1/2 complex was found to be re-induced at the costameres of adult, regenerating muscle fibres in mdx mice (Fig. 7), pointing at an active involvement of the protein complex in muscle regeneration. The convergence of several signalling pathways allows a ``finetuning'' of protein complexes and their activities in a spatially and temporally restricted fashion, providing tight control of cytoskeletal re-arrangements during skeletal muscle differentiation and re-generation.

Acknowledgement We gratefully acknowledge the technical assistance of A. Guhlan and B. Mai. The authors thank Prof. J. Wehland (Braunschweig, Germany) for the donation of mAb YL1/2, Dr. M. Way (London, United Kingdom) for the donation of Nck1 and Nck2 cDNA constructs and Dr. P. Zammit (London, United Kingdom) for the donation of samples. We thank Prof. B. Micheel and his group (Potsdam, Germany) for the generation of the polyclonal anti-ponsin serum. This study was supported by a ¨ grant from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft to D.O. Furst. References
Ausubel, F.M., Brent, R., Kingston, R.E., Moore, D.D., Seidman, J.G., Smith, J.A., Struhl, K., 1987. Current Protocols in Molecular Biology. John Wiley and Sons, New York. Bernard, J.R., Saito, M., Liao, Y.H., Yaspelkis III, B.B., Ivy, J.L., 2008. Exercise training increases components of the c-Cbl-associated protein/c-Cbl signaling cascade in muscle of obese Zucker rats. Metabolism 57, 858­866. Bladt, F., Aippersbach, E., Gelkop, S., Strasser, G.A., Nash, P., Tafuri, A., Gertler, F.B., Pawson, T., 2003. The murine Nck SH2/SH3 adaptors are important for the development of mesoderm-derived embryonic structures and for regulating the cellular actin network. Mol. Cell. Biol. 23, 4586­4597. Buday, L., Wunderlich, L., Tamas, P., 2002. The Nck family of adapter proteins: regulators of actin cytoskeleton. Cell Signal. 14, 723­731. Bulfield, G., Siller, W.G., Wight, P.A., Moore, K.J., 1984. X chromosome-linked muscular dystrophy (mdx) in the mouse. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81, 1189­1192. Campbell, R.E., Tour, O., Palmer, A.E., Steinbach, P.A., Baird, G.S., Zacharias, D.A., Tsien, R.Y., 2002. A monomeric red fluorescent protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 7877­7882. Collins, C.A., Morgan, J.E., 2003. Duchenne's muscular dystrophy: animal models used to investigate pathogenesis and develop therapeutic strategies. Int. J. Exp. Pathol. 84, 165­172. Court, N.W., dos Remedios, C.G., Cordell, J., Bogoyevitch, M.A., 2002. Cardiac expression and subcellular localization of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase member, stress-activated protein kinase-3 (SAPK3). J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 34, 413­426. Cowan, C.A., Henkemeyer, M., 2001. The SH2/SH3 adaptor Grb4 transduces B-ephrin reverse signals. Nature 413, 174­179. Cuenda, A., Rouse, J., Doza, Y.N., Meier, R., Cohen, P., Gallagher, T.F., Young, P.R., Lee, J.C., 1995. SB 203580 is a specific inhibitor of a MAP kinase homologue which is stimulated by cellular stresses and interleukin-1. FEBS Lett. 364, 229­233. Davis, R.J., 1993. The mitogen-activated protein kinase signal transduction pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 268, 14553­14556. Dinev, D., Jordan, B.W., Neufeld, B., Lee, J.D., Lindemann, D., Rapp, U.R., Ludwig, S., 2001. Extracellular signal regulated kinase 5 (ERK5) is required for the differentiation of muscle cells. EMBO Rep. 2, 829­834. Frese, S., Schubert, W.D., Findeis, A.C., Marquardt, T., Roske, Y.S., Stradal, T.E., Heinz, D.W., 2006. The phosphotyrosine peptide binding specificity of Nck1 and Nck2 Src homology 2 domains. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 18236­18245. ¨ Gehmlich, K., Geier, C., Osterziel, K.J., Van der Ven, P.F., Furst, D.O., 2004. Decreased interactions of mutant muscle LIM protein (MLP) with N-RAP and alphaactinin and their implication for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Cell Tissue Res. 317, 129­136. Gehmlich, K., Pinotsis, N., Hayess, K., van der Ven, P.F., Milting, H., El Banayosy, A., ¨ Korfer, R., Wilmanns, M., Ehler, E., Furst, D.O., 2007. Paxillin and ponsin interact in nascent costameres of muscle cells. J. Mol. Biol. 369, 665­682.

Geier, C., Perrot, A., Ozcelik, C., Binner, P., Counsell, D., Hoffmann, K., Pilz, B., ¨ Martiniak, Y., Gehmlich, K., van der Ven, P.F., Furst, D.O., Vornwald, A., von ¨ Hodenberg, E., Nurnberg, P., Scheffold, T., Dietz, R., Osterziel, K.J., 2003. Mutations in the human muscle LIM protein gene in families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation 107, 1390­1395. Geier, C., Gehmlich, K., Ehler, E., Hassfeld, S., Perrot, A., Hayess, K., Cardim, N., Wenzel, K., Erdmann, B., Krackhardt, F., Posch, M.G., Osterziel, K.J., Bublak, A., ¨ ¨ Nagele, H., Scheffold, T., Dietz, R., Chien, K.R., Spuler, S., Furst, D.O., Nurnberg, P., Ozcelik, C., 2008. Beyond the sarcomere: CSRP3 mutations cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Hum. Mol. Genet. 17, 2753­2765. Guan, S., Chen, M., Woodley, D., Li, W., 2007. Nckbeta adapter controls neuritogenesis by maintaining the cellular paxillin level. Mol. Cell. Biol. 27, 6001­6011. Hake, M.J., Choowongkomon, K., Kostenko, O., Carlin, C.R., Sonnichsen, F.D., 2008. Specificity determinants of a novel Nck interaction with the juxtamembrane domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor. Biochemistry 47, 3096­3108. Jones, N., Blasutig, I.M., Eremina, V., Ruston, J.M., Bladt, F., Li, H., Huang, H., Larose, L., Li, S.S., Takano, T., Quaggin, S.E., Pawson, T., 2006. Nck adaptor proteins link nephrin to the actin cytoskeleton of kidney podocytes. Nature 440, 818­823. Kimura, A., Baumann, C.A., Chiang, S.H., Saltiel, A.R., 2001. The sorbin homology domain: a motif for the targeting of proteins to lipid rafts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 9098­9103. Kioka, N., Ueda, K., Amachi, T., 2002. Vinexin, CAP/ponsin, ArgBP2: a novel adaptor protein family regulating cytoskeletal organization and signal transduction. Cell Struct. Funct. 27, 1­7. ¨ Lange, S., Himmel, M., Auerbach, D., Agarkova, I., Hayess, K., Furst, D.O., Perriard, J.C., Ehler, E., 2005. Dimerisation of myomesin: implications for the structure of the sarcomeric M-band. J. Mol. Biol. 345, 289­298. Langhorst, M.F., Jaeger, F.A., Mueller, S., Sven, H.L., Luxenhofer, G., Stuermer, C.A., 2008. Reggies/flotillins regulate cytoskeletal remodeling during neuronal differentiation via CAP/ponsin and Rho GTPases. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 87, 921­931. Le, G.F., Rudnicki, M.A., 2007. Skeletal muscle satellite cells and adult myogenesis. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 19, 628­633. Lechner, C., Zahalka, M.A., Giot, J.F., Moller, N.P., Ullrich, A., 1996. ERK6, a mitogenactivated protein kinase involved in C2C12 myoblast differentiation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 4355­4359. Lee, J., Hong, F., Kwon, S., Kim, S.S., Kim, D.O., Kang, H.S., Lee, S.J., Ha, J., Kim, S.S., 2002. Activation of p38 MAPK induces cell cycle arrest via inhibition of Raf/ ERK pathway during muscle differentiation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 298, 765­771. Lesniewski, L.A., Hosch, S.E., Neels, J.G., de Luca, C., Pashmforoush, M., Lumeng, C.N., Chiang, S.H., Scadeng, M., Saltiel, A.R., Olefsky, J.M., 2007. Bone marrowspecific Cap gene deletion protects against high-fat diet-induced insulin resistance. Nat. Med. 13, 455­462. Lin, W.H., Huang, C.J., Liu, M.W., Chang, H.M., Chen, Y.J., Tai, T.Y., Chuang, L.M., 2001. Cloning, mapping, and characterization of the human sorbin and SH3 domain containing 1 (SORBS1) gene: a protein associated with c-Abl during insulin signaling in the hepatoma cell line Hep3B. Genomics 74, 12­20. Liu, J., Li, M., Ran, X., Fan, J.S., Song, J., 2006. Structural insight into the binding diversity between the human Nck2 SH3 domains and proline-rich proteins. Biochemistry 45, 7171­7184. Macias, M.J., Wiesner, S., Sudol, M., 2002. WW and SH3 domains, two different scaffolds to recognize proline-rich ligands. FEBS Lett. 513, 30­37. Matson, S.A., Pare, G.C., Kapiloff, M.S., 2005. A novel isoform of Cbl-associated protein that binds protein kinase A. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1727, 145­149. O'Farrell, P.Z., Goodman, H.M., O'Farrell, P.H., 1977. High resolution twodimensional electrophoresis of basic as well as acidic proteins. Cell 12, 1133­1141. ¨ Obermann, W.M., Gautel, M., Steiner, F., Van der Ven, P.F., Weber, K., Furst, D.O., 1996. The structure of the sarcomeric M band: localization of defined domains of myomesin, M-protein, and the 250-kD carboxy-terminal region of titin by immunoelectron microscopy. J. Cell Biol. 134, 1441­1453. Obermann, W.M., Gautel, M., Weber, K., Furst, D.O., 1997. Molecular structure of the sarcomeric M band: mapping of titin and myosin binding domains in myomesin and the identification of a potential regulatory phosphorylation site in myomesin. EMBO J. 16, 211­220. Pardo, J.V., Siliciano, J.D., Craig, S.W., 1983. A vinculin-containing cortical lattice in skeletal muscle: transverse lattice elements (``costameres'') mark sites of attachment between myofibrils and sarcolemma. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 80, 1008­1012. Perdiguero, E., Ruiz-Bonilla, V., Gresh, L., Hui, L., Ballestar, E., Sousa-Victor, P., Baeza-Raja, B., Jardi, M., Bosch-Comas, A., Esteller, M., Caelles, C., Serrano, A.L., Wagner, E.F., Munoz-Canoves, P., 2007. Genetic analysis of p38 MAP kinases in myogenesis: fundamental role of p38alpha in abrogating myoblast proliferation. EMBO J. 26, 1245­1256. Rao, P.V., Maddala, R., 2009. Abundant expression of ponsin, a focal adhesion protein, in lens and downregulation of its expression by impaired cytoskeletal signaling. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 50, 1769­1777. Ribon, V., Herrera, R., Kay, B.K., Saltiel, A.R., 1998a. A role for CAP, a novel, multifunctional Src homology 3 domain-containing protein in formation of actin stress fibers and focal adhesions. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 4073­4080. Ribon, V., Printen, J.A., Hoffman, N.G., Kay, B.K., Saltiel, A.R., 1998b. A novel, multifuntional c-Cbl binding protein in insulin receptor signaling in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18, 872­879. Smith, L.G., Li, R., 2004. Actin polymerization: riding the wave. Curr. Biol. 14, R109­R111.

ARTICLE IN PRESS
364 K. Gehmlich et al. / European Journal of Cell Biology 89 (2010) 351­364

Tortorella, L.L., Lin, C.B., Pilch, P.F., 2003. ERK6 is expressed in a developmentally regulated manner in rodent skeletal muscle. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 306, 163­168. Tosoni, D., Cestra, G., 2009. CAP (Cbl associated protein) regulates receptormediated endocytosis. FEBS Lett. 583, 293­300. Tu, Y., Li, F., Wu, C., 1998. Nck-2, a novel Src homology2/3-containing adaptor protein that interacts with the LIM-only protein PINCH and components of growth factor receptor kinase-signaling pathways. Mol. Biol. Cell 9, 3367­3382. Van der Ven, P.F., Wiesner, S., Salmikangas, P., Auerbach, D., Himmel, M., Kempa, S., ¨ ¨ Hayess, K., Pacholsky, D., Taivainen, A., Schroder, R., Carpen, O., Furst, D.O., 2000. Indications for a novel muscular dystrophy pathway. gamma-Filamin,

the muscle-specific filamin isoform, interacts with myotilin. J. Cell Biol. 151, 235­248. Weisswange, I., Newsome, T.P., Schleich, S., Way, M., 2009. The rate of N-WASP exchange limits the extent of ARP2/3-complex-dependent actin-based motility. Nature 458, 87­91. Zhang, M., Liu, J., Cheng, A., Deyoung, S.M., Chen, X., Dold, L.H., Saltiel, A.R., 2006. CAP interacts with cytoskeletal proteins and regulates adhesion-mediated ERK activation and motility. EMBO J. 25, 5284­5293. Zhang, M., Liu, J., Cheng, A., Deyoung, S.M., Saltiel, A.R., 2007. Identification of CAP as a costameric protein that interacts with filamin C. Mol. Biol. Cell 18, 4731­4740.

