INDEX,

VOLUME
A

48, JULY AND

AUGUST,

1972

Adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate, succinyl derivativrs of: synthesis and purification, CAILLA AND DELAAGE. 62 Alcian blue staining of glycoproteins, WARDI AND ALLEN, 621 Alpha 1-antitrypsins. isolation and characterization of from mouse serum. MPEROWITZ et rd., 394 Amines. volatile, in mouse brain: a radioassay with picogram sensitivity. KIXON, 460 Amino acid losses (unknown) from protein hydrolyzates, an accurate method for correcting, ROBEL .~ND CRANE, 233 2-Aminophenanthroimidazole, fluorescent product, of the reaction of phenanthrene quinone with arginine, ITANO ASD Y.~MADA, 483 2-Amino-4-thiosulfohutyric acid, prepa.ration and chromntographic properties of, Ds MARCO ASD LDCHI, 346 Ammonia. conductometric diffusion rate method for determination of microgmm quantities of. FREIDL. 300 Analytical centrifuge, pulsed laser interferometry (PLI) in: II. Clocked trigger circuit.. P.411~ .4ND YIJHANTIS. 605 Analytical centrifuge, pulsrd laser interferomr%ry (PLI) in: I. System design. P.ACI, AND YPII.%NTIS. 588 Aniline and its alkyl derivatives, reaction of with hrxoscs and pcntoses, GOODWIN, 120 Anthranilate g-phosphoribosylpyrophosphute phosphoribosyl transferase from Snlmonella typhimurilrm. binding of to srpharos~-nntllranilatc derivatives. M.~RUJS ,\ND BALBINDER, 448 Argininr rrnction with phcnanthreneqninonP. 2-aminophrnanthroimidazole as fluorescent, product of: ITAN~ .4ND YAMADA, 483 Aspartatc nminotransft>rase (GOT), dctermination of using differential substrnlc levcln. Minimizing errors in 636

differential kinetic analyses of isoenzymes, D.kvrs it nl.. 569 A4TPase and calcium uptake activities of sarcoplasmit reticulum preparations, simple spectrophotometric estimation of. HORG.~N Ed n2.. 147 ATP-sulfate adenyltransferase (ATPsulfurglase), clectrophoretic characterization of using acrylamide gels, SK~RIXG cl cd.. 259 B Base analysis of ribopolynucleotides by chemical tritium labeling: a methodological study with model nucleosides and purified tRh'il speries, RANDERATH et rd., 172 Benzimidazole fluorcsccnce, effects of pH on, ROGERS AND CLAYTON, 199

C
Ca'+ interaction of with endoplasmic reticulum of rat liver: a standardized procedure for the isolation of rat liver microsomf,s, KAMATH AND NARAYAN, 53 Calcium uptake and ATPase activities of sarcoplasmic reticulum preparations, simple spect,rophotometric estimation of HORGAN et nl.. 147 Cxthepsin IS-like nctivit,v in lysosomes, c*ont,inuous fluorometric assay for, DE LUGER' AND TAIBPEL. 378C Crrrnkov radiation of `?P, use of for phosphorylntion assay in liquid scintillation counter: application to photophospholylntion, ASADA et al., 311 Chloroplnstx. determination of solute accumulation in by rapid centrifugal transfer through silicone fluid layers, GARNSSLEN AND MCCARTY, 504 Cholinrsterases. chromogenic substrates for: l-t2-thiazolylazol-2-acetoxygenzrne derivatives, V.%N HOOIDONK et al., 33

----

---: SUL(JLCJ

ISDEX

637
aromatic thio A~~GUSTIsSSOs esters as substrates et cd., 428 in,

Collagen. tissue, trichloroacetic

degradation of by hot acid extraction. LAIYGNER BND NEWMMaX, 73 Contractile protein preparations from frozen rabbit muscle. COHEN et nl., 279 Coomwrie brilliant blue. a new type. for an iml~rovecl procedure for protein staining in polyacrylamide gels. DIEZEI. et al., 617 Cystinc and methionine in legume seeds, siml~le methods for determination of, HERRIC.K et rtl., 353

F
Fatty acids, raphy of reversed-phase on hydrophobic chromatogsephndes,

D
Dihpdrofolate reductase inhibition ia lliwo. a method for assessing, MISCHHA et al.. 515 DNA, controlled fragmentation of by DNase. I. HELL et al., 369 DNA extraction and reassociation studies, subsequent to isopropanol preservation of biological samples, RAKE, 365 DNA. polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of, GREGSOS. 613 DOPA decarbosplase activity, improved ionization chamber method for continuous measurement of, TRAN, 112

BEIJER AND NYSTRBM. 1 Ferritin (tissue), assay of, LINDER 9ND Mr-rao, 266 continuous effect of Flop analyzers. sucrose on. HINTOK .~SD NORRIS, 247 Fluorescent thio reagents. V. Microfluorometry of thio compounds with a fluorescent-labeled maleimide, SEKISE ef Ill., 557

G Glutaminase and glutamic acid decarbosylase, radiochemical assay for, WOOD et al.. 581 Glycoproteins. alcian blue staining of. \vARDI AND ALLES, 621

H
Hesosrs aniline and pcntoses, reaction of and its alkyl derivatives with: GOODWIN. 120 Histidonal phosphate phosphatase, nelv assay for using a coupled reaction, BRADT AND HO~STOX, 480 I Isocitrate amide lyase activity in polyacrylgels, determination of, REEVES AXD VOLK. 437 Isoenzymes, minimizing errors in differential kinetic analyses of: detexminaaminotransferase tion of aspartate (GOT) using differential substrate levels, DAVIS et al., 569

E
Electrodialyeis.
r7.4UERM.4N. 491

micro,

an apparatus

for,

Electrophoretic migration of proteins in sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels, relative importance of some factors affecting, TUNG AND INSIGHT, 153 Elastase, plasminogen activator, and nonspecific proteases. Radial diffusion in gel for micro determination of enzymes. II. ScHu~.4cHI2 AND &HILL, 9 Endoplasmic reticulum of rat liver interaction of with Ca'+: a standardized procedure for the isolation of rat liver microsomes, &MATH AND SARAYAN, 53 Enzymes, easy extraction of from small amOUntS Of moody tissue, HAISSIG .4ND SCHIPPER. JR., 129 Erratum, 316, 633 E&erase determinations, quantitative,

L
Lactose-Y (galactosyl-"C) and lactose3H(glucosyl-3H), enzymic synthesis of, HI,-DSON et al., 524 Laser interferometry. pulsed (PLI) in the analytical centrifuge. II. Clocked trigger circuit, PAL-L AND YPHANTIS, 605 Laser interferometry, pulsed (PLI) in

638

SUBJECT

INDEX

the analytical centrifuge. I. System design, P.4vL AND Y~H.INTIS, 588 Laser light source for the analytical ultracentrifuge, WILLIAMS. JR., 164 Ligand binding systems, complex. at equilibrium, mathematical theory of: some methods for parameter fitting, FELDMAN, 317 Lowry method for the determination of protrin. a modification that gives a linear photometric response. HARTREE, 422 Lysosomes, continuous fluorometric assay for cathepsin B-like activity in, DE L~~IEN .~ND TAPI~EL, 378
Al

dctcction of on electrophoreris membranes. HERD. 103 Muranic arid, determination of in nutomated amino acid analysis, ROSAN, 624

N
KAD labeled with `H of high specific raclioactirity in the 4-nicotinamide position, method for preparing, LITTLE, 217 N-ID, studirs on the tie ,~OL'O biosynthesis of in Eschericilirr coli. II. Quantitative method for isolating quinolinic acid from biological materials,
CHaNDLER .4ND GHOLSON. 5%

LMagnetic circular dichroism studies. XIX. Determination of the tyrosine: trpptophan ratio in proteins, BARTH et al., 471 i'. Maleimide, fluorescent labeled, for microfluoromctry of thiol compounds. Fluorescent thiol reagents, &KI?~E et al., 557 Methanolysis of the pyrrolidone ring of amino-terminal pyroglutamic acid in model peptides, krAWASAK1 AND IR.4N0, 546 Methionine adenosyltransferase : a double-isotope derivative, enzymatic assay, MATTHYSSE et al., 410 Methionine and cystine in legume seeds, simple method for determination of,
HERRICK et al., 353

Nucleic acids, plant viral, 2'- and 3'-mononucleotides improved two-dimensional chromatography, KUMAR P

separation of of by an thin-layer
et ctl.. 497

Pentoses and hexoses, reaction of aniline and its alkyl derivatives Tvith, GOODWIN, 120 Peroxides, detection of by the print thin-Iaye isoelectric technique in focusing. DELIWEE AND R~DOLA. 536 Phagr concentration in lysates. spectrophotometric determination of. SABELNIKOV. 629

L-["`Slmethionine labeled nucleic acids from rabbit aration and anal,vsis of, 202 Microsomes. a standardized for the isolation of from interaction of Ca'+ with reticulum of rat liver. N.~R.~YA~. 53 2'- and 3'-mononucleotides nucleic acids, separation proved two-dimensional chromatography, KITMAR Mucopolysaccharides, acid,

transfer liver,

riboprepSTANLEY, JR., procedure rat liver: inendoplasmic

pH, effects of on benzimidazole fluoresence, ROGERS AND CLAYTON, 199 Phenanthrcnr-quinone reaction with arginine, 2-aminophenanthroimidazole as fluorrscrnt product of. ITANO AND
YAMADA, 483

h-AMATH

AND

of plant viral of by an imthin-layer
et al., 497

radioactive,

Phosphorylation assay in liquid scintillation counter using Cerenkov radiation of 32P: application to photophosphorylation, ASADA et al., 311 Photophosphorylation, application of phosphorylation assay in liquid scintillation counter using Cerenkolradiation of "P. ASADA et al.. 311 Planchet (aluminum) counting : a simple method for improved sample spreading. CHOULES AND GUYMON, 307 Plant viral nucleic acids, separation of

SUBJECT

IKDEX

639 R

2'- and 3'-mononucleotides of by an improved two-dimensional thin-layer chromatography, KUMAR et al.. 497 Plasminogen activator, elastase and non. spec~hc protenses. Radial diffusion in gel for micro determination of enzymes. II. S~HUMXHER .~ND &HILL, 0 Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. preparative, recovery of protein in, Kwa~1.4 AKD CHRAMBKH. 90 Proteases, nonspecific. l)lasminogen nctirator, and elastasc. Radinl diffusion in gel for micro determination of enzymes. II. S~HU.RIA~HI~R ASD S~HILL, 9 Protein binding methodology : comparison of equilibrium dialysis and frontal analysis cl~romntoprn1~l~y in the study of snlicylntr binding, KMI~x~~TE~X.4(X et rtl.. so Protein. detc~rmination of: a modificntion of the Lowry method that gives a linear photometric response. HARTREE. 422 Protein hydrolyzates. an accurate method for correcting unkno1v-n amino acid losses from, ROBEL AND CR.~SE, 233 Proteins. relative importance of some factors affecting the electrophoretic migration of in sodium dodrcyl sulfate-poly~crylamide gels, Trrxo ASD KNIGHT. 153 Protein staining in polyacrylnmide gels, an improved procedure for with a new type of Coomassie brilliant blue, DIEZEL et al.. 617 Protein synthesis, cell-free, nith sodium dodecyl sulfate and ADP, T~PERT AND RAMMLER. 292 Pyroglutamir acid, amino-terminal, model peptides, methanol+ of the p,vrrolidonc ring of, &w.isasr AXD ITAh-0, 546

Radioimmunoassay
MAN-COFFELT, 3%

for

ribosomes,

WIK-

Ribonucleic acids (transfer). L-[%I methionine labeled, from rabbit liver, preparation and analysis of, STANLEY, JR.. 202 Rihonucleosides. sugar-methyl&cd, an analytical method for the separation of from base-methylated and nonAL-ARIF methylated ribonucleoeides, AND SPORK, 386 Ribopolynucleotides, base analysis of by chemical tritium labeling: a methodological study with model nucleosides and purified tRNA species, RAiiDERATH et al., 172 Ribosomes. rndioimmunoassaqfor, WIKMAN-COFFELT; 3%

RiYA-cellulose columns, preparation and 11se of, SMITJI et al., 27 RKA, discontinuous polyncrylsmide gel elrctrophoresis of, PETRI. 442 RKA, transfer, a rapid technique for the analytical and preparative isolation of from reaction mixtures, VICKERS .4ND
LOC.4N. 45

s
Snlicylate binding, comparison of equilibrium dialysis and frontal analysis chromatography in the study of: Protein binding methodology, KERESZTES?;.4m et al.. SO Snrcoplasmic reticulum preparations, ,9implc spectrophotometric estimation of -kTPase and calcium uptake nctivities of, MORGAN et al.. 147 ,-l%lmethionine labeled transfer ribonucleic acids from rabbit liver, preparation and analysis of, STANLEY? JR., 202 Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels, relative importance of some factors affecting the electrophoretic migration of proteins in, TUNC AND KXIGHT, 153 Succinyl derivatives of adenosine 3',4'-

Q
Quinolinic arid, quantitative method for isolating biological materials. Studies on the de ~ZOUO biosynthesis of NAD in Escherichia coli. CHANDLER AND GIIOLSON, 529

640

SUBJECT

INDEX

cyclic monophosphatr : synthesis and purification, CAILLA ASD DF.IA~GE. 62

Transketolase for the

T
Thio reagents, fluorescent. V. Microfluorometry of thiol compounds with a fluorescent-labeled maleimide, SEKISE et al., 557 Transfer ribonucleic acids, L-[%lmethionine labeled, from rabbit liver, preparation and analysis of, STANLEY, JR., 202 Transfer RNA, a rapid technique for the analytical and preparative isolation of from reaction mixtures, VICKERS AND LOGAN, 45

a new method recording of, I~OCHETOV .~SD PHILIPPOV, 286 Tyrosine: tryptophan ratio in proteins, determination of magnetic* circular dichroism studies. SIX. BARTH et al., 471

reaction. continuous

U
Ultracentrifuge. analytical. a lasirr light source for, WILLIAMS. JR., 164 Ultrasonification of biological materials. I. Apparatus, MACKENZIE AND MILLAR, 225 Woody tissue, easy extraction of enzymes from small amounts of. HAISSIG
.~ND SHIPPER,

JR., 129

