Cell Host & Microbe

Previews
Designer Bugs: Structural Engineering to Build a Better Mouse Model
Shyam S. Bhaskaran1 and C. Erec Stebbins1,*
1

Laboratory of Structural Microbiology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, USA *Correspondence: stebbins@rockefeller.edu DOI 10.1016/j.chom.2007.05.009

Many animal models of bacterial diseases are hampered by differences in tissue tropism and the course of pathogenesis. In a recent issue of Cell, by rationally mutating a surface invasion protein (InlA) to have higher binding affinity for its cognate host receptor (E-cadherin), Wollert et al. were able to ``murinize'' Listeria monocytogenes, creating a strain capable of invading intestinal epithelial cells in mice, mimicking the route of infection in humans.
Since the beginnings of germ theory with Koch, Pasteur, and others in the mid-19th century, animal models have been indispensable in the study of human infectious diseases, in elucidating not only the basis of their pathogenesis but also how our body's defenses respond to this invasion. The mouse model in particular has proven attractive due to its relatively low-maintenance costs, high fecundity, genetically pure strains, and a biochemistry and physiology similar to that of humans (99% of its 30,000 genes have a sequence homolog in humans, 96% of which are within syntenic chromosomal regions). Moreover, the organism is genetically tractable, with tools such as targeted mutagenesis (gene knockouts/ins) and RNAi available to manipulate gene expression. Additionally, the presence of both an innate and adaptive immune system allows the dissection of evolving interactions between host and pathogen during disease (Pradel and Ewbank, 2004). However, some human pathogens exhibit strong species and tissuespecific tropism, not infecting mice or having a disease progression that is markedly different from that in humans. For example, Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi causes potentially fatal typhoid fever in humans but cannot establish an infection in mice, whereas Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium causes a limited gastrointestinal infection in humans but a systemic fatal infection in mice. When the basis of species tropism is understood, commonly the specific interaction of a pathogen ligand and a cell-surface receptor, one solution is to construct a transgenic mouse carrying the human homolog of the receptor in addition to that of the mouse, expressed in either specific tissues or the whole organism (Figure 1). This was first done with the polio virus, where mice carrying the human receptor CD155 (hPVR) and its promoter exhibited lethal poliomyelitis when infected intracerebrally, while normal mice were not susceptible (Ren et al., 1990). The first bacterial pathogen with a ``humanized'' mouse model was the Gram-positive food-borne pathogen Listeria monocytogenes. Listeriosis has a mortality rate of 30%, affecting mostly fetuses, newborns, and immunocompromised patients, leading to severe gastroenteritis, miscarriage, and meningitis. It is of particular concern because the bacterium continues to grow at refrigerated temperatures, and food contamination can lead to major outbreaks. Furthermore, it is one of the few bacterial pathogens that can cross the intestinal barrier, the blood-brain barrier, as well as the fetoplacental barrier. It is able to do so by stimulating its uptake into nonphagocytic cells (thereby also evading the immune system) through the use of two internalins: InlA which interacts with the adhesion molecule E-cadherin present in epithelial cell-cell junctions and leads to entry into intestinal cells (Mengaud et al., 1996), and InlB which binds the receptor tyrosine kinase Met leading to invasion of

Figure 1. Overcoming Species- and Tissue-Specific Tropism
(A) The L. monoctyogenes invasin InlA is unable to bind the murine homolog of its receptor, E-cadherin. (B) Human E-cadherin can be expressed ubiquitously or in specific tissues in transgenic mice. (C) InlA can be modified to bind murine E-cadherin.

Cell Host & Microbe 1, June 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc. 241

Cell Host & Microbe

Previews
hepatocytes and various other cell lines (Shen et al., 2000). After escape from the phagosome, it can rapidly multiply cytoplasmically and move from cell to cell using the actin cytoskeleton, as well as spreading to the liver and other organs through the bloodstream and lymphatic system. In mice, InlB can bind Met, but InlA is unable to bind E-cadherin, specifically due to a change of Pro16 to glutamic acid, making them resistant to oral infection (Lecuit et al., 1999). Therefore, only intravenous infections were possible until a transgenic mouse was created that specially expressed human E-cadherin (hE-cadherin) in intestinal epithelial cells under the control of the intestinal fatty-acid binding-protein (iFABP) promoter (Lecuit et al., 2001). This then allowed researchers to study the early stages of oral listeriosis. However, there is a major limitation inherent in the model. Since the expression of hE-cadherin was restricted specifically to the intestines, the mechanism by which L. monocytogenes crossed the blood-brain and fetoplacental barrier could not be addressed in the model, despite being of great clinical interest. One possible solution was to chromosomally replace the mouse coding sequence with its human homolog, but this risked the complication that interactions with other partners of E-cadherin could be affected. Another approach would be to devise a mouse model that retained the endogenous expression pattern of host receptors but which interacted with both InlA and InlB. In their recent study in Cell, Wollert and colleagues were able to do just this. Through a structure-based engineering approach, they were able to create a strain of L. monocytogenes containing a modified InlA that could bind murine E-cadherin. This strain was able to lethally infect mice by the intragastric route, recapitulating the symptoms of both oral and systemic listeriosis (Wollert et al., 2007). This reengineering was based on a previously determined crystal structure of a complex between InlA and the N-terminal cytoplasmic domain of hE-cadherin (hEC1) (Schubert et al., 2002; Figure 2). It was hypothesized that the binding affinity of InlA to its receptor could be enhanced by making

Figure 2. Structural Basis for the Murinizing of Listeria
(A) Structural alignment of the complexes InlAWT/hEC1 (magenta, PDB 1O6S) and InlAm/mEC1 (green, coordinates obtained from W. Schubert). The positions of the two point mutations in InlAm are also shown (red). (B) Illustration of the new hydrogen bond between Asn192 (InlAm) and the carbonyl of Phe17 (mEC1). Also shown are Pro16 (hEC1) and Glu16 (mEC1). (C) Illustration of the new water-mediated hydrogen bond from Ser369 (InlAm) to Asn27 (mEC1).

two amino acid changes in InlA that would improve its surface complementarity to hEC1. Ser192InlA was mutated to a slightly longer asparagine residue, allowing it to form a hydrogen bond to the main-chain carbonyl of Phe17hEC1, and a bulky Tyr369InlA which had unfavorable steric interactions with Asn27hEC1 was replaced by a smaller serine residue. Their crystal structure of the (double) mutant protein (InlAm) with hEC1 confirmed that Asn192InlAm did actually form a hydrogen bond to the carbonyl of Phe17hEC1 and also that Ser369InlAm formed a new water-mediated hydrogen bond to Asn27hEC1. As a result, the binding affinity (KD) of InlAm to hEC1 had increased 6700-fold to 1.2 ± 0.3 nM from 8 ± 4 mM for InlA. Additionally, the invasion efficiency of an isogenic mutant strain (Lmo-InlAm) into human epithelial cell lines was doubled compared to the wild-type strain (Lmo-WT), but not changed in a macrophagelike cell line where uptake is phagocytotic and internalin independent. Surprisingly, InlAm was now also able to bind murine EC1 (mEC1), with a KD of 10 ± 2 mM, comparable to

that of wild-type InlA to hEC1. Moreover, the modified Lmo-InlAm strain was 1000-fold more virulent than Lmo-WT when administered orally to mice. At the highest doses used, the mutant strain was 100% lethal within 5 days, while the wild-type caused only 20% mortality by 2 weeks. Bacterial loads in the stomach, small intestine, mesenteric lymph nodes, spleen, and liver were also significantly higher and increased steadily during infection with Lmo-InlAm, but stabilized 2 days postinfection with Lmo-WT. Immunohistochemical analyses showed that Lmo-WT did not invade epithelial cells, most likely crossing the intestinal barrier through phagocytic M cells present in Peyer's patches. In contrast, Lmo-InlAm quickly colonized the epithelia at the tips of the villi and rapidly spread through the rest of the epithelial and subepithelial layers. This is consistent with the idea that the basolaterally expressed E-cadherin is only exposed at the tips of microvilli as cells are sloughing off (Lecuit et al., 2001). Interestingly, when administered intravenously, both strains were identical in virulence and organ loads, showing

242 Cell Host & Microbe 1, June 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc.

Cell Host & Microbe

Previews
that InlA was not involved in systemic spread. Previous work in human placental explants and trophoblastic cells (Lecuit et al., 2004) had shown a role for InlA in crossing the fetoplacental barrier, while studies in mice (nonfunctional InlA; Le Monnier et al., 2007) and guinea pigs (nonfunctional InlB; Bakardjiev et al., 2004) showed no requirement for either. In this study, the authors found no difference in placental loads between strains when infecting pregnant mice, indicating that another mechanism must be present for crossing this barrier. This result could only have been conclusively determined using this model (functional InlA and InlB) and hopefully will yield further insights into the poorly understood mechanisms behind how both the fetoplacental and the blood-brain barrier are crossed. The possibility that the concept of ``murinizing'' the pathogen rather than ``humanizing'' the host could be expanded to other pathogens where suitable animal models have not been created is tremendously exciting. This would provide an alternative to the creation of transgenic mice, where certain pitfalls, such as secondary effects of additionally expressed receptors and strain background effects on the host response, can complicate the effectiveness of the model. Bacterial genetics also requires significantly less effort than creating a stable transgenic line. However, since one cannot change what one does not understand, and in many cases the exact reason for species-tropism is unknown, the general applicability of this approach may be limited. Nevertheless, when such information is present, it is likely to prove a valuable tool of great utility in understanding bacterial pathogenesis. Finally, while exciting for the development of new infection models, it is also concerning that in this case a pathogen's host range could be expanded by only two amino acid changes, especially in the context of emerging infectious diseases, where changes in host susceptibility has the potential to lead to global pandemics, as has happened with HIV and could occur with avian flu. And as with many insights into the ability to manipulate an infectious agent, concerns arise regarding how such paradigms might be applied for nefarious purposes. However, as a corollary, these same molecular determinants of virulence may prove to be the pathogen's Achilles' heel and raise the promise of rationally designed small-molecule drugs that disrupt these few interactions between host receptor and microbial ligand.
REFERENCES Bakardjiev, A.I., Stacy, B.A., Fisher, S.J., and Portnoy, D.A. (2004). Infect. Immun. 72, 489­ 497. Le Monnier, A., Autret, N., Join-Lambert, O.F., Jaubert, F., Charbit, A., Berche, P., and Kayal, S. (2007). Infect. Immun. 75, 950­957. Lecuit, M., Dramsi, S., Gottardi, C., FedorChaiken, M., Gumbiner, B., and Cossart, P. (1999). EMBO J. 18, 3956­3963. Lecuit, M., Vandormael-Pournin, S., Lefort, J., Huerre, M., Gounon, P., Dupuy, C., Babinet, C., and Cossart, P. (2001). Science 292, 1722­1725. Lecuit, M., Nelson, D.M., Smith, S.D., Khun, H., Huerre, M., Vacher-Lavenu, M.C., Gordon, J.I., and Cossart, P. (2004). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 6152­6157. Mengaud, J., Ohayon, H., Gounon, P., Mege, R.M., and Cossart, P. (1996). Cell 84, 923­ 932. Pradel, E., and Ewbank, J.J. (2004). Annu. Rev. Genet. 38, 347­363. Ren, R.B., Costantini, F., Gorgacz, E.J., Lee, J.J., and Racaniello, V.R. (1990). Cell 63, 353­362. Schubert, W.D., Urbanke, C., Ziehm, T., Beier, V., Machner, M.P., Domann, E., Wehland, J., Chakraborty, T., and Heinz, D.W. (2002). Cell 111, 825­836. Shen, Y., Naujokas, M., Park, M., and Ireton, K. (2000). Cell 103, 501­510. Wollert, T., Pasche, B., Rochon, M., Deppenmeier, S., van den Heuvel, J., Gruber, A.D., Heinz, D.W., Lengeling, A., and Schubert, W.-D. (2007). Cell 129, 891­902.

Cell Host & Microbe 1, June 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc. 243

