Obstetrics

Abnormality of calcium channel inhibitor released from fetal membranes in preterm labor
Elaine M. Carroll, MD,a John G. Gianopoulos, MD,a and Patricia L. Collins, MD, PhDa, b, c Maywood, Illinois
OBJECTIVE: This study was undertaken to test the hypothesis that an inhibitor of uterine contractions acting at the level of the dihydropyridine receptor of the uterine L-type uterine calcium channel is released in greater amounts from fetal membranes before term than at term. STUDY DESIGN: Endogenous calcium channel inhibitor activity was generated with standardized 25-cm2 surface area fetal membrane samples from the following 4 categories of women: preterm in labor, preterm not in labor, term in labor, and term not in labor. The amount of inhibitor in each membrane category was quantified by means of a competitive binding assay. Inhibition of uterine contractions induced by Bay K 8644 (an L-type calcium channel agonist) was used as another test of endogenous calcium channel inhibitor activity released from fetal membranes of all 4 groups of patients. RESULTS: Endogenous calcium channel inhibitor activity was most variable but present in the greatest amount in fetal membranes of women who were preterm not in labor followed by those in women at term not in labor and at term in labor. Fetal membranes from women in preterm labor had the least amount of measured endogenous calcium channel inhibitor activity. Consistent with the competitive binding assay, endogenous calcium channel inhibitor activity from fetal membranes from women who were preterm not in labor, at term not in labor, and at term in labor inhibited Bay K 8644­induced uterine contractions. Fetal membranes from women in preterm labor did not inhibit Bay K 8644­induced contractions. Endogenous calcium channel inhibitor activity was present in the chorion, the decidua, and the placenta, with little activity in the amnion. CONCLUSION: The down-regulation of endogenous calcium channel inhibitor activity with advancing gestation is consistent with a potential role for this inhibitor in maintaining uterine quiescence and in regulating the transition into labor. One possible cause of idiopathic preterm labor may be an abnormally low amount of endogenous calcium channel inhibitor activity in fetal membranes. (Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001;184:356-62.)

Key words: Fetal membranes, L-type calcium channel inhibitor, parturition, premature labor

The transition from intrauterine to extrauterine life requires the development of coordinated phasic uterine contractions, which lead to progressive dilatation of the uterine cervix and delivery of the fetus. Uterine muscle contractions require an increase in intracellular calcium concentration.1 One mechanism for increasing intracel-

From the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,a the Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy,b and the Cardiovascular Institute,c Loyola University Medical Center. Supported by National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development grant HD 28433 (Patricia L. Collins). Presented at the Nineteenth Annual Meeting of the Society for MaternalFetal Medicine, San Francisco, California, January 18-23, 1999. Received for publication March 29, 1999; revised April 5, 2000; accepted May 25, 2000. Reprint requests: Patricia L. Collins, MD, PhD, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Loyola University Medical Center, 2160 S First Ave, Maywood, IL 60153. Copyright © 2001 by Mosby, Inc. 0002-9378/2001 $35.00 + 0 6/1/108855 doi:10.1067/mob.2001.108855

lular calcium concentration is through uterine voltagedependent L-type calcium channels.1-3 The L-type uterine calcium channel is a multimeric protein complex that is present in the uterus throughout pregnancy but is upregulated near term.2, 4-6 The pore-forming 1-subunit of this complex contains the dihydropyridine-binding site that specifically binds the dihydropyridine class of calcium channel blockers, as represented by the drug nifedipine.7 Previous work from this laboratory demonstrated that human fetal membranes release endogenous calcium channel inhibitor activity (ECCIa).8-10 This ECCIa was initially characterized by means of a uterine contraction bioassay. Uterine contractions were amplified by a known calcium channel agonist, Bay K 8644, which acts at the dihydropyridine-binding site. Contractions were inhibited in those uterine muscle strips exposed to ECCIa.9 To further support the concept that ECCIa interacts with the dihydropyridine-binding site, our laboratory recently reported on a competitive binding assay.8

356

Volume 184, Number 3 Am J Obstet Gynecol

Carroll, Gianopoulos, and Collins 357

Table I. Clinical characteristics
Case 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 Clinical category Preterm not in labor Preterm not in labor Preterm not in labor Preterm not in labor Preterm not in labor Preterm not in labor Preterm in labor Preterm in labor Preterm in labor Preterm in labor Preterm in labor Preterm in labor Term not in labor Term not in labor Term not in labor Term not in labor Term not in labor Term not in labor Term not in labor Term not in labor Term in labor Term in labor Term in labor Term in labor Term in labor Term in labor Term in labor Term in labor Gestational age 32 wk 2 d 31 wk 3 d 33 wk 5 d 24 wk 6 d 35 wk 1 d 34 wk 30 wk 5 d 31 wk 6 d 34 wk 4 d 25 wk 6 d 35 wk 32 wk 1 d 37 wk 6 d 37 wk 39 wk 1 d 40 wk 1 d 37 wk 3 d 40 wk 4 d 39 wk 1 d 39 wk 3 d 40 wk 5 d 38 wk 5 d 38 wk 38 wk 4 d 40 wk 1 d 39 wk 40 wk 39 wk 3 d Reason for delivery Preeclampsia; intrauterine growth restriction; oligohydramnios Severe preeclampsia Severe preeclampsia Severe preeclampsia Preterm premature rupture of membranes; previous extensive cervical laceration Hypertension; Rh isoimmunization; mature fetal lung profile Idiopathic preterm labor Twin gestation; preterm labor Triplet gestation; preterm labor Appendicitis; preterm labor Triplet gestation; preterm labor Idiopathic preterm labor Elective repeat cesarean delivery Elective repeat cesarean delivery Elective repeat cesarean delivery Primary cesarean delivery for breech presentation Primary cesarean delivery for funic presentation Primary cesarean delivery for breech presentation Elective repeat cesarean delivery Primary cesarean delivery for breech presentation Term labor Term labor Term labor Term labor Term labor Term labor Term breech presentation in labor Term labor Mode of delivery Cesarean delivery Cesarean delivery Cesarean delivery Cesarean delivery Cesarean delivery Cesarean delivery Spontaneous vaginal delivery Spontaneous vaginal delivery Cesarean delivery Spontaneous vaginal delivery Cesarean delivery Spontaneous vaginal delivery Cesarean delivery Cesarean delivery Cesarean delivery Cesarean delivery Cesarean delivery Cesarean delivery Cesarean delivery Cesarean delivery Spontaneous vaginal delivery Spontaneous vaginal delivery Spontaneous vaginal delivery Spontaneous vaginal delivery Spontaneous vaginal delivery Spontaneous vaginal delivery Cesarean delivery Spontaneous vaginal delivery

In that study human fetal membrane ECCIa specifically competed with tritiated isradipine at the dihydropyridine site of the L-type uterine calcium channel in pregnant guinea pigs. In this study the hypothesis that preterm fetal membranes release a greater amount of ECCIa than do term fetal membranes was tested. If this hypothesis were true, then the data would support a role for ECCIa in maintaining preterm uterine quiescence. If ECCIa decreased at term, it would imply a role for ECCIa in the initiation of term labor. The strategy for testing this hypothesis was to measure and compare the amount of ECCIa produced by fetal membranes from women in 4 clinical categories as follows: (1) preterm not in labor, (2) preterm in labor, (3) term not in labor, and (4) term in labor. Material and methods Competitive binding assay. L-Type calcium channel binding sites were generated from pregnant guinea pig uterine tissues at 55 days' (0.8) gestation (Hilltop Lab Animals, Inc, Scottsdale, Pa). Animals were killed according to a protocol approved by the Loyola University institutional animal care and use committee. The cell membrane preparation was as previously described.8 Protein determination was by the Bradford method,11 with bovine serum albumin used as the protein standard. A 500-µg aliquot of protein was used per assay tube. Four

different guinea pig uteri were used for these experiments, randomly assigned to the 4 clinical categories. The number of dihydropyridine binding sites and the affinity, as measured by saturation binding, were similar among the 4 uteri (data not shown). Tritiated isradipine (NEN Life Science Products, Inc, Boston, Mass) at 79.7 Ci/mmol was used to detect the dihydropyridine site at a final concentration of 230 pmol/L. Binding was performed at 25°C for 90 minutes. Incubation time was chosen on the basis of the plateau phase of an association binding experiment (data not shown). Nonspecific binding was determined by excess unlabeled isradipine at a final concentration of 1 µmol/L. Bound ligand was separated from free ligand by filtration through glass fiber filters (Schleicher & Schuell Inc, Keene, NH) and counted. All samples were run in duplicate. Specific binding represented about 90% of total binding. The sensitivity of the assay was about 10% specific inhibition. The intraassay and interassay coefficients of variation were 5% and 12%, respectively. Generation of the fetal membrane inhibitor. Placentas were obtained from term pregnancies (37-41 weeks' gestation) after spontaneous labor or elective cesarean delivery. Placentas were also obtained from preterm pregnancies (24-36 weeks' gestation) after spontaneous premature labor or indicated preterm cesarean delivery. Table I shows the clinical data for each patient from

358 Carroll, Gianopoulos, and Collins

February 2001 Am J Obstet Gynecol

A

B

C

D

Fig 1. Competitive binding assay. Competitive binding curves for individual patients in the following categories: preterm not in labor (A), term not in labor (B), preterm in labor (C), and term in labor (D). Amount of ECCIa measured is displayed on y axis as percentage of specific inhibition. Inhibitor was added in increasing amounts, shown on x axis as volume in milliliters. A, Filled circle, patient 1; filled square, patient 2; filled inverted triangle, patient 3; open square, patient 4; filled diamond, patient 5; filled triangle, patient 6. B, Filled circle, patient 13; filled triangle, patient 14; filled square, patient 15; open diamond, patient 16; filled inverted triangle, patient 17; open square, patient 18; open triangle, patient 19; open inverted triangle, patient 20. C, Filled triangle, patient 7; open square, patient 8; filled square, patient 9; filled circle, patient 10; filled diamond, patient 11; filled inverted triangle, patient 12. D, Filled triangle, patient 21; open inverted triangle, patient 22; open triangle, patient 23; filled square, patient 24; open square, patient 25; filled diamond, patient 26; open circle, patient 27; filled inverted triangle, patient 28.

whom a placenta was taken for use in the competitive binding assay. Appropriate Loyola University Medical Center institutional review board approval was obtained for use of human fetal membranes. Pregnancies exposed to uterotonic or cervical ripening agents or those with intrapartum infection or meconium-stained fluid were excluded. Membranes were collected within 15 minutes of delivery and placed in 4°C buffer solution (110-mmol/L sodium chloride, 4-mmol/L potassium chloride, 20mmol/L N-[2-hydroxyethyl]piperazine-N´-[2-ethanesulfonic acid], pH 7.1 at 37°C, 2.0-mmol/L calcium chloride, 0.5-mmol/L magnesium chloride, 15-mmol/L sodium bicarbonate, and 1.8-mmol/L glucose plus 100 U/mL penicillin G and 100 µg/mL streptomycin sulfate). A 25-cm2 surface area of membrane was cut with a template, with care taken to avoid the site of rupture. The fetal membrane sample was immersed in 7.5 mL buffer at 37°C for 25 minutes. The time chosen was the peak time of release as previously established.8 The inhibitor released from the fetal membranes into the buffer solution was subsequently added in increasing volumes to generate a competitive binding curve. Total protein of the fetal

membrane templates was determined by dissolving the tissue in 1N sodium hydroxide, boiling for 5 minutes at 90°C, and subsequently measuring protein by the Bradford method11 with bovine serum albumin as the protein standard with appropriate sodium hydroxide control preparations. Uterine contraction assay. The contraction assay used the in vitro Plexiglas (Elf Atochem North America, Inc, Philadelphia, Pa) chamber model as previously described elsewhere.9, 10 In brief, the chamber model consists of a fetal compartment (3 mL) and a maternal compartment (10 mL) divided by fetal membranes, which are placed in a removable cassette. For the contraction assay uterine strips from an estrogenized (50 µg 17-estradiol subcutaneously for 3 days) rat (Wistar, 200 g; Charles River Laboratories, Inc, Wilmington, Mass) were cut to a template and mounted to measure force generated by longitudinal muscle. Uterine strips were used either in control chambers (Bay K 8644 dose response only) or in experimental chambers (Bay K 8644 dose response after 20-minute exposure to human fetal membranes). The cumulative Bay K 8644 (RBI, Natick, Mass) dose-response curve was from

Volume 184, Number 3 Am J Obstet Gynecol

Carroll, Gianopoulos, and Collins 359

100 pmol/L to 1 µmol/L. Each number in the control chambers (Bay K 8644 only) represents a separate animal, and each number reported for the experimental chambers (Bay K 8644 with fetal membranes) represents a separate placenta. The fetal membranes used in the uterine contraction bioassay came from patients other than those reported on for the competitive binding experiments. Data for the group in labor at term were published previously as part of a time course experiment and are shown here for ease of comparison with the other clinical groups.8 Site specificity. To confirm the origin of the inhibitor within the layers of fetal membranes, a 25-cm2 area of full-thickness fetal membranes was manually separated into the amnion and the chorion and decidua. The component parts were placed in 7.5 mL buffer and incubated for 25 minutes at 37°C. In addition, inhibitor was generated from placenta by incubating 2 g placenta (wet weight)/mL buffer for 25 minutes at 37°C. Two concentrations, represented by the 1.0-mL and 0.5-mL volumes, were used in the competitive binding assay. Data and statistical analysis. For the competitive binding assay, the percentage of specific inhibition was calculated for each dilution as follows: [1 ­ (Experimental cpm ­ Nonspecific cpm)/(Total cpm ­ Nonspecific cpm)] × 100%. A 1% specific inhibition was defined as 1 inhibitor unit. With an average of 2 or 3 dilutions from the linear part of each competition curve, the inhibition in inhibitor units per milliliter was calculated for each patient's placenta. The data are displayed as mean ± SD inhibitor units per milliliter for each clinical category, and comparisons were made between the preterm group in labor and the preterm group not in labor and between the term group in labor and the term group not in labor. Statistical analysis was by the Mann-Whitney test (2-tailed). For the contraction assay the area under the curve for each 5-minute dose was calculated and expressed as a fold increase with respect to the basal value. Statistical analysis was by 1-way analysis of variance for comparison of the Bay K 8644 curve versus the Bay K 8644 curve done in the presence of the human fetal membranes. The Fisher protected least significant difference was used as the post hoc test. The site specificity data were also expressed as mean ± SD of inhibitor units per milliliter for each site, and a t test (2-tailed) was used for comparison. In all cases P  .05 was considered significant. Results Competitive binding assay. ECCIa released from human fetal membranes was measured with the competitive binding assay. Competitive binding curves for individual patients in each of the 4 clinical categories are shown in Fig 1. Patient numbers are the same as in Table I. The gestational age, clinical category, reason for delivery, and mode of delivery are listed for each patient in

Fig 2. Competitive binding assay. Data for each individual patient (shown in Fig 1) are summarized by calculation of number of inhibitor units per milliliter (1% specific inhibition was defined as 1 inhibitor unit). Comparisons were made between preterm labor (PT,L) and preterm not in labor (PT,NIL) groups and between term labor (T,L) and term not in labor (T,NIL) groups. Statistical analysis was by Mann-Whitney test (2-tailed). Significantly less ECCIa was measured in preterm group in labor. Bar heights, Mean; error bars, SD. Asterisk, P  .05.

Table I. The mean (±SD) gestational age for the preterm group not in labor was 31.91 ± 3.69 weeks, with a similar mean gestational age for the preterm group in labor at 31.66 ± 3.27 weeks. The mean gestational age for the term group not in labor was 38.83 ± 1.28 weeks, and that for the term group in labor was 39.32 ± 0.92 weeks. These data have been summarized by calculating the number of inhibitor units per milliliter released from each patient's fetal membrane specimen. The summary data are displayed as mean (±SD) of inhibitor units per milliliter for each clinical category and shown in Fig 2. ECCIa was most variable but present in the greatest amount in fetal membranes from preterm women not in labor, followed by women at term not in labor and women at term in labor. Fetal membranes from women in preterm labor released the least amount of ECCIa. Uterine contraction bioassay. Human fetal membranes in each of the clinical categories were also tested in a functional uterine contraction bioassay. Fetal membranes released ECCIa into the uterine muscle bath. ECCIa then competed with Bay K 8644, an L-type calcium channel agonist. Fig 3 shows the integrated contraction data for uterine muscle strips exposed to Bay K 8644 only (control chambers) and for muscle strips first exposed to fetal membrane ECCIa followed by the Bay K 8644 dose response. Bay K 8644­induced contractions were significantly inhibited in uterine muscles exposed to fetal membranes from women in the following categories: (1) preterm not in labor, (2) term not in labor, and

360 Carroll, Gianopoulos, and Collins

February 2001 Am J Obstet Gynecol

A

B

C

D

Fig 3. Uterine contraction bioassay. Integrated contraction data are shown for uterine muscle strips exposed to Bay K 8644 only (open squares; n = 24) or for muscle strips first exposed to fetal membrane ECCIa followed by Bay K 8644 dose response (filled circles) in membranes from preterm group not in labor (A), term group not in labor (B), preterm group in labor (C), and term group in labor (D). Data are displayed as fold increase in force relative to basal level versus log dose of Bay K 8644. Data points, Mean; error bars, SD. Bay K 8644­induced contractions were significantly inhibited in uterine muscles exposed to membranes from preterm group not in labor (A; n = 3; P  .002), term group not in labor (B; n = 6; P  .01), and term group in labor (C; n = 10; P  .01). Fetal membranes from preterm group in labor (D; n = 3) did not inhibit Bay K 8644­induced contractions. Data for term group in labor (D) have been previously published and are shown here for ease of comparison.8

(3) term in labor. Consistent with the low amount of ECCIa measured in the competitive binding assay, fetal membranes from women in preterm labor did not inhibit Bay K 8644­induced contractions. Site specificity. The specific site of production of the ECCIa was also examined. For these experiments measurements were made at only 2 dilutions. Data from all the groups at the 1.0-mL dilution were pooled and are displayed in Fig 4. Consistent with previous published data from term fetal membranes only, the chorion and decidua produced significantly more ECCIa than did the amnion.8, 9 An unexpected finding was the large amount of inhibitor released by the placenta itself.
Fig 4. Site of production. Amounts of ECCIa released from chorion and decidua (C/D; n = 25), amnion (n = 25), and placenta (n = 13) were measured with competitive binding assay. Data are displayed as inhibitor units per milliliter. Clinical categories are grouped for each site. Significantly more inhibitor was released from chorion and decidua than from amnion. ECCIa was also released from placenta. Bar heights, Mean; error bars, SD. Asterisk, P  .05, by t test.

Comment The findings from this study are as follows. First, as measured in the competitive binding assay, fetal membranes from women who were preterm not in labor released more ECCIa than did those in the other 3 clinical groups (term not in labor, term in labor, and preterm in

Volume 184, Number 3 Am J Obstet Gynecol

Carroll, Gianopoulos, and Collins 361

labor). An unexpected finding was the extremely low amount of ECCIa released by fetal membranes from women in preterm labor. Functional uterine contraction data are internally consistent with the competitive binding data, in that the ECCIa released from fetal membranes in the 3 groups considered to be part of the normal physiologic continuum of pregnancy (preterm not in labor, term not in labor, and term in labor) specifically inhibited uterine contractions induced by the L-type calcium channel agonist Bay K 8644. Bay K 8644­induced uterine contractions were not inhibited by exposure to fetal membranes from women in preterm labor, a finding that was in agreement with the low amounts of ECCIa measured in this group. Both these assays specifically tested inhibition at the level of the dihydropyridine site of the uterine L-type calcium channel. Finally, ECCIa was released from chorion and decidua, with little released from the amnion, which is consistent with our previous work.8, 9 An unexpected finding was the large amount of ECCIa released by the placenta. Interpretation of these findings depends on the assumption that the standardized surface areas of membranes from which ECCIa was measured in either assay contained similar numbers of cells producing the inhibitor. Because the exact cell type that is producing ECCIa is unknown at this time, it is not possible to test this assumption. Because of the variable amounts of water in the membrane pieces, wet weights are a poor method of standardization. Even measurement of total protein content does not address whether there are similar numbers of inhibitor producing cells in each membrane piece. There is the additional constraint that there had to be enough fetal membrane from each placenta for pathologic analysis. Use of a standardized surface area of membrane was therefore chosen as the best method for standardization. Recent reviews on investigations into the mechanisms of onset of term labor and preterm labor have discussed the many possible molecular and biochemical pathways leading to labor and the possible endocrine and paracrine control of these pathways.12, 13 Many studies on mechanisms of parturition have evaluated the role of fetal membranes in the modulation of uterine contractions, but they have concentrated on the regulation and role of stimulatory effectors, such as oxytocin and prostaglandins. However, there is also a growing body of evidence to suggest that there may be active inhibition of the myometrium throughout most of pregnancy, and that loss or down-regulation of the inhibitory pathways may play an important role in the onset of parturition.14-17 Our data on the ECCIa are consistent with this concept. ECCIa may participate in actively maintaining uterine quiescence in the preterm uterus, which would be consistent with more ECCIa earlier in pregnancy. The data are also consistent with ECCIa playing a role in the transition into term labor, in that the ECCIa is decreasing at a time

in gestation when the uterine L-type calcium channel is known to be up-regulated.2, 5, 6 The data also show that fetal membranes from patients with idiopathic preterm labor had extremely little ECCIa, even though the mean gestational age was similar to that among the preterm group not in labor. Therefore abnormally low levels of the ECCIa may be associated with idiopathic preterm labor, and replacement of deficient ECCIa may be a mechanism to prevent or treat some preterm labor. The current efficacy data of all agents used for tocolysis, including calcium channel blockers, are mixed.18-20 This is probably because of the multiple mechanisms that lead to premature labor. The concurrent presence of various mechanisms leads to a lack of diagnostic specificity, which invariably leads to mixed outcomes when specific therapies are tested. Further identification of the ECCIa described in this article may lead to the development of diagnostic modalities that would allow identification of patients in whom the mechanism leading to preterm labor is an inherent or acquired lack of ECCIa. When endogenous or exogenous calcium channel inhibitors are tested in this specific group of patients, a significant tocolytic effect might be more apparent. Until the diagnostic tools are available to separate and categorize the different subtypes of preterm labor, the benefits of any specific therapy will be difficult to prove. We acknowledge Elena Choobineh for her technical assistance with the competitive binding assay and Edo Idriss for his technical assistance with the uterine contraction bioassay. We thank Susanne Rovansek and Amy Stuck for their assistance in the preparation of the manuscript.
REFERENCES

1. Sanborn BM. Relationship of ion channel activity to control of myometrial calcium. J Soc Gynecol Investig 2000;7:4-11. 2. Mironneau J. Ion channels and the control of uterine contractility. In: Garfield RE, Tabb TN, editors. Control of uterine contractility. Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press; 1994. p. 1-22. 3. Young RC, Smith LH, Anderson NC. Passive membrane properties and inward calcium current of human uterine smooth muscle cells. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;164:1132-9. 4. Hofmann F, Biel M, Flockerzi V. Molecular basis for Ca2+ channel diversity. Ann Rev Neurosci 1994;17:399-418. 5. Mershon JL, Mikala G, Schwartz A. Changes in the expression of the L-type voltage-dependent calcium channel during pregnancy and parturition in the rat. Biol Reprod 1994;51:993-9. 6. Tezuka N, Ali M, Chwalisz K, Garfield RE. Changes in transcripts encoding calcium channel subunits of rat myometrium during pregnancy. Am J Physiol 1995;269:C1008-17. 7. Striessnig J, Grabner M, Mitterdorfer J, Hering S, Sinnegger MJ, Glossmann H. Structural basis of drug binding to L Ca2+ channels. Trends Pharmacol Sci 1998;19:108-15. 8. Emery SP, Idriss E, Richmonds C, Collins PL. Human fetal membranes release a Ca++ channel inhibitor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:989-93. 9. Collins PL, Moore JJ, Idriss E, Kulp TM. Human fetal membranes inhibit calcium L-channel activated uterine contractions. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;175:1173-9. 10. Collins PL, Idriss E, Moore JJ. Human fetal membranes inhibit spontaneous uterine contractions. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993;77:1479-84.

362 Carroll, Gianopoulos, and Collins

February 2001 Am J Obstet Gynecol

11. Bradford MM. A rapid and sensitive method for quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding. Anal Biochem 1976;72:248-54. 12. Norwitz ER, Robinson JN, Challis JR. The control of labor. N Engl J Med 1999;341:660-6. 13. Riemer RK, Heymann MA. Regulation of uterine smooth muscle function during gestation. Pediatr Res 1998;44:615-27. 14. Cheung PY, Walton JC, Tai HH, Riley SC, Challis JR. Immunocytochemical distribution and localization of 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase in human fetal membranes, decidua, and placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163:1445-9. 15. Yallampalli C, Garfield RE, Byam-Smith M. Nitric oxide inhibits uterine contractility during pregnancy but not during delivery. Endocrinology 1993;133:1899-902. 16. Sladek SM, Regenstein AC, Lykins D, Roberts JM. Nitric oxide

17.

18. 19.

20.

synthase activity in pregnant rabbit uterus decreases on the last day of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;169:1285-91. Germain AM, Smith J, Casey ML, MacDonald PC. Human fetal membrane contribution to the prevention of parturition: uterotonin degradation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;78: 463-70. Gyetvai K, Hannah ME, Hodnett ED, Ohlsson A. Tocolytics for preterm labor: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 1999;94:869-77. Papatsonis DN, Van Geijn HP, Adèr HJ, Lange FM, Bleker OP, Dekker GA. Nifedipine and ritodrine in the management of preterm labor: a randomized multicenter trial. Obstet Gynecol 1997;90:230-4. Carr DB, Clark AL, Kernek K, Spinnato JA. Maintenance oral nifedipine for preterm labor: a randomized clinical trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999;181:822-7.

Bound volumes available to subscribers Bound volumes of the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology are available to subscribers (only) for the 2001 issues from the publisher, at a cost of $122.00 for domestic, $156.22 for Canada, and $146.00 for international for Vol. 184 (January-June) and Vol. 185 (July-December). Shipping charges are included. Each bound volume contains a subject and author index, and all advertising is removed. Copies are shipped within 60 days after publication of the last issue in the volume. The binding is durable buckram with the Journal name, volume number, and year stamped in gold on the spine. Payment must accompany all orders. Contact Mosby, Subscription Customer Service, 6277 Sea Harbor Dr, Orlando, FL 32887. Telephone (800)654-2452 or (407)345-4000. Fax (407)363-9661. Subscriptions must be in force to qualify. Bound volumes are not available in place of a regular Journal subscription.

