Protein Expression and Purification 69 (2010) 91­98

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Protein Expression and Purification
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yprep

Coexpression of x subunit in E. coli is required for the maintenance of enzymatic activity of Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris RNA polymerase
Ching-Yuan Cheng, Yu-Jen Yu, Ming-Te Yang *
Institute of Molecular Biology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung 40227, Taiwan, ROC

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t
In this study, plasmid pBBad22K was modulated to be able to coexpress the subunits of Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris (Xcc) core RNA polymerase (RNAP) in an Escherichia coli host. The subunitencoding genes of Xcc core RNAP were PCR-amplified respectively to convert into gene cassettes in which an intact subunit-encoding gene and a ribosome binding site (RBS) preceding the gene were contained, and were then cloned one by one into pBBad22K. In addition, a hexahistidine tag (His-tag) was introduced into the C-terminus of a subunit-encoded rpoA during PCR for facilitating purification of Xcc core RNAP. The resultant vectors, pBC-CBA and pBC-CBAZ, were used for overproduction of Xcc core RNAP lacking or containing x, respectively. The assembly of Xcc core RNAP subunits that were coexpressed from these vectors was demonstrated after purification via two-step column chromatography. The yield of Xcc core RNAP containing x had a 67% increase compared with that of one lacking x, indicating that x promotes the assembly of Xcc core RNAP. In addition, Xcc core RNAP lacking x showed a 13-fold decrease in enzymatic activity in comparison with that containing x. Promoter-specific transcription assays by recombinant Xcc core RNAP reconstituted with external added r factor showed that the absence of x debilitates the transcriptional activity of Xcc RNAP. Our results demonstrated that x is not only capable of strengthening the stability, but is also required for the maintenance of enzymatic activity of Xcc RNAP. Ó 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Article history: Received 14 June 2009 and in revised form 1 July 2009 Available online 5 July 2009 Keywords: Xanthomonas Coexpression RNA polymerase

Introduction Protein overexpression is a powerful tool for characterization of protein molecules of all living organisms in the post-genomic era. This is achieved through the use of a plasmid bearing the target gene under the control of a strong and inducible promoter. However, overexpression of a single protein that forms complex with its partners may tend to form inclusion bodies because of the incorrectly folding of the protein, even if coexpressed with chaperons. Although reconstitution in vitro with subunits that were overexpressed individually and purified separately is practicable, it turns out to be a low efficiency and time-consuming process [1,2]. Due to these technical difficulties, the studies of these multicomponent protein complexes have been restricted. Coexpression of multiple proteins simultaneously in the cell provides a better method to acquire the desired protein complexes with the abundant and tightly assembled multicomponents. This technique improves the protein solubility compared to when expressed alone, and yields active protein complexes [3]. Multicomponent protein complexes can be purified more easily if one (or more than one) of the coexpressed subunits bears a short peptide

affinity tag that facilitates the purification. Successful cases of coexpression of protein complexes in prokaryotic and eukaryotic hosts have been documented [4], and vectors suitable for coexpression system have been reported [5­8]. In regard to the production of functional bacterial core RNAP, a suite of polycistronic coexpression plasmids droven by the T7 RNAP promoter (pET-based) were created. They were used to coexpress three Escherichia coli core RNAP subunit genes (rpoA, rpoB, and rpoC) in vivo, allowing to obtain the in vivo-assembled, overproduced mutant E. coli core RNAP for the structure­function analysis [9,10]. Minakhin et al. [11] also used the pET system to overproduce the recombinant Thermus aquaticus RNAP subunits for analysis of the transcription mechanism of T. aquaticus. As to Gram positive bacteria, plasmids permitting the overproduction of recombinant Bacillus subtilis RNAP have been previously described [12]. In order to obtain the Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris1 (Xcc) core RNAP with high yield and purity for transcriptional studies in Xcc, we have established a method that outperforms the conventional purification. In this report, we designed a cloning strategy that applied both T7 RNAP and BAD expression systems

* Corresponding author. Fax: +886 4 22874879 E-mail address: mtyang@dragon.nchu.edu.tw (M.-T. Yang). 1046-5928/$ - see front matter Ó 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.pep.2009.07.002

1 Abbreviations used: Xcc, Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris; RNAP, RNA polymerase; RBS, ribosome binding site; His-tag, hexahistidine tag; TCA, trichloroacetic acid.

92

C.-Y. Cheng et al. / Protein Expression and Purification 69 (2010) 91­98

for the coexpression of Xcc core RNAP subunits in E. coli. Our results demonstrated that the PBAD-based vectors permitted a significantly increase in the yield and purity of the in vivo assembled Xcc core RNAP, and the enzymatic activity of Xcc RNAP depended on the presence of x subunit.

were carried out using an ÄKTA purifier automated liquid chromatography system (GE Healthcare). Determination the in vitro transcriptional activity of Xcc RNAP The method described by Chamberlin et al. [19] was employed for determination of the RNAP transcriptional activity. Xcc core RNAP (1­2 lg) was added into the 50 ll reaction mixture containing 40 mM Tris­HCl (pH 7.9), 150 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM DTT and 1 lg poly(dA-dT) DNA template. The binding of RNAP to the DNA template was performed at 28 °C for 20 min. Transcription was initiated by adding a solution containing 10 mM ATP, 10 mM UTP, and 5 lCi [a-32P]UTP, and reaction was carried out at 28 °C for 20 min. Transcription was stopped by addition of 200 ll cold 5% trichloroacetic acid (TCA). Labeled RNA transcripts were collected by filtration onto Whatman GF/A filters preequilibrated with 5% ice-cold TCA. Each filter was washed three times with 1 ml ice-cold 5% TCA and finally with 1 ml ice-cold ethanol. The filters were air-dried and counted by liquid scintillation analyzer (TRI-CARB 2900TR, PACKARD). As for determining the promoter-specific transcriptional activity of Xcc RNAP, the 219bp DNA template containing r70-dependent promoter PrpoD was prepared by PCR using primers r70-L and r70-R. On the other hand, the 208-bp DNA template containing rE-dependent promoter PrpoE was PCR-amplified using primers rpoE-P and rpoE-GF. In vitro reconstitution of the recombinant Xcc core RNAP with purified r70 and rE was carried out as described previously [17]. The 32Plabeled RNA products were precipitated and washed with 70% ethanol, resuspended in 6 ll formamide-loading dye (80% formamide, 0.05% bromophenol blue, and 0.05% xylene cyanol) and analyzed on a 6% urea-denaturing polyacrylamide gel. The gel was visualized using the Phosphoimager Typhoon 9200 (GE Healthcare). Results Cloning strategy and construction of Xcc RNAP coexpression vectors Despite a number of attempts to develop a system for overexpression and purification each of the RNAP subunits and reconstitution in vitro [20], an efficient system has yet to be established. Polycistronic expression system for producing the desired protein complex in the cell provides an alternative method to acquire abundant and tightly assembled multicomponent protein. Successful cases of plasmids that were constructed for the production of bacterial RNAP have been described [9,11,12]. Therefore, we decided to design the coexpression system for expression and purification of Xcc core RNAP. Each gene encoding Xcc RNAP subunit that was cloned individually into the pET-based expression vector for single subunit overproduction (see Materials and methods) was PCR-amplified respectively to convert into a gene cassette using primer pET-Spe in combination with primer pET-Swa. Primer pET-SwaH was used in PCR when the expressed Xcc RNAP subunit that bears a His-tag at its C-terminus is required. Primer pET-Spe has the sequences identical to downstream region of the pET21 lac operator and the XbaI site been converted into a SpeI site (ACTAGT), and primer pET-Swa is complementary to the upstream region of the His-tag coding sequences. Thus, each resultant gene cassette included a Xcc RNAP subunit-encoded gene and a ribosome binding site (RBS) preceding the start codon of the target gene. Several restriction enzyme sites were introduced into the flanking region of each gene cassette by these primers. To facilitate further cloning procedures, a SpeI site was generated at the 50 -end of each of the gene cassette, while XbaI, SwaI, and BglII sites were introduced at the 30 -end in the described order. Thus, all the gene cassettes of the

Materials and methods Construction of vectors for expression of the individual RNAP subunit In order to reduce the basal expression of the target protein without IPTG induction, a BamHI-digested 115-bp E. coli thr attenuator [13] was subcloned into BglII site upstream of the T7 promoter of the expression vectors pET-21b and pET-21d (Novagen) to generate pET21bT and pET21dT, respectively. Each of the Xcc RNAP gene was PCR amplified with Pfu DNA polymerase (Stratagene) using specific primers incorporating unique restriction enzyme sites for facilitating gene cloning. The primers used in this study are listed in Supplementary data Table S1. The PCR product of the 1.0-kb rpoA (GenBank Accession No. U79735) [14] was digested with NdeI and SalI and cloned into NdeI and XhoI restriction sites of pET21bT to create pET-a. The 4.1-kb rpoB (AF426390) was PCR-amplified and cloned into NcoI and XhoI restriction sites of pET21dT to create pET-b. The 4.2-kb rpoC (AF426389) was PCRamplified and cloned into NdeI and NotI restriction sites of pET21bT to create pET-b0 . The PCR products of Xcc rpoD (U82763) [15], and rpoZ were digested with NdeI and XhoI and ligated to identical restriction sites of pET21bT to create pET-r, and pET-x, respectively. The specific primers for Xcc rpoZ were designed on the basis of the coding sequence published by Chung et al. [16]. All constructed expression vectors were verified by DNA sequencing. Purification of the recombinant Xcc r factors The expression vector pET-r was transformed into E. coli strain BL21(DE3). When the cell density reached OD600 = 0.3­0.4, the protein was induced with 0.5 mM IPTG at 28 °C for 4 h. The cell pellet was harvested by centrifugation at 4 °C, and resuspended with the sonication buffer [20 mM Tris­HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM KCl, 5% glycerol]. The cell homogenization was carried out by sonication (MISONIX, USA). The hexahistidine tag (His-tag) fusion Xcc RpoD was purified by eluting from Ni­NTA column (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's suggestions. The expression and purification of Xcc rE was carried out as described previously [17]. Expression and purification of recombinant Xcc core RNAP For coexpression of the Xcc core RNAP subunits, E. coli strain DH5a harboring pBBad22K-based coexpression vectors [18] was induced with 0.05% arabinose, while BL21(DE3) harboring pETbased coexpression vectors was induced with 0.2 mM IPTG. After induction at 28 °C for 4 h, cell pellets were resuspended with Buffer A [25 mM Tris­HCl (pH 8.0), 5 mM MgCl2, 5% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM b-mercaptoethanol and 1 mM PMSF] containing 150 mM KCl and then disrupted using a French Press (Thermo Electron Co., USA). The lysates were collected and filtrated by passing through a 0.45 lm syringe filter, pumped onto Ni-NTA column and eluted with 250 mM imidazole. The eluate was then applied to HiTrapTM Heparin HP column (5 ml, GE Healthcare) for further purification and the Xcc core RNAP fraction was eluted with Buffer A containing 0.45 M KCl. The native Xcc core RNAP was purified as described previously [17]. The protein fraction at each purification step was visualized by coomassie blue-stained SDS­PAGE. All purifications

C.-Y. Cheng et al. / Protein Expression and Purification 69 (2010) 91­98

93

Xcc core RNAP subunit coding sequences, including rpoA (a), rpoB (b), rpoC (b0 ), and rpoZ (x) were successfully PCR-amplified and subcloned into the EcoRV site of pSK+ (Stratagene) to generate pSKC-A, pSKC-B, pSKC-C, and pSKC-Z, respectively (Table 1). In the course of our coexpression vector construction, two vectors were utilized based on their different promoter systems. The pET-21b of the T7 RNAP system is one of the most commonly used expression system for heterologous protein production in E. coli with the advantage of being tightly controlled and producing a high level of protein overexpression [21]. The pBBad22K plasmid bearing a L-arabinose-inducible BAD promoter (PBAD) system was constructed by Sukchawalit et al. [18] and able to replicate in both enteric and non-enteric Gram negative bacteria. The cloning strategy for the construction of Xcc RNAP coexpression vectors is represented in Fig. 1. To construct the pET-21b vector system, the subunit-encoded gene cassette 1 (referred to gene 1) of the Xcc RNAP was isolated from the pSKC-based plasmid by SpeI and BglII digestion. The SpeI-BglII gene 1 DNA fragment was then ligated into XbaI (compatible to SpeI) and BamHI (compatible to BglII) sites of pET-21b. The resultant plasmid was then digested with XbaI and SwaI and used as a recipient for insertion of gene 2 that had been cleaved with SpeI and SwaI. For insertion of the third and more inserted gene cassettes, the same cloning strategy as gene 2 was applied (Fig. 1a). The cloning strategy for pBBad22K vector is similar to that of pET-21b, e Xcc ept that the gene 1 for pBBad22K was digested by SpeI (one SpeI site is incorporated in pET-Spe, and the other is in the vicinity of EcoRV site of pSK+),

and cloned into BglII-compatible NheI and XbaI sites of pBBad22K (Fig. 1b). Expression and purification of the Xcc core RNAP with coexpression vectors Considerable pretests were performed prior to overexpress Xcc core RNAP. We found that the expression level of each Xcc RNAP subunit was different and the closer the target gene to the T7 promoter seems to have a higher protein expression after induction (data not shown). Therefore, it might be a better choice to use the gene encoding rpoB or rpoC as the first and the second genes in the polycistronic construction. The a and b0 subunits that had a His-tag fusion at the C-terminus are configurations which have been successfully applied to bacterial RNAP purification [1,20,22]. In this study, the His-tag fused to the C-terminus of the a and b0 subunits of Xcc RNAP were compared. E. coli cell crude extracts containing the coexpressed Xcc core RNAP subunits with either aHis-tag or b0 His-tag were subjected to Ni-NTA column purification, respectively. After wash and elution with imidazole, the protein fractions were analyzed by SDS­PAGE. Results showed that under the same wash condition, the RNAP containing aHis-tag exhibited a stronger binding intensity to the resin than that with b0 His-tag. Most of the RNAP containing b0 His-tag were eluted from the resin when the column was washed with the buffer containing 40 mM imidazole, whereas the RNAP containing aHis-tag were eluted at higher imidazole concentration (data not shown). According to the results

Table 1 Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study. Strain or plasmid Description References or source

Strains E. coli strains for T7 expression system Dara-leu7697 DlacX74 DphoAPvuII phoR DmalF3 F0 [lac+(lacIq)pro] trxB::kan (DE3) AD494(DE3) B834(DE3) FÀ ompT hsdSB (rÀ mÀ ) gal dcm met k(DE3) (B strain) B B BL21(DE3) FÀ ompT hsdSB (rÀ mÀ ) gal dcm k(DE3) (B strain) B B À BL21 Star(DE3) F ompT hsdSB (rÀ mÀ ) gal dcm rne131 k(DE3) (B strain) B B C41(DE3) FÀ ompT hsdSB (rÀ mÀ ) gal dcm k(DE3) containing one non-characterized mutation at least B B À À ER2566 F k fhuA2 [lon] ompT lacZ::T7 gene1 gal sulA11 D (mcrC-mrr)114::IS10 R(mcr-73::miniTn10-TetS)2 R(zgb-210::Tn10)(TetS) endA1 [dcm] JM109(DE3) e14À(mcrAÀ) recA1 endA1 gyrA96 thi-1 hsdR17(rÀ mþ ) supE44 relA1 D (lac-proAB) [F0 traD36 proAB lacIqZDM15] k(DE3) K K Origami B(DE3) FÀ ompT hsdSB(rÀ mÀ ) gal dcm lacY1 aphC (DE3) gor522::Tn10 trxB (Kanr,Tetr) (B strain) B B À À À Rosetta(DE3)pLysS F ompT hsdSB(rB mB ) gal dcm (DE3) pLysSRARE (Camr) (B strain) Tuner(DE3) FÀ ompT hsdSB (rÀ mÀ ) gal dcm lacY1 (DE3) (B strain) B B E. coli strain for BAD expression system DH5a /80dlacZDM15 recA1 endA1 gyrA96 thi-1 hsdR17 (rÀ mþ ) supE44 relA1 deoR D (lacZYA-argF)U169 K K Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris (Xcc) Xcc 17 Wild type strain Plasmids pBBad22 K pBluescript II SK+(pSK+) pET-21b pET-21d pET-21bT pET-21dT pET-CBA pET-CBAZ pBC-CBA pBC-CBAZ pET-a pET-b pET-b0 pET-x pET-r pSKC-A pSKC-B pSKC-C pSKC-Z Overexpression vector containing BAD promoter, pBBR1MCS-4 replicon, Kmr Cloning vector, ColE1 replicon, f1(+) origin, Apr Overexpression vector containing T7 promoter, pMB1 replicon, f1(+) origin, Apr Overexpression vector containing T7 promoter, pMB1 replicon, f1(+) origin, Apr pET-21b derivative, E. coli thr terminator preceding to T7 promoter pET-21d derivative, E. coli thr terminator preceding to T7 promoter pET-based expression vector of Xcc core RNAP (a2bb0 ) pET-based expression vector of Xcc core RNAP (a2bb0 x) pBBad22 K-based expression vector of Xcc core RNAP (a2bb0 ) pBBad22 K-based expression vector of Xcc core RNAP (a2bb0 x) Expression vector of Xcc a subunit Expression vector of Xcc b subunit Expression vector of Xcc b0 subunit Expression vector of Xcc x subunit Expression vector of Xcc r70 subunit Gene cassette of rpoA Gene cassette of rpoB Gene cassette of rpoC Gene cassette of rpoZ

Novagen Novagen Novagen Invitrogen [23] New England Biolab Promega Novagen Novagen Novagen Invitrogen [16] [18] Stratagene Novagen Novagen This study This study This study This study This study This study This study This study This study This study This study This study This study This study This study

94

C.-Y. Cheng et al. / Protein Expression and Purification 69 (2010) 91­98

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram outlining the strategy for construction of polycistronic expression vectors driven by either T7 RNAP (a) or the L-arabinose-inducible PBAD promoter (b). The restriction enzyme sites utilized during the cloning are indicated. See the Results section for more details on plasmid construction. PBAD, E. coli araBAD promoter; MCS, multiple cloning sites; T7T, T7 terminator; rrnBT1, the transcription terminator; RBS, ribosome-binding site.

of the preliminary tests, plasmids pET-CBA and pBC-CBA, contain a polycistronic operon rpoC­rpoB­rpoA under the control of T7 promoter or PBAD and a His-tag, appended to the C-terminus of a subunit, were chosen for expression and purification of the Xcc core RNAP. The expression levels of each Xcc RNAP subunit in E. coli with our constructed coexpression vectors were examined. The pET21b-based coexpression vectors, pET-CBA bearing rpoC­ rpoB­rpoA and pET-CBAZ bearing rpoC­rpoB­rpoA­rpoZ of Xcc RNAP were transformed individually into 10 different E. coli strains, including AD494(DE3), BL21(DE3), BL21 Star(DE3), B834(DE3), C41(DE3) [23], ER2566, JM109(DE3), Origami(DE3), Rosetta(DE3)pLysS, and Tuner(DE3). The expression of Xcc core RNAPs from these vectors was induced with 0.25 mM IPTG at 28 °C for 1­4 h, and the expression levels were monitored by SDS­PAGE. For reasons which remain unclear, the expressions of Xcc core RNAP subunits in the above E. coli hosts were unexpectedly low, leading to insufficient yield and difficulty in purification. The purification results of Xcc core RNAP from BL21(DE3), one of the above E. coli strains, harboring pET-CBAZ or pET-CBA were presented in Fig. 2. Efforts to optimize the expression conditions, including increasing the concentration of IPTG and prolonged the induction time, yielded higher overproduction level of Xcc core RNAP subunits. However, the yields of the fully reconstituted Xcc core RNAPs overproduced by these vectors and their purity were still low after two-step column chromatography via Ni-NTA and Heparin HP columns (Fig. 2a and b, lane H). Whilst the results of the T7 RNAP system were unsatisfactory, the PBAD system showed a moderate level of expression of the Xcc core RNAP subunits in DH5a. Fig. 3a shows the result of the affinity tag chromatography of the Xcc core RNAP using plasmid pBC-CBAZ containing rpoC­rpoB­rpoA­rpoZ. With 0.05% L-arabinose induction, the Xcc core RNAP subunits were coexpressed and can be observed on SDS­PAGE with migration at their corresponding molecular weight (Fig. 3a, lane T). Most of a subunit were overproduced in soluble form, while approximately 50% of the b and b0 subunits were expressed as insoluble (Fig. 3a, compare lanes P and S). In addition to the a

subunit, the b, b0 , and x subunits were also observed at the eluted fractions after passing through the Ni-NTA column (Fig. 3a, lane E). This indicates that the expressed subunits were able to assemble efficiently in vivo and copurify with a subunit through the fused His-tag in the C-terminus of the a subunit. Since the monomer and dimer of a subunits, and a2b complexes are able to bind to the Ni-NTA resin, further purification was necessary to remove these possible contaminations, intermediates formed in the assembly process. The Heparin HP column with a KCl stepwise gradient elution was applied to further separate these intermediate complexes from fully assembled Xcc core RNAP (Fig. 3a, lane H). The final yield of the purified Xcc core RNAP from 1-liter culture broth was 2.0 mg after two-step column chromatography, and the purity was greater than 95% by SDS­PAGE analysis (Table 2). The presence of x subunit improves the transcription activity of the Xcc RNAP In spite of the x subunit is not required for bacterial survival in E. coli [24], the contributions of x subunit in restoring the denatured core RNAP activity and promoting the RNAP assembly were evidenced [25,26]. Therefore, the impact of x subunit on the assembly and enzymatic activity of Xcc core RNAP was explored. Plasmid pBC-CBA, the predecessor to construct pBC-CBAZ, was used for coexpression of x-less Xcc core RNAP. The purification of the coexpressed x-less Xcc core RNAP from DH5a harboring pBC-CBA was essentially the same as described for the strain harboring pBC-CBAZ, and the purified core RNAP was verified by SDS­ PAGE. The result showed that association among a, b, and b0 was observed in the absence of x (Fig. 3b, lanes E and H). Nonetheless, the stability of the assembled x-less Xcc core RNAP became susceptible to salt concentration. A portion of subunits dissociated from the x-less Xcc core RNAP during the following Heparin HP column chromatography at the KCl concentration lower than 0.45 M (data not shown). As a result, the final yield of the purified x-less Xcc core RNAP from 1-liter culture media was 1.2 mg after two-step column chromatography (Table 2).

C.-Y. Cheng et al. / Protein Expression and Purification 69 (2010) 91­98

95

Fig. 2. Coomassie blue stained SDS­PAGE of purification of recombinant Xcc core RNAP. Cells of BL21(DE3) harboring pET-CBAZ (a) or pET-CBA (b) were induced with 0.2 mM IPTG at 28 °C for 4 h. The Xcc core RNAP was purified from the cell crude extract via two-step column chromatography as described in Materials and methods section. Low molecular weight size markers (GE Healthcare) were loaded in lane M and sizes are indicated on the left of each stained gel in kilodaltons. Xcc RNAP subunits are indicated by arrows on the right of the gel. Lanes T, the cell crude extract after induction; P, the insoluble protein fraction; S, the soluble protein fraction; F, flow-through of the Ni-NTA column; W, the protein fraction washed with 37.5 mM imidazole; E, the eluted fraction containing overexpressed Xcc core RNAP; H, the eluate of second chromatography by HiTrapTM Heparin HP column.

Fig. 3. Coomassie blue stained SDS­PAGE of purification of recombinant Xcc core RNAP expressed by BAD system. Cells of DH5a harboring pBC-CBAZ (a) or pBC-CBA (b) were induced with 0.05% L-arabinose at 28 °C for 4 h. The Xcc core RNAP was purified from the cell crude extract via two-step column chromatography (see Materials and Methods). Xcc RNAP subunits are indicated by arrows on the right of the gel. Lanes M, Low molecular weight size markers (GE Healthcare); T, the cell crude extract after induction; P, the insoluble protein fraction; S, the soluble protein fraction; F, flow-through of the Ni-NTA column; W, the protein fraction washed with 37.5 mM imidazole; E, the eluted fraction containing overexpressed Xcc core RNAP; H, the eluate of second chromatography by HiTrapTM Heparin HP column.

With both of the purified Xcc core RNAPs saturated with or without x subunit in hand, the effect of x on the transcriptional activity of the Xcc core RNAP was investigated. The transcriptional activities of the two types of the purified Xcc core RNAP using poly(dA-dT) templates were measured and presented in the Table 2. Results showed that the fully reconstituted Xcc core RNAP (a2bb0 x) purified from E. coli has a comparable activity with that of the native Xcc core RNAP. In comparison, the x-less Xcc core RNAP purified from DH5a containing pBC-CBA exhibited a 13-fold decrease in activity. This suggested that x is relevant to the maintenance of activity. To further confirm this, promoter-specific in vitro transcription assays were carried out using DNA fragment containing the r70-dependent promoter PrpoD as template. Both of the Xcc core RNAPs (a2bb0 and a2bb0 x) reconstituted in vitro with exogenously added Xcc r70 were able to generate specific RNA transcripts in a length of 106 nt, but showing feeble transcriptional activity by Xcc RNAP lacking x (Fig. 4a, compare lanes 2 and 4). Neither Xcc core RNAP containing x nor that lacking x gave specific RNA transcripts (Fig. 4a, lanes 1 and 3), suggesting that

the possible contamination of E. coli r70, which is typically present at the highest level among rs and might be copurified in the processes of purifying overexpressed Xcc core RNAPs from E. coli, is negligible. Similar result was observed when rE-dependent (a sigma factor responsible for extracytoplasmic stress) transcription was assayed by Xcc core RNAP containing or lacking x saturated with Xcc rE (Fig. 4b). These data indicate that x is required for robust activity of Xcc RNAP.

Discussion As more and more microorganisms have been sequenced, their genomic data have been made widely available. Taking advantages of high secretion capacity and different codon usage, it is very tempting to consider using other bacterial hosts rather than E. coli in the field of protein overproduction in industry and for commercial applications [27]. In comparison to other strong inducible promoters, PBAD has the advantage of expressing proteins of

96

C.-Y. Cheng et al. / Protein Expression and Purification 69 (2010) 91­98

Table 2 Purification of recombinant Xcc core RNAP overexpressed in E. coli host. Sample T7 RNAP system pET-CBA (a2bb0 ) Soluble lysate Ni­NTA Heparin pET-CBAZ (a2bb0 x) Soluble lysate Ni­NTA Heparin BAD system pBC-CBA (a2bb0 ) Soluble lysate Ni­NTA Heparin pBC-CBAZ (a2bb0 x) Soluble lysate Ni­NTA Heparin Total protein (mg)a Purity (%)b Relative activity (%)c

231 3.2 0.3 265 2.9 0.7

ND 60 65 ND 53 53

ND ND 11 ± 1.3 ND ND 112 ± 7.8

79.5 7.5 1.2 60.5 7.8 2.0

ND 86 >95 ND 85 >95

ND ND 14 ± 1.3 ND ND 179 ± 9.6

a Typical result from 0.5 L of BL21(DE3) culture with 0.2 mM IPTG induction and 1 L of DH5a culture with 0.05% arabinose induction at 28 °C for 4 h. The protein concentrations were estimated by Bio-Rad protein assay kit. b The purity of target protein was determined by quantifying each gel lane by using TotalLab software. c Percentage of specific activity (counts of 32P-labeled RNA transcripts per lg) of the recombinant Xcc RNAP compared with that of the native RNAP purified from Xcc.

interest in different bacteria. Cases of successful expression by PBAD in Mycobacterium [28], Pseudomonas [29] and Xanthomonas [18] have been reported. Additionally, it has been demonstrated that the PBAD expression system is characterized by tight regulation and controllable expression to a far greater extent than other available expression systems merely by means of the amount and the type of carbon sources presented in the medium, which is suitable for the study of the physiology of bacteria [30]. When utilizing the PBAD promoter to overproduce the heterologous protein in E. coli, we noticed that the cell growth became slower once the induction was initiated by the addition of L-arabinose. A rational explanation

is that a large proportion of E. coli RNAP molecules took part in PBAD-dependent transcription during induction, resulting in the overall decreased efficiency of the transcription of E. coli host. However, this finding may also be regarded as being favorable for protein purification as it makes it easier to isolate the overproduced protein with high quality from the host lysates. To minimize the use of different restriction enzymes and omit other tedious molecular manipulations, our cloning strategy for constructing the polycistronic expression system was simplified. The expression vector pBBad22K can be modulated as a coexpression vector by digesting with NheI and XbaI for positioning the first gene cassette which had been cleaved with SpeI. While in the pET vectors the first gene cassette was digested with SpeI and BglII and cloned into XbaI (compatible to SpeI site) and BamHI (compatible to BglII site) sites of these vectors. After that, the resulting plasmids can accept additional gene cassettes that had been previously treated with SpeI and SwaI in a theoretically unlimited number at XbaI and SwaI sites. The restriction enzymes used in our system, except NheI and BamHI that recognize their specific AT-rich sequences, make it possible for almost all genes from Xcc with 65% G + C content [31] to be cloned into our coexpression system. In addition, genes of interest that have been cloned in pET-20 to pET-44 vectors (Novagen) can be directly amplified using our designed primers pET-Spe and pET-Swa/pET-SwaH, and converted into gene cassettes used in our coexpression system with their in-frame tags. In this study, the His-tag on a C-terminus of the overproduced Xcc core RNAP conferred stronger binding to Ni­NTA than that on b' C-terminus under the same purification conditions. Since the native RNAP contains two a subunits, two His-tags can be introduced in the Xcc core RNAP by a dimer. It has been demonstrated that the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the a subunit is involved in the activation of the gene transcription [32­34]. Whether the fusion tag disturbs the regulation of the cell gene expression was not investigated in this study. Furthermore, Vrentas et al. have reported that a trace amount of host-encoded x might be copurified with the x-less E. coli core RNAP when the E. coli abb0 RNAP was overproduced in BL21(DE3) [10]. Taking advantage of the fact that Xcc x (11.1 kDa) and E. coli x (10.2 kDa) can be distinguished by running on a 16.5% Tricine-SDS­polyacrylamide gel (Supplemen-

Fig. 4. Promoter-specific in vitro transcription assay of overexpressed Xcc RNAP. The transcriptional activities of Xcc RNAPs that were obtained from overproducing strains DH5a (pBC-CBA) and DH5a (pBC-CBAZ), respectively, were analyzed using (a) r70-dependent promoter PrpoD and (b) rE-dependent promoter PrpoE as the templates. The arrow on the right of the figure indicates the position of the expected RNA transcript. Purified Xcc core RNAP (2 pmol) and r factor (10 pmol) added in each lane are indicated on the top of the figure.

C.-Y. Cheng et al. / Protein Expression and Purification 69 (2010) 91­98

97

tary data Fig. S1, compare lanes X1 and E), we found that only a very faint band corresponding to the position of E. coli x could be detected in the lane of the overproduced recombinant x-less Xcc core RNAP (Fig. S1, compare lanes X1, X2 and E). Thus, we could not exclude the possibility that the overproduced x-less Xcc core RNAP used in this study may contain a trace amount of E. coli x. Functional E. coli core RNAP can be produced in the absence of x, and has been used widely for structure­function analysis of RNAP in vitro [9,20]. Moreover, the requirement of x to RNAP in response to the ppGpp signaling can be relieved by DksA in vivo [10,35]. In comparison with the x-containing Xcc core RNAP, the enzymatic activity of the recombinant Xcc core RNAP lacking x was very low (Table 2), implying that x is a prerequisite component for activity maintenance of RNAP in Xcc. Even so, in vitro transcriptions from the specific promoters could still be achieved using the Xcc core RNAP lacking x reconstituted with external added r70 (Fig. 4a, lane 2) or rE (Fig. 4b, lane 2), indicating the interaction between recombinant x-less Xcc core RNAP and r is available. After passing through two columns chromatography, the yield of the recombinant Xcc core RNAP showed a 67% increase when the x was coexpressed with other Xcc RNAP subunits. This result indicates that Xccx, like its orthologues observed in other bacteria, played a role in promoting RNAP assembly. However, our preliminary test indicated that in vitro reconstitution of the recombinant x-less Xcc core RNAP with external added x could not elevate the transcriptional activity of RNAP (data not shown). Construction of Xcc rpoZdeficient mutant is now in progress. The comparison of the enzymatic activity of RNAP between Xcc wild type and the rpoZ mutant is one of our future subjects. In summary, our results demonstrated a practicable method with the advantage of simple cloning strategy for overproducing Xcc core RNAP in E. coli, and also showed higher x-dependence to Xcc RNAP than E. coli RNAP. Moreover, our PBAD-dependent coexpression system provides a cheaper way for protein complex overproduction than T7 promoter expression system. It allows us to study the characteristics of multiple protein complexes in Xcc or other bacteria, wherein the T7 promoter expression system is less effective. Acknowledgments We are grateful to Dr. S. Mongkolsuk for the gift of plasmid pBBad22K, and we thank T.Y. Wang, P.L. Liao, and L.Y. Wong for their technical support. This work was funded in part by the National Science Council and an Academic Excellence Pursuit Grant (to M.T. Yang) from the Ministry of Education, Taiwan. Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.pep.2009.07.002. References
[1] M. Kashlev, E. Martin, A. Polyakov, K. Severinov, V. Nikiforov, A. Goldfarb, Histidine-tagged RNA polymerase: dissection of the transcription cycle using immobilized enzyme, Gene 130 (1993) 9­14. [2] K. Zalenskaya, J. Lee, C.N. Gujuluva, Y.K. Shin, M. Slutsky, A. Goldfarb, Recombinant RNA polymerase: inducible overexpression, purification and assembly of Escherichia coli rpo gene products, Gene 89 (1990) 7­12. [3] D. Neumann, M. Suter, R. Tuerk, U. Riek, T. Wallimann, Co-expression of LKB1, MO25a and STRAD a in bacteria yield the functional and active heterotrimeric complex, Mol. Biotechnol. 36 (2007) 220­231. [4] C. Romier, M. Ben Jelloul, S. Albeck, G. Buchwald, D. Busso, P.H. Celie, E. Christodoulou, V. De Marco, S. van Gerwen, P. Knipscheer, J.H. Lebbink, V. Notenboom, A. Poterszman, N. Rochel, S.X. Cohen, T. Unger, J.L. Sussman, D. Moras, T.K. Sixma, A. Perrakis, Co-expression of protein complexes in prokaryotic eukaryotic hosts: experimental procedures database tracking and case studies, Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 62 (2006) 1232­1242.

[5] I. Berger, D.J. Fitzgerald, T.J. Richmond, Baculovirus expression system for heterologous multiprotein complexes, Nat. Biotechnol. 22 (2004) 1583­1587. [6] K.J. Kim, H.E. Kim, K.H. Lee, W. Han, M.J. Yi, J. Jeong, B.H. Oh, Two-promoter vector is highly efficient for overproduction of protein complexes, Protein Sci. 13 (2004) 1698­1703. [7] C. Scheich, D. Kummel, D. Soumailakakis, U. Heinemann, K. Bussow, Vectors for co-expression of an unrestricted number of proteins, Nucleic Acids Res. 35 (2007) e43. [8] S. Tan, R.C. Kern, W. Selleck, The pST44 polycistronic expression system for producing protein complexes in Escherichia coli, Protein Expr. Purif. 40 (2005) 385­395. [9] I. Artsimovitch, V. Svetlov, K.S. Murakami, R. Landick, Co-overexpression of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase subunits allows isolation and analysis of mutant enzymes lacking lineage-specific sequence insertions, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 12344­12355. [10] C.E. Vrentas, T. Gaal, W. Ross, R.H. Ebright, R.L. Gourse, Response of RNA polymerase to ppGpp: requirement for the x subunit and relief of this requirement by DksA, Genes Dev. 19 (2005) 2378­2387. [11] L. Minakhin, S. Nechaev, E.A. Campbell, K. Severinov, Recombinant Thermus aquaticus RNA polymerase, a new tool for structure-based analysis of transcription, J. Bacteriol. 183 (2001) 71­76. [12] X. Yang, P.J. Lewis, Overproduction and purification of recombinant Bacillus subtilis RNA polymerase, Protein Expr. Purif. 59 (2008) 86­93. [13] M.T. Yang, J.F. Gardner, Transcription termination directed by heteroduplex thr attenuator templates. Evidence that the transcript stem and loop structure is the termination signal, J. Biol. Chem. 264 (1989) 2634­2639. [14] J.Y. Lai, C.F. Huang, Y.H. Tseng, M.T. Yang, Sequence and molecular analysis of the rpoA cluster genes from Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1492 (2000) 553­559. [15] Y.S. Tseng, C.T. Yu, Y.H. Tseng, M.T. Yang, Cloning, sequencing, and expression of the rpoD gene encoding the primary sigma factor of Xanthomonas campestris, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 232 (1997) 712­718. [16] W.J. Chung, H.Y. Shu, C.Y. Lu, C.Y. Wu, Y.H. Tseng, S.F. Tsai, C.H. Lin, Qualitative and comparative proteomic analysis of Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris 17, Proteomics 7 (2007) 2047­2058. [17] C.Y. Cheng, S.Y. Shieh, C.C. Hsu, M.T. Yang, Characterization and transcriptional analysis of an ECF sigma factor from Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 289 (2008) 250­257. [18] R. Sukchawalit, P. Vattanaviboon, R. Sallabhan, S. Mongkolsuk, Construction and characterization of regulated l-arabinose-inducible broad host range expression vectors in Xanthomonas, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 181 (1999) 217­ 223. [19] M.J. Chamberlin, W.C. Nierman, J. Wiggs, N. Neff, A quantitative assay for bacterial RNA polymerases, J. Biol. Chem. 254 (1979) 10061­10069. [20] H. Tang, K. Severinov, A. Goldfarb, R.H. Ebright, Rapid RNA polymerase genetics: one-day, no-column preparation of reconstituted recombinant Escherichia coli RNA polymerase, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92 (1995) 4902­ 4906. [21] F.W. Studier, B.A. Moffatt, Use of bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase to direct selective high-level expression of cloned genes, J. Mol. Biol. 189 (1986) 113­ 130. [22] M.J. Babcock, M.J. Buttner, C.H. Keler, B.R. Clarke, R.A. Morris, C.G. Lewis, M.E. Brawner, Characterization of the rpoC gene of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) and its use to develop a simple and rapid method for the purification of RNA polymerase, Gene 196 (1997) 31­42. [23] B. Miroux, J.E. Walker, Over-production of proteins in Escherichia coli: mutant hosts that allow synthesis of some membrane proteins and globular proteins at high levels, J. Mol. Biol. 260 (1996) 289­298. [24] D. Gentry, H. Xiao, R. Burgess, M. Cashel, The x subunit of Escherichia coli K-12 RNA polymerase is not required for stringent RNA control in vivo, J. Bacteriol. 173 (1991) 3901­3903. [25] P. Ghosh, A. Ishihama, D. Chatterji, Escherichia coli RNA polymerase subunit omega and its N-terminal domain bind full-length b' to facilitate incorporation into the a2b subassembly, Eur. J. Biochem. 268 (2001) 4621­4627. [26] K. Mukherjee, D. Chatterji, Studies on the omega subunit of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase ­ its role in the recovery of denatured enzyme activity, Eur. J. Biochem. 247 (1997) 884­889. [27] K. Terpe, Overview of bacterial expression systems for heterologous protein production: from molecular and biochemical fundamentals to commercial systems, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 72 (2006) 211­222. [28] P. Carroll, A.C. Brown, A.R. Hartridge, T. Parish, Expression of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Rv1991c using an arabinose-inducible promoter demonstrates its role as a toxin, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 274 (2007) 73­82. [29] J.K. Setlow, Genetic Engineering: Principles and Methods, Kluwer Academic Publishers, New York, 2001. [30] L.M. Guzman, D. Belin, M.J. Carson, J. Beckwith, Tight regulation, modulation, and high-level expression by vectors containing the arabinose PBAD promoter, J. Bacteriol. 177 (1995) 4121­4130. [31] A.C. da Silva, J.A. Ferro, F.C. Reinach, C.S. Farah, L.R. Furlan, R.B. Quaggio, C.B. Monteiro-Vitorello, M.A. Van Sluys, N.F. Almeida, L.M. Alves, A.M. do Amaral, M.C. Bertolini, L.E. Camargo, G. Camarotte, F. Cannavan, J. Cardozo, F. Chambergo, L.P. Ciapina, R.M. Cicarelli, L.L. Coutinho, J.R. Cursino-Santos, H. El-Dorry, J.B. Faria, A.J. Ferreira, R.C. Ferreira, M.I. Ferro, E.F. Formighieri, M.C. Franco, C.C. Greggio, A. Gruber, A.M. Katsuyama, L.T. Kishi, R.P. Leite, E.G. Lemos, M.V. Lemos, E.C. Locali, M.A. Machado, A.M. Madeira, N.M. Martinez-Rossi, E.C. Martins, J. Meidanis, C.F. Menck, C.Y.

98

C.-Y. Cheng et al. / Protein Expression and Purification 69 (2010) 91­98 [33] R.L. Gourse, W. Ross, T. Gaal, UPs and downs in bacterial transcription initiation: the role of the a subunit of RNA polymerase in promoter recognition, Mol. Microbiol. 37 (2000) 687­695. [34] I.N. Olekhnovich, R.J. Kadner, Contribution of the RpoA C-terminal domain to stimulation of the Salmonella enterica hilA promoter by HilC and HilD, J. Bacteriol. 186 (2004) 3249­3253. [35] S.T. Rutherford, J.J. Lemke, C.E. Vrentas, T. Gaal, W. Ross, R.L. Gourse, Effects of DksA, GreA, and GreB on transcription initiation: insights into the mechanisms of factors that bind in the secondary channel of RNA polymerase, J. Mol. Biol. 366 (2007) 1243­1257.

Miyaki, D.H. Moon, L.M. Moreira, M.T. Novo, V.K. Okura, M.C. Oliveira, V.R. Oliveira, H.A. Pereira, A. Rossi, J.A. Sena, C. Silva, R.F. de Souza, L.A. Spinola, M.A. Takita, R.E. Tamura, E.C. Teixeira, R.I. Tezza, M. Trindade dos Santos, D. Truffi, S.M. Tsai, F.F. White, J.C. Setubal, J.P. Kitajima, Comparison of the genomes of two Xanthomonas pathogens with differing host specificities, Nature 417 (2002) 459­463. [32] E.E. Blatter, W. Ross, H. Tang, R.L. Gourse, R.H. Ebright, Domain organization of RNA polymerase a subunit: C-terminal 85 amino acids constitute a domain capable of dimerization and DNA binding, Cell 78 (1994) 889­896.

