Chemical Physics 258 (2000) 171±180

www.elsevier.nl/locate/chemphys

Anomalous X-ray diraction studies of hydration eects in concentrated aqueous electrolyte solutions
S. Ramos a, A.C. Barnes a, G.W. Neilson a,*, M.J. Capitan b
a b

H.H. Wills Physics Laboratory, University of Bristol, Tyndall Avenue, Bristol BS8 1TL, UK European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Avenue des Martyrs, F-38043, Grenoble, France Received 18 September 1999

Abstract The method of anomalous X-ray diraction (AXD) was applied to two aqueous electrolyte solutions: 6 m rubidium bromide and 4 m rubidium chloride. Data from the former solution were used to determine Br¿ hydration and those from the latter to determine Rb hydration. The results are compared with those obtained from other techniques and contrasted with the hydration of other ions in their respective series. A critical appraisal of the AXD method and its potential for future studies of ionic solutions are given. ” 2000 Published by Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction The determination of the properties of aqueous electrolyte solutions represents a worthwhile scientiÆc endeavour, not least because of the inØuence and use of salt solutions in mediating many chemical and biochemical processes. For over a quarter of a century, we have been developing experimental ways to determine the atomic structure and water dynamics in aqueous electrolyte solutions [1]. We began by developing the method of neutron diraction and isotopic substitution (NDIS) and demonstrated that for a number of systems, one could obtain the detailed structure of the ionic hydration in terms of a linearly weighted sum over the pair radial distribution functions,

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +44-117-928-8706; fax: +44117-925-5624. E-mail address: george.w.neilson@bristol.ac.uk (G.W. Neilson).

gIa r, of the hydrated ion, I [2]. We also showed that for a smaller number of systems at high concentration, it was possible to obtain the ion± ion and ion±counterion (solute) structure in terms of the respective individual pair distribution functions [3]. Recent studies in collaboration with Soper have enabled us to determine details of the water solvent structure in terms of gHH r and to a good approximation gOH r [4]. We have also learnt that there are inherently large errors in the determination of gOO r from NDIS experiments, and caution must be taken when analysing this function in terms of the local O±O structure. The remarkable success of NDIS has, over the years, enabled us to build up a body of information of ionic hydration as a function of ion concentration, counterion type, and recently temperature and pressure [5]. Despite this success, it has long been recognised that it is limited to systems which have a range of isotopes with favourable neutron scattering lengths. Consequently, we have always been interested in other means to

0301-0104/00/$ - see front matter ” 2000 Published by Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: S 0 3 0 1 - 0 1 0 4 ( 0 0 ) 0 0 1 3 2 - 4

172

S. Ramos et al. / Chemical Physics 258 (2000) 171±180

determine the atomic structure of solutions. The most viable alternatives have always been those associated with X-ray scattering, and indeed the early pioneers in this Æeld used the methods of X-ray diraction to good eect [6]. By combining the structural information from hydrated solids with that from the scattering pattern from the liquid, they were able to make major contributions to the study of ionic hydration. However, because of the fundamental drawback that X-rays interact with matter through the electromagnetic interaction and the scattering from an atom is anisotropic, the information derived is less quantitative than one would wish. Alternative methods that used X-rays were therefore developed. Amongst them was the method of X-ray diraction with isomorphic substitution (XDIS), which overcame some of the inherent diculties associated with angular dependent scattering lengths (e.g. the phase problem) [7]. Again this had limited success and relied on the isomorphism of two elements with a suciently large dierence in their atomic numbers (e.g. Ni and Mg [8], Na and Ag [9]). In recent years, with the construction of the third generation of intense synchrotron radiation sources and signiÆcant improvements in monochromator crystals, it has become feasible to use techniques such as EXAFS spectroscopy [10±12] and anomalous X-ray diraction (AXD) [13] to investigate the ionic structure of aqueous electrolyte solutions. It is this latter technique that we will be concerned with in this paper; we will present and discuss results of recent experiments in two aqueous electrolyte solutions, 6 m rubidium bromide (RbBr) and 4 m rubidium chloride (RbCl). The experiments used state-of-the-art technology at the ESRF (Grenoble). 2. Theory The underlying theory of AXD has been known for over 60 years [14,15]. Therefore, we will only concern ourselves with the part of the formalism which is relevant to the work presented below. It is well known that for a liquid containing several atomic species, the dierential cross-section due to elastic scattering is given by the equation:

 dr √ qY E  fa qY Efb qY E dX a b C B Nb Na      ¬ r Y exp ¿ i~ ~ia ¿~jb q r
ia1jb1

1

where a and b represent the dierent atomic species; Na denotes the total number of a species in the system; ~i , the position of the ith particle; f, the r total atomic form factor; and the brackets represent an ensemble average in the position of the particles. The modulus of the momentum transferred is represented by "q, where q is related to the h scattering angle, 2h, through q  4p sin hakX This general expression can be separated into two contributions as follows:  dr qY E  ca fa qY Efa√ qY E dX a  √ ca cb fa qY Efb qY E  ¿ ¡ ¬ Sab q ¿ 1 Y
a b

2

where ca represents the atomic fraction and Sab q, the partial structure factor. The Ærst term corresponds to the correlation of every atom with itself (``self-term''), and the second corresponds to the correlations between dierent atoms (``distinct term''). The weighting of both terms depends on the energy and q through the total atomic form factor, which is deÆned as a complex function by f qY E  f0 q  f H  E  if HH  EY 3 where f0 q is the normal form factor and f H  E and f HH  E are the anomalous terms, which can be calculated from the electronic structure of the atom or can be obtained through absorption measurements by making use of the Kramers±Krning o relation. This last method is more satisfactory on many occasions because some elements show considerable disagreement between the calculated and experimentally obtained values due to interatomic eects [16]. The anomalous X-ray diraction technique is based on the appreciable change of the anomalous contributions to the total form factor of an atom

S. Ramos et al. / Chemical Physics 258 (2000) 171±180

173

around an absorption edge (K- and L-absorption edges show the most clear contrast). This oers the possibility of calculating Ærst- or indeed secondorder dierences for the system from the total scattering at two or three dierent energies given that the Ærst is close to the absorption edge of a selected atomic species, the second far away from it, and the third somewhere in between. In this paper, we concentrate on the Ærst-order dierences and focus on the total structure around a speciÆc ionic species, I. For this case, the relevant contrie butions to the dierence D I q are those included in the following equation:  dr dX    q ¿ 
a

Rb . The choice of Cl¿ (Z  17) as the counterion for the second sample was made in order to minimise the contribution to the scattering intensity from all atomic species except the one of interest, i.e. Rb±O. The samples were transported to ESRF (Grenoble) in hermetically sealed plastic bottles. Each sample was transferred to a specially built assembly which enabled it to be peristaltically pumped through a capillary tube during the diraction experiments. This was necessary in order to avoid local heating of the sample in the intense X-ray beam (1013 photons/s). The sample passed through



E EH √ c2 RefIYE qfIYE q I

dr dX


√ √ q ¿ cI fIYE qfIYE q ¿ fIYEH qfIYEH q √ ¿ fIYEH qfIYEH qSIa q ¿ 1

2

√ √ e cI ca RefIYE qfaYE q ¿ fIYEH qfaYEH qSIa q ¿ 1  D I qX

4

The Fourier transform of Eq. (4) gives the X-ray modiÆed total pair distribution function, e e G I r. It should be noted that in D I q, the weighting factors and the structure function are both dependent on q. The eect of the q dependence of the weighting factors is to broaden and diminish in height the real pair correlation funce tions when combined in G I r. This is the main dierence with NDIS, where the neutron scattering lengths are independent of q, and the total pair distribution function is a simple linear superposition of the pair distribution functions, gIX r.

3. Experimental 3.1. Data acquisition Aqueous solutions of 6 m RbBr and 4 m RbCl were prepared by standard methods which involved dissolution of a known amount of Analar grade salt in a known amount of doubly distilled water. The two dierent samples were needed due to the high absorption of the 6 m RbBr sample at the energies required to study the hydration of the

a 0.5 mm (bore) silica tube which was irradiated by $1 mm2 of X-ray beam. The measurements on both samples were taken at ambient conditions on the ID1 instrument at the ESRF. Data were gathered at two energies below the K edge ()5 and )200 eV) for both samples, Rb: 15.199 keV and Br: 13.474 keV. Each run consisted of several scans over a q range of # 0X1 6 q(A¿1 ) 6 12 for the 6 m RbBr sample and #¿1 ) 6 13 for the 4 m RbCl one. Mea0X1 6 q(A surements of the background and empty container were also taken. It is important to note that the limit to the q range is imposed by the energy of the X-rays required to study each ion, i.e., the energy of their K edge and the maximum scattering angle accessible to the detector (approximately 120∞). 3.2. Data analysis The raw data collected for each scan were combined and normalised to the Øux of incoming photons, which was monitored throughout the experiment. Unwanted inelastic eects, which occurred during the scattering process, were mainly due to Compton scattering and a less important

174

S. Ramos et al. / Chemical Physics 258 (2000) 171±180

contribution from resonant Raman. The instrument ID1 at the ESRF provides a highly monochromatic beam ($DEaE  10¿4 ) and allows the use of an analyser crystal for the scattered beam. The appropriate analyser will reject the photons that have suered inelastic scattering with a precision of a few eV. Since the same inelastic behaviour is anticipated at the two incident energies (which are separated by only $195 eV), as well as using the analyser crystal, the procedure of working with the dierence between the data was adopted to ensure that all inelastic contributions were removed. A calculation of multiple scattering (which is mainly inelastic) showed that it accounted for less than 1% of the total scattering from the samples and it was of similar magnitude at both energies; again, it was not considered necessary to correct for this when working with dierences. The correction made on the dierence function was for attenuation in the sample and container [17]. The corrected dierence between the intensities can be written as ¿ ¿ ¡¡ 4  4  CN
a

4. Results The results shown in Figs. 1±4 provide detailed structural information on the atomic coordination of Rb and Br¿ in concentrated aqueous electrolyte solutions. The noise levels in Figs. 1 and 3 are similar to those associated with total ion dierence functions DI q obtained from NDIS experiments at the Ærst isotopic dierence level [2]. The discrepancies between the directly calculated funce tions D I q and the back Fourier transforms of the e edited G I r are appreciable but not structural (particularly in Fig. 1). The reasons for this are unclear at present but are probably due to relatively small ($10%) variations in the q-dependent corrections over the region where the total form factors vary most rapidly. Another factor that e could contribute to this dierence is that D I q is obtained by Ætting the calculated dierence to the calculated self-term, whereas the decaying q dependence of the weighting factors in the distinct term remains unaected. Nevertheless, the general e features of the D I qs remain intact on back trans5

I qY E ¿ I qY E

H

 CN

√ ca faYE qfaYE q

¿

√ faYEH qfaYEH q


a b

√ √ ca cb faYE qfbYE q ¿ faYEH qfbYEH q Sab q ¿ 1  D Y

¿

¡

5 5

where N represents the total number of particles and C and D are parameters which ensure normalization of the data. e D I qs (Eq. (4)) were obtained by Ætting the calculated dierence to the self-term, which can be calculated from tabulated values (Figs. 1 and 3). The Ætting parameters used were C, N and D. By e Fourier transforming D I q, the X-ray modiÆed e distribution function, G I r, was derived (Figs. 2 and 4). The values obtained were put on an absolute scale of electron units, i.e. the same as that calculated for the self-term that was used to rescale the dierence. The correctness of this normalization relies on the fact that the contribution from the distinct term is approximately one order of magnitude smaller than the self-term.

e formation, and consequently, the G I rs which have been used to regenerate these functions are we believe a good approximation to the hydration structure of Rb and Br¿ . Our results (Figs. 2 and 4) show a clear Ærst coordination shell for both ions and essentially no appreciable longer-range structure. This coordination shell can, in principle, contain contributions from oxygen and hydrogen of the hydrated water molecules and, at such high concentrations, from the counterions. The relative weightings of e e the contributions to D I q and therefore G I r suggest that the peaks are mainly due to the scattering from water molecules (20% of it due to hydrogen, although it could not be resolved from oxygen in our data). There will also be a contri-

S. Ramos et al. / Chemical Physics 258 (2000) 171±180

175

e Fig. 1. Corrected and normalised dierence D Rb q in 4m RbCl solution, derived from AXD experiment. The dashed curve represents e the back Fourier transformation of the (edited) G Rb r curve shown in Fig. 2, and gives an estimate of the accuracy of the information provided by state-of-the-art AXD.

bution from the counterions, with a weighting factor approximately one-third of that from oxygen. Due to the q dependence of the total form factor, the calculation of coordination numbers from AXD data is not straightforward, and approximations have to be made. As a Ærst approximation in the calculation of the coordination numbers, the e Ærst peak in the calculated G I r is taken to represent the central position of the oxygen atoms with the area below that peak as proportional to the number of water molecules around the ion. This assumption is consistent with the expected overlap between the gIH r and gIO r pair distribution functions such as has been established by NDIS for K and Cl¿ [2]. However, it is not possible to use this assumption if signiÆcant overlap exists between the water and the counterion contributions, gIJ r.

When this approximation holds, the method we have employed consists of calculating the number of water molecules around an ion by dividing e D I q by a linear combination of the weighting factors of O and H. This approximation is used to reduce the q dependence in the multiplying factors of the pair distribution function for both elements making the weighting factor of oxygen as large as possible compared to the other contributions. The e Fourier transform of that modiÆed D I q is calculated and the coordination number for water molecules obtained. In the case where overlap between the ion±water pair distribution functions and the gIJ r exists, the only reliable method is to calculate a second-order dierence, but this was not possible with the data available. A less satisfactory alternative, but still useful method to estimate a value for the coordination number, is to calculate it by Ætting gaussians

176

S. Ramos et al. / Chemical Physics 258 (2000) 171±180

e Fig. 2. The total modiÆed pair distribution G Rb r for Rb in 4m RbCl aqueous solution obtained by AXD. The dashed line from 0 # e to 2.6 A represents the cut-o region and when combined with the remaining of the G Rb r curve was back transformed to give the dashed curve in Fig. 1.

e to G I r and taking the central (and main, if the Ætting is realistic) peak as the oxygen contribution. The results for the systems presented here are listed in Tables 1 and 2. We assumed that the Ærst approximation holds in the case of the Rb ion given that the value obtained for the coordination number, 6X9 ∆ 0X5 water molecules, is reasonable and consistent with the values obtained for other alkali metals. In the case of the Br¿ ion, the concentration was appreciably larger (6 m) and the result obtained assuming no overlap was unphysical ($16 water molecules around the ion) even from the simplest geometrical considerations. By Ætting gaussians, it was possible to separate two # dierent contributions, the Ærst centred at 3.4 A being bigger and narrower, and the second cen# tred at 4 A being smaller and wider, associated with O and Rb , respectively. The estimation

for the coordination number in this case was 7X0 ∆ 1. Although the calculations and the error associated with these are based on reasonable estimates associated with the range and relative contributions of the correlations which we believe are likely to make up the Ærst coordination shell, a conclusive answer to the question of calculating coordination numbers is not possible until we can clearly state whether overlap between contributions exists. This problem would be solved if a second-order dierence could be obtained and an AXD experiment has been planned to test feasibility. Another possibility to obtain a more accurate result with a Ærst-order dierence would be to study the structure of LiBr or NaBr, where the contribution coming from the Li or Na would be very small compared to Br¿ .

S. Ramos et al. / Chemical Physics 258 (2000) 171±180

177

e Fig. 3. The full line represents the corrected and normalised dierence D Br¿ q in 6m RbBr. The dashed line again represents the back e Fourier transformation of the edited G Br¿ r shown in Fig. 4 [12].

5. Discussion 5.1. Rb hydration Fig. 2 represents the local structure around the Rb ion in a 4 m aqueous solution of RbCl as determined from a Ærst-order dierence AXD exe e periment. Because D I q and therefore G I r are dominated by the Rb ±O correlation, the peak # centred at 3.05 A can be identiÆed with the nearest neighbour Rb ±O separation. As mentioned above, the determination of a coordination number is not straightforward. However, based on reasonable assumptions, as described above, we can conclude that the hydration number for Rb is in the range 6.4±7.4. Although there appear to be some structural features beyond the Ærst coordination shell, spe-

ciÆc identiÆcation of a second shell remains doubtful given the level of noise produced in the Fourier transform procedure. Discussion of this point will therefore be deferred until experimental techniques for data corrections become more reliable. The results can be compared with those obtained for the coordination of other alkali ions in aqueous electrolyte solution (Table 1). As might be expected, the ion±oxygen nearest neighbour separation increases with ion size (the structure of K ion remains to be resolved more accurately as the result obtained from NDIS showed only a very broad Ærst peak). Interestingly, however, it appears that the coordination number does not change signiÆcantly from a value of between 6 and 8. Results from XDIS for Na and from NDIS for Li strongly suggest that the ion±oxygen and

178

S. Ramos et al. / Chemical Physics 258 (2000) 171±180

e e Fig. 4. The total modiÆed pair distribution function G Br¿ r obtained from Fourier transformation of D Br¿ q. The dashed line represents the Fourier transform of the best Ætting function showing no structure at small r [12]. Table 1 Structural properties of alkali cation hydration. (r : ionic radius; rIO : average cation±oxygen separation; rIH : average cation±hydrogen " separation; n1 : average cation±water coordination number) Ion Li Na K Rb First hydration shell # # r [24] (A) rIO (A) 0.6 0.98 1.33 1.47 1.95 2.40 3.1 2.93 rIH # (A) n1 " 6.5 4.9 3.9 6.9 $6 Second hydration shell # Range (A) n2 " 3±5 ± ± ± ± ± ± ± Technique NDIS [18] XDIS [9] NDIS [19] AXD [This work] EXAFS [12]

2.52 ± ± ±

Table 2 Structural properties of halide anion hydration. (r : ionic radius; rIO : average anion±oxygen separation; rIH : average anion±hydrogen " separation; n1 : average anion±water coordination number) Ion Cl¿ Br¿ First hydration shell # # r [24] (A) rIO (A) 1.81 1.96 3.3 3.4 3.34 3.35 " n1 # rIH (A) 2.28 ± ± ± 6.4 7.0 6.9 7.4 NDIS [25] AXD [This work] EXAFS [22] AXD [21] Technique

S. Ramos et al. / Chemical Physics 258 (2000) 171±180

179

ion±hydrogen (deuterium) are resolved [9,18], whereas for K and Rb the equivalent correlations show considerable overlap [19]. A similar type of structure is likely to appear for the Cs coordination, and an AXD experiment has been planned to check it. There is also broad agreement between our results for Rb and those of an EXAFS experiment [12]. However, it appears that the nearest neighbour separation derived from EXAFS is appreciably shorter than that obtained from our AXD study. This could be a real eect due to dierence in concentration of the samples studied, or it could arise from the dierent procedures used in the data analysis. Whereas Bertagnolli et al. report more than one distance for the oxygen atoms in the Ærst hydration shell [20], the present study and that of Fulton et al. [12] show a single distance. 5.2. Br¿ hydration The results in Fig. 4 clearly show a pronounced # feature centred around 3.4 A that corresponds to the nearest neighbour coordination shell of Br¿ . # Integration over the range from 2.6 to $4 A of this peak, and allowing for signiÆcant overlap of Br¿ ±O, Br¿ ±H and Br¿ ±Rb correlations, gives a hydration number between 6 and 8. The results are in good agreement with those obtained in an earlier AXD study on 4 m ErBr3 aqueous solution [21] and a EXAFS±molecular dynamics (MD) simulation study [22] of 0.15 m RbBr in water (Table 2). However, it is particularly interesting to note that in contrast to both of these investigations, our results do not show any signiÆcant structure beyond the Ærst hydration shell, an observation that is also of relevance to MD simulations which often show structure beyond the Ærst hydration shell [23]. The only other halogen ion, which has been studied at this level of detail, is Cl¿ , and a comparison between the two results is encouraging. As might be expected on the basis of the ``bare'' ion size, the Br¿ ±O nearest neighbour distance is large and Br¿ hydration is approximately the same (as it was for the alkali series). The general shape and range of the two total pair distribution functions

are similar, both showing an absence of structure beyond the Ærst coordination shell. 6. Conclusions The results presented above demonstrate that signiÆcant progress is being made in the application of AXD to the study of ionic structure in aqueous electrolyte solutions. Results for Br¿ and Rb hydration show that these two ions posses similar structures to other associated ions in the halide and alkali series. Both ions posses a well deÆned Ærst coordination shell, but there is no evidence for longer-range correlations. Within each series, there is a clear ion size eect in the nearest neighbour ion±oxygen separation. However, the values obtained for the coordination number do not vary greatly with ionic radius. This indicates that approximately the same arrangement of water molecules is energetically favourable in all cases and it seems to be dependent only on the electronic distribution of the last electronic level. As regards the AXD method itself, the results show that it has the potential to provide useful information on all ionic species with a mass number greater than about 30. This minimum value for the mass number of the elements accessible to the technique is its main limitation, and it corresponds to the limit imposed on the q range that can be measured by the energy of the Kabsorption edge of the dierent atomic species. It is also clear that several other problems have yet to be overcome before one can say that the information provided is truly complementary to NDIS. Regarding the analysis, the greatest problem we have encountered concerns the q dependence of the atomic form factors and, as a result, of the weighting factor associated to every partial structure factor. Encouragingly, however, just as we found in the XDIS method [7,8], this problem becomes resolved when calculating the ion±ion radial distribution function gII r from data at three wavelengths, whereby the corresponding SII q can be obtained by solving simultaneously the three equations obtained, and q dependent factors essentially cancel. At the same time, by

180

S. Ramos et al. / Chemical Physics 258 (2000) 171±180 [8] N.T. Skipper, G.W. Neilson, S. Cummings, J. Phys. Cond. Matter 1 (1989) 3489. [9] N.T. Skipper, G.W. Neilson, J. Phys. Cond. Matter 1 (1989) 4141. [10] B. Beagley, C.A. McAulie, S.P.B. Smith, E.W. White, J. Phys. Cond. Matter 3 (1991) 7919. [11] P. Lagarde, A. Fontaine, D. Raoux, A. Sadoc, P. Migliardo, J. Chem. Phys. 72 (1980) 3061. [12] J.L. Fulton, D.M. Pfund, S.L. Wallen, M. Newville, E.A. Stern, M. Yanjun, J. Chem. Phys. 105 (1996) 2161. [13] S. Ramos, A.C. Barnes, G.W. Neilson, D. Thiaudiere, S. Lequien, J. Phys. Cond. Matter 11 (2000) A203. [14] R.W. James, The Optical Principles of the Diraction of X-rays, Bell, London, 1962 (Chapter 4). [15] P.H. Fuoss, P. Eisenberger, W.K. Warburton, A. Bienenstock, Phys. Rev. Lett. 46 (1981) 1537. [16] P. Dreier, P. Rabe, W. Malzfeldt, W. Niemann, J. Phys. C Solid State Phys. 17 (1984) 3123. [17] H.H. Paalman, G.J. Pings, Appl. Cryst. 33 (1962) 2635. [18] I. Howell, G.W. Neilson, J. Phys. Cond. Matter 8 (1996) 4455. [19] G.W. Neilson, N.T. Skipper, Chem. Phys. Lett. 114 (1984) 35. [20] H. Bertagnolli, T.S. Ertel, M. Homann, R. Frahm, Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem. 95 (1991) 704. [21] R. Beudert, H. Bertagnolli, M. Zeller, J. Chem. Phys. 106 (1997) 8841. [22] P. D’Angelo, A. Di Nola, A. Filipponi, N.V. Pavel, D. Roccatano, J. Chem. Phys. 100 (1994) 985. [23] S. Koneshan, J.C. Rasaiah, R.M. Lyndel-Bell, S.H. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. B 102 (1998) 4193. [24] F.A. Cotton, G. Wilkinson, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, Wiley, NY, 1980, p. 14. [25] D.H. Powell, G.W. Neilson, J.E. Enderby, J. Phys. Cond. Matter 5 (1993) 5723.

obtaining this second-order dierence, it would be possible to solve the overlap problem in the calculation of hydration numbers. Acknowledgements The authors wish to thank the sta at ID1 of the ESRF for their technical support during the course of the experiments and Dr. Stuart Ansell for helpful discussions. S. Ramos thanks the organisers of the TMR Programme of the EU for the award of a grant to pursue her Ph.D. References
[1] J.E. Enderby, G.W. Neilson, in: F. Franks (Ed.), Water: A Comprehensive Treatise, vol. 6, Plenum Press, NY, 1979 (Chapter 1). [2] G.W. Neilson, R.D. Broadbent, I. Howell, R.H. Troup, J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans. 89 (1993) 2927. [3] G.W. Neilson, J.E. Enderby, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 390 (1983) 353. [4] R.H. Tromp, G.W. Neilson, A.K. Soper, J. Chem. Phys. 96 (1992) 8460. [5] G.W. Neilson, A.K. Adya, Roy. Soc. Chem. Ann. Repts. Section C 93 (1997) 101. [6] A.H. Narten, F. Vaslow, H.A. Levy, J. Chem. Phys. 58 (1973) 5017. [7] W. Bol, G. Gerrits, C. van Panthaleon van Eck, J. Appl. Cryst. 3 (1970) 486.

