Chemistry & Biology, Vol. 12, 1221­1226, November, 2005, ª2005 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved. DOI 10.1016/j.chembiol.2005.09.006

Ligand Requirements for glmS Ribozyme Self-Cleavage
Tom J. McCarthy,1 Melissa A. Plog,1 Shennen A. Floy,1 Joshua A. Jansen,1 Juliane K. Soukup,1,* and Garrett A. Soukup2,* 1 Department of Chemistry Creighton University 2 Department of Biomedical Sciences Creighton University School of Medicine 2500 California Plaza Omaha, Nebraska, 68178 tional termination [18]. The products of b-globin ribozyme cleavage possess 50 -phosphate and 30 -hydroxyl termini that do not incorporate guanosine [17]. The glmS ribozyme [16] is categorized as a unique member of otherwise noncatalytic ``riboswitches'' that function as metabolite-dependent genetic regulatory elements [19]. The glmS ribozyme resides in the 50 UTR of glmS mRNA in certain prokaryotes [20] and represses gene expression when activated by glucosamine-6-phosphate (GlcN6P) [16], the metabolic product of the GlmS enzyme. The products of glmS ribozyme cleavage possess 50 -hydroxyl and 20 ,30 -cyclic phosphate termini that do not incorporate GlcN6P [16]. While both the b-globin and glmS ribozymes are activated by binding nonsubstrate organic compounds, it is presently unclear how such ligands function to activate catalysis. Two fundamental strategies that greatly enhance the proficiency and functionality of protein enzymes in biological catalysis include exogenous organic compounds as requisite participants in catalysis (i.e., coenzymes) or as allosteric effectors that modulate enzymatic activity. Although effector- and coenzyme-dependent functions have been explored in the context of engineered allosteric ribozymes [21] and artificial nucleic acid catalysts [22, 23], such mechanistic distinctions have not yet been applied to naturally occurring, ligand-dependent ribozymes. To gain a better understanding of how GlcN6P might promote glmS ribozyme activity as either an effector or a coenzyme, we have examined the ligand requirements for glmS ribozyme self-cleavage. Results and Discussion To discriminate between the potential roles for GlcN6P in the mechanism of glmS ribozyme self-cleavage, we have examined the self-cleavage activity of the glmS ribozyme derived from Bacillus cereus (Figure 1A). The glmS ribozyme contains four paired domains (P1­P4) that are highly conserved among an 18-member phylogeny [20]. Previous characterization of the B. subtilis glmS ribozyme demonstrated that the minimal segment required to establish GlcN6P-dependent self-cleavage activity encompasses nucleotides from the +1 position (relative to the cleavage site) through the P2 domain, while the P3­P4 domains serve to enhance activity [16]. For the full-length B. subtilis glmS ribozyme, GlcN6P binding was reported to elicit a 1000-fold increase in the observed rate constant (kobs) for self-cleavage activity under saturating GlcN6P and divalent metal ion concentrations [16]. However, our analysis of the B. cereus glmS ribozyme reveals that GlcN6P is more vital to selfcleavage activity than previously appreciated. Reaction of the P1­P4 B. cereus glmS ribozyme in the absence or presence of GlcN6P (Figure 1B) demonstrates that the ribozyme possesses considerable self-cleavage activity in the absence of ligand in TRISbuffered solution as previously reported [16]. To the contrary, the ribozyme is largely devoid of self-cleavage activity in HEPES-buffered solution in the absence of GlcN6P (Figure 1B), demonstrating a greater dependence

Summary Natural RNA catalysts (ribozymes) perform essential reactions in biological RNA processing and protein synthesis, whereby catalysis is intrinsic to RNA structure alone or in combination with metal ion cofactors. The recently discovered glmS ribozyme is unique in that it functions as a glucosamine-6-phosphate (GlcN6P)-dependent catalyst believed to enable ``riboswitch'' regulation of amino-sugar biosynthesis in certain prokaryotes. However, it is unclear whether GlcN6P functions as an effector or coenzyme to promote ribozyme self-cleavage. Herein, we demonstrate that ligand is absolutely requisite for glmS ribozyme self-cleavage activity. Furthermore, catalysis both requires and is dependent upon the acid dissociation constant (pKa) of the amine functionality of GlcN6P and related compounds. The data demonstrate that ligand is integral to catalysis, consistent with a coenzyme role for GlcN6P and illustrating an expanded capacity for biological RNA catalysis. Introduction The majority of natural ribozymes perform RNA cleavage or splicing through transesterification reactions that utilize an internal or external hydroxyl group for nucleophilic attack on the phosphate at the cleavage or splice site [1­3]. Mechanistic strategies that ribozymes employ to promote RNA transesterification include metal-ion catalysis and/or general acid-base catalysis utilizing internal functional groups, as indicated by the self-cleaving hammerhead [4­6], HDV [7­9], hairpin [10­12], and VS [13, 14] ribozymes. Although self-splicing group I introns utilize exogenous guanosine as a nucleophilic substrate [2], catalysis is likewise attributable to intrinsic RNA structure and metal ion cofactors [15]. Recent discoveries of two ligand-responsive, selfcleaving ribozymes [16, 17] suggest that the scope of biological RNA catalysis might extend beyond the intrinsic capabilities of RNA by harnessing ligand functionalities. The cotranscriptional cleavage (CoTC) element in the 30 untranslated region (UTR) of human b-globin mRNA contains a guanosine-sensitive ribozyme that promotes self-cleavage [17] and exonuclease-mediated transcrip-

*Correspondence: jksoukup@creighton.edu (J.K.S.); gasoukup@ creighton.edu (G.A.S.)

Chemistry & Biology 1222

Figure 1. glmS Ribozyme Structure and TRIS-Activated Self-Cleavage (A) Refined secondary structure model of the B. cereus glmS ribozyme containing nucleotides 213 through +141 relative to the cleavage site (arrowhead). An additional 50 -terminal guanosine at 214 (parentheses) was included to facilitate in vitro transcription. Depicted are paired regions P1­P4 including a putative 50 -proximal pseudoknot (P1.1) supported by mutational analysis (G.A.S., unpublished data) and a 30 -proximal pseudoknot (P3.1) indicated by phylogenetic analysis (R.R. Breaker, personal communication). Nucleotide identities that are R95% conserved are highlighted. (B) TRIS-activated self-cleavage of the glmS ribozyme. Shown are products of reactions incubated for 2 hr in the absence (2) or presence (+) of 200 mM GlcN6P (L) under standard conditions (HEPES) or standard conditions substituting HEPES with TRIS (TRIS). Bands corresponding to the ribozyme (open arrowhead) and its 30 cleavage product (filled arrowhead) are indicated. (C) TRIS-activated self-cleavage of a truncated P1-P3 glmS ribozyme. A construct containing nucleotides 213 through +86 of the B. cereus glmS ribozyme was prepared and analyzed as in (B). (D) Dependence of glmS ribozyme self-cleavage on TRIS concentration. Depicted is the fraction of ribozyme cleaved in reactions incubated for 2 h under standard conditions replacing HEPES with HEPES:TRIS in millimolar ratios from 49:1 to 0:50 as indicated by TRIS concentration alone. Error bars indicate the standard deviation determined for two replicate assays. (E) Rate of glmS ribozyme self-cleavage in the absence (open circle) or presence (filled circle) of 10 mM TRIS as ligand under standard conditions.

upon GlcN6P. Similar analysis of a truncated P1­P3 ribozyme (Figure 1C) demonstrates that TRIS-activated selfcleavage is more pronounced for the P1­P4 ribozyme, consistent with the previous observation that the P3­ P4 domains function to enhance activity [16]. By varying the molar ratio of HEPES:TRIS in otherwise equivalently buffered solutions (Figure 1D), it is evident that the selfcleavage activity of the P1­P4 ribozyme responds to TRIS concentration in a manner similar to GlcN6Pdependent activation [16]. These data indicate that TRIS can functionally substitute for GlcN6P, although it appears to be a lower-affinity ligand incapable of saturating the catalyst at concentrations % 50 mM. Determination of kobs values for ribozyme self-cleavage in the absence or presence of TRIS (Figure 1E) demonstrates that 10 mM TRIS accounts for a rate enhancement of 130-fold over the background kobs of w1025 min21. By comparison, saturating 10 mM GlcN6P elicits a kobs of 1.1 min21, revealing that the true rate enhancement provided by GlcN6P binding to the glmS ribozyme is approximately five orders of magnitude (Table 1). Importantly, the background kobs for the ribozyme is consistent with that for uncatalyzed transesterification of an unconstrained

Table 1. Kinetic Parameters for the glmS Ribozyme in the Absence or Presence of 10 mM GlcN6P or Various Analogs under Standard Conditions Ligand GlcN6P GlcN Serinol TRIS -- kobs (min21) 1.1 3.0 3 1022 7.5 3 1023 1.3 3 1023 w1025 Apparent KD (mM) 0.03 R5 R5 R25 -- Rate Enhancement 110,000 3,000 750 130 --

phosphodiester linkage or a constrained in-line linkage [24], suggesting that the catalytic mechanism of the glmS ribozyme is intrinsically linked to GlcN6P. In consideration of a molecular basis for TRIS-dependent glmS ribozyme self-cleavage, it becomes apparent that TRIS structure is analogous to the amine-containing portion of GlcN6P, thereby implicating the importance of the amine functionality in ligand binding and activation of self-cleavage. An analysis of GlcN6P and related compounds (Figure 2A) reveals a striking dependence of ribozyme activity upon amine-containing analogs (Figure 2B). Both GlcN6P and glucosamine (GlcN) activate glmS ribozyme self-cleavage, while glucose-6-phosphate (Glc6P) and glucose (Glc) do not. In these reactions, GlcN is less than two orders of magnitude less potent than GlcN6P as an activator (Table 1). These data demonstrate that the phosphate moiety of GlcN6P is partially expendable with regard to binding and catalysis, while the amine functionality is vital. Further examination of amine-containing analogs reveals the simplicity of ligand recognition and catalysis (Figures 2A and 2B). Serinol, a more precise analog of GlcN6P than TRIS, expectedly functions as a more potent activator of ribozyme activity (Table 1), while trimethylene glycol (TMG), an analog lacking the amine group, fails to elicit ribozyme self-cleavage. Interestingly, L-serine (L-Ser) supports ribozyme activity, while D-serine (D-Ser) does not. These compounds demonstrate that stereochemical presentation of amine and hydroxyl functionalities might be an important determinant of ligand recognition and catalysis, and they implicate the importance of the C1 hydroxyl of GlcN6P. Moreover, adjacent amine and hydroxyl functionalities establish the minimal requirement for activity, as ethanolamine (EtOHN) supports ribozyme

Ligand Requirements for glmS Ribozyme Activity 1223

Figure 2. Dependence of glmS Ribozyme Self-Cleavage on Amine-Containing Analogs of GlcN6P (A) Chemical structures of GlcN6P and related compounds depicted as the predominant species at pH 7.5. The portion of GlcN6P mimicked by other amine-containing compounds is shaded. Shown in brackets is the pKa of each amine functionality taken from product literature or experimentally determined (Figure S1). (B) Ligand-activated glmS ribozyme selfcleavage. Shown are products of reactions incubated for 2 hr under standard conditions in the absence (2) or presence of 200 mM GlcN6P or 10 mM analog as indicated. Bands corresponding to the ribozyme (open arrowhead) and its 30 cleavage product (filled arrowhead) are indicated.

self-cleavage, while ethanol (EtOH), methylamine (MeN), and ammonium ion do not. These data clearly demonstrate the glmS ribozyme's minimal, but rigid, chemical requirement of ligand to perform catalysis. Discriminating between the effects of functional group substitutions on ligand binding versus catalysis is a formidable challenge. This is particularly the case for GlcN6P activation of the glmS ribozyme, where there appear to be few determinants for ligand recognition and catalysis that likely attribute to the relatively poor apparent dissociation constant (KD) determined for GlcN6P [16]. Hydroxyl group substitution of the amine functionality by Glc6P does not entirely preclude the possibility of hydrogen bonding at the affected position (i.e., binding). However, the relatively greater acid dissociation constant (pKa) of the hydroxyl group markedly reduces the potential of Glc6P to accept or donate a proton in potential mechanisms of catalysis. Indeed, Glc6P is observed to function as an inhibitor of analogdependent glmS ribozyme self-cleavage (Figure 3A). The extent of inhibition likely reflects the relative binding affinity of each analog versus that of Glc6P, as TRIS-, L-Ser-, and EtOHN-dependent self-cleavage are more easily inhibited with Glc6P than are GlcN- and serinoldependent self-cleavage. While Glc6P is unable to affect saturating, GlcN6P-dependent self-cleavage (Figure 3A), it does effectively inhibit nonsaturating, GlcN6P-dependent self-cleavage with an apparent Ki of 3.0 mM (Figure 3B). Therefore, Glc6P exhibits competitive inhibition of GlcN6P, demonstrating competence in binding, but not catalysis. The absolute inability of the hydroxyl group substitution to support catalysis in Glc6P-ribozyme complexes suggests that the role of the amine functionality in GlcN6P-activated self-cleavage goes beyond an effect of binding. The data, therefore, demonstrate that the amine functionality is more important to catalysis than binding per se, and they suggest that GlcN6P might act as a coenzyme in glmS ribozyme self-cleavage. The hypothesis that coenzyme function of GlcN6P in glmS ribozyme self-cleavage involves participation of

Figure 3. Competitive Inhibition of glmS Ribozyme Self-Cleavage by Glc6P (A) Competition of ligand-activated ribozyme activity by Glc6P. Depicted is the fraction of ribozyme cleaved in reactions incubated for 2 hr under standard conditions including 10 mM ligand and 0, 1, or 10 mM Glc6P as indicated. Fraction cleaved was normalized to reaction lacking ligand, and error bars indicate the standard deviation determined for two replicate assays. (B) Competition of GlcN6P-activated ribozyme activity by Glc6P. Reactions were performed under standard conditions with 10 mM GlcN6P and various concentrations of Glc6P. The concentration of Glc6P required to achieve a half-maximal kobs value (apparent Ki) is indicated. Error bars indicate the standard deviation determined for three replicate assays.

Chemistry & Biology 1224

Figure 4. Reactivity Profiles of Ligand-Activated glmS Ribozyme Self-Cleavage (A) Ligand concentration dependence. Reactions were performed under standard conditions with various concentrations of GlcN (open circles) or serinol (open triangles). Dashed lines represent a slope of 1. Data depicted are representative of two replicate assays. (B) pH dependence. Reactions were performed under standard conditions using 10 mM GlcN (open circles) or serinol (open triangles), and substituting HEPES with other nonamine-containing buffering agents as appropriate to maintain the desired pH. Reactions were similarly performed using 10 mM GlcN6P (filled circles). The pH required to achieve a half-maximal kobs value (apparent pKa) is indicated for each ligand. Data depicted are representative of two replicate assays. (C) pH dependence of apparent KD for GlcN6P. The bar graph summarizes apparent KD values determined for GlcN6P under standard conditions at various pH (Figure S2A). (D) GlcN6P concentration dependence of apparent pKa. The bar graph summarizes apparent pKa values determined for various concentrations of GlcN6P under standard conditions (Figure S2B). Error bars indicate the standard deviation determined for two replicate assays.

the amine functionality in proton transfer predicts that ribozyme activity is necessarily dependent upon the pKa of the amine group. Advantageously, pKa values determined for GlcN and serinol (Figure S1A; see the Supplemental Data available with this article online) differ by w1 (Figure 2A), thereby enabling a facile means of assessing coenzyme function by examining the reactivity profiles of ribozyme with each ligand. At constant pH, varying the concentration of GlcN or serinol produces a linear reactivity profile with a slope of w1 (Figure 4A), demonstrating that ribozyme is not saturated at GlcN or serinol concentrations % 10 mM, but consistent with previous data for GlcN6P demonstrating that activation results from a single binding event [16]. Moreover, the reactivity profiles for GlcN and serinol exhibit a relative shift by one log unit ligand concentration. This shift is likely attributable to the unit difference in pKa between the two ligands (i.e., log unit difference in the concentration of deprotonated species at constant pH below pKa), and it suggests that deprotonated ligand is the effective activator. Accordingly, the reactivity profiles generated by varying pH with constant GlcN or serinol concentration (Figure 4B) exhibit a slope of w1 and a relative shift by one pH unit under reaction conditions where pH does not exceed the pKa of either compound. These data demonstrate that there is a single deprotonation event for GlcN or serinol that influences ribozyme activity and corresponds with the established unit difference in pKa between the two compounds. Importantly, reactivity reaches a near identical maximum under conditions where pH exceeds the pKa of each compound, demonstrating that fully deprotonated GlcN and serinol function equivalently with regard to binding and activation of catalysis. Moreover, the approximate pH required for each ligand to elicit a half-maximal rate constant

for self-cleavage (apparent pKa; Figure 4B) corresponds closely to the pKa values of each compound. Reactivity profiles therefore demonstrate a relationship between the protonation state of ligand and ribozyme activity that support a role for ligand as a coenzyme in potential mechanisms involving proton transfer. Interestingly, the reactivity profile for glmS ribozyme activation by GlcN6P exhibits a markedly different relationship with pH (Figure 4B). The pH-reactivity profile was examined with nonsaturating GlcN6P, where the apparent pKa is 7.8. Importantly, the amine functionality of GlcN6P alone exhibits a pKa of 8.2 (Figure S1B). The data, therefore, suggest that the pKa of GlcN6P is perturbed slightly toward neutrality in the context of the ribozyme; a feature expected to enhance catalysis. Considering that the ribozyme appears incapable of similarly affecting the pKa of either GlcN or serinol as ligand analogs suggests that it works specifically in concert with GlcN6P to maximize catalysis. While the phosphate moiety of GlcN6P enhances binding affinity (Table 1), interaction of the ligand with the ribozyme might ``mask'' the proximity effect of the phosphate group on the pKa of the amine functionality, thereby yielding an apparent pKa for GlcN6P that is consistent with the apparent and actual pKa values for GlcN (Figure 4B and Figure S1A). Importantly, the apparent pKa for the GlcN6Pstimulated reaction likely accurately reflects the pKa of GlcN6P rather than an effect of the protonation state upon ligand binding affinity, as the apparent KD for GlcN6P is affected only 3-fold by pH over a range that corresponds to a 20-fold difference in the ratio of deprotonated and protonated GlcN6P in solution (Figure 4C and Figure S2A). Moreover, the apparent pKa of the reaction is not affected by GlcN6P concentration (Figure 4D and Figure S2B). The data demonstrate that the

Ligand Requirements for glmS Ribozyme Activity 1225

protonation state of the amine functionality has a marginal effect on ligand binding although it is crucial to catalysis, and therefore support the possibility that ligand affects catalysis through its capacity for proton transfer rather than binding alone. Consequently, the data are consistent with the hypothesis that GlcN6P functions as a coenzyme rather than an effector in glmS ribozyme self-cleavage. Significance Our analysis of the GlcN6P-dependent glmS ribozyme demonstrates that self-cleavage is completely dependent upon the addition of amine-containing ligands, suggesting that the RNA alone lacks an intact catalytic site. Activation by GlcN6P achieves a rate enhancement of 110,000-fold, a value far greater than that which would be necessary to achieve a biological effect upon a typical bacterial mRNA with a half-life of only minutes. Moreover, reactivity profiles demonstrate that ligand-activated catalysis is dependent upon the pKa of the amine functionality, while ligand binding affinity appears to be only modestly affected by the protonation state. The data are therefore consistent with the hypothesis that GlcN6P functions as a coenzyme for glmS ribozyme self-cleavage rather than an allosteric effector that modulates catalytic activity. A probable mechanistic role for ligand includes amine-mediated proton transfer that promotes general acid-base catalysis similar to the role of cytosine in HDV ribozyme self-cleavage [7­9]. However, additional studies will be required to elucidate the precise interactions between ligand and the glmS ribozyme that contribute to catalysis. The glmS ribozyme serves as an illustration that a natural RNA catalyst can exploit organic compounds to achieve catalytic competency and enhance biological functionality, underscoring the possibility that additional such catalysts are likely to exist in nature although their identification is made challenging by the necessity to reconstitute appropriate holoenzymatic complexes. The ability of nucleic acid catalysts to utilize coenzymes has only been demonstrated previously by artificial activities [22, 23], and it supports the notion that modern biology might have evolved from a sophisticated ``RNA world.'' The glmS ribozyme, however, demonstrates that contemporary RNA catalysts can be equally sophisticated in their function, placing ribozymes more on par with their protein enzyme counterparts.
Experimental Procedures Templates for transcription were prepared by primer extension and PCR amplification by using synthetic DNA corresponding to ribozyme sequence. Ribozymes were prepared by in vitro transcription with T7 RNA polymerase and 32P-labeling by incorporation of [a-32P]-UTP. Transcription products were separated by denaturing 10% polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE), and ribozymes were eluted in solution containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5 at 23ºC) and 200 mM NaCl, precipitated with ethanol, and redissolved in water. Ribozyme reactions contained %250 nM ribozyme and ligand as indicated, and they were performed under standard conditions consisting of incubation at 23ºC in solution containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5 at 23ºC) and 10 mM MgCl2, except as noted otherwise. TRIS, MES, PIPES, TAPS, or CHES was substituted for HEPES as in-

dicated. Reactions were terminated by the addition of a gel loading dye containing 10 M urea and 20 mM EDTA. Products were separated by denaturing 10% PAGE and were analyzed with a PhosphorImager and IMAGEQUANT software (Molecular Dynamics). kobs values for self-cleavage were derived by plotting the natural logarithm of the fraction of uncleaved ribozyme versus time and establishing the negative slope of the resulting line. Stated values represent the average of two replicate assays. Apparent Ki was established by fitting data from three replicate assays to an exponential curve. Apparent KD values were established by fitting average data from at least two replicate assays to the Michaelis-Menten equation: kobs = (kmax 3 [ligand])/([ligand] + apparent KD). Apparent pKa values were determined by fitting average data from at least two replicate assays to the Hill equation: kobs = (kmax 3 pHn)/(pHn + apparent pKan), where n represents the Hill coefficient. Supplemental Data Supplemental Data including potentiometric titration curves for pKa determination and kinetic analyses for apparent pKa and apparent KD determination are available at http://www.chembiol.com/cgi/ content/full/12/11/1221/DC1/. Acknowledgments We especially thank R.R. Breaker for critical comments and suggestions, and we thank A. Roth and M. Hulce for helpful discussions. J.K.S. is supported by the Clare Boothe Luce Program of the Henry Luce Foundation and National Institutes of Heath (NIH) grant P20 RR16469 from the Institutional Development Award Program for Networks of Biomedical Research Excellence Program of the National Center for Research Resources (NCRR). G.A.S. is supported by the Health Future Foundation and NIH grant P20 RR017717 from the Centers of Biomedical Research Excellence Program of the NCRR. This investigation was in part conducted in a facility constructed with support from NIH grant C06 RR17417 from the Research Facilities Improvement Program of the NCRR. Received: August 16, 2005 Revised: September 8, 2005 Accepted: September 9, 2005 Published: November 18, 2005 References 1. Frank, D.N., and Pace, N.R. (1998). Ribonuclease P: unity and diversity in a tRNA processing ribozyme. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67, 153­180. 2. Doudna, J.A., and Cech, T.R. (2002). The chemical repertoire of natural ribozymes. Nature 418, 222­228. 3. Moore, P.B., and Steitz, T.A. (2003). The structural basis of large ribosomal subunit function. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 72, 813­850. 4. Murray, J.B., Seyhan, A.A., Walter, N.G., Burke, J.M., and Scott, W.G. (1998). The hammerhead, hairpin and VS ribozymes are catalytically proficient in monovalent cations alone. Chem. Biol. 5, 587­595. 5. O'Rear, J.L., Wang, S., Feig, A.L., Beigelman, L., Uhlenbeck, O.C., and Herschlag, D. (2001). Comparison of the hammerhead cleavage reactions stimulated by monovalent and divalent cations. RNA 7, 537­545. 6. Curtis, E.A., and Bartel, D.P. (2001). The hammerhead cleavage reaction in monovalent cations. RNA 7, 546­552. 7. Ferre-D'Amare, A.R., and Doudna, J.A. (1998). Crystal structure of a hepatitis delta virus ribozyme. Nature 395, 567­574. 8. Nakano, S., Chadalavada, D.M., and Bevilacqua, P.C. (2000). General acid-base catalysis in the mechanism of a hepatitis delta virus ribozyme. Science 287, 1492­1497. 9. Shih, I.H., and Been, M.D. (2001). Involvement of a cytosine side chain in proton transfer in the rate-determining step of ribozyme self-cleavage. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 1489­1494. 10. Rupert, P.B., and Ferre-D'Amare, A.R. (2001). Crystal structure of a hairpin ribozyme-inhibitor complex with implications for catalysis. Nature 410, 780­786.

Chemistry & Biology 1226

11. Rupert, P.B., Massey, A.P., Sigurdsson, S.T., and FerreD'Amare, A.R. (2002). Transition state stabilization by a catalytic RNA. Science 298, 1421­1424. 12. Bevilacqua, P.C. (2003). Mechanistic considerations for general acid-base catalysis by RNA: revisiting the mechanism of the hairpin ribozyme. Biochemistry 42, 2259­2265. 13. Jones, F.D., and Strobel, S.A. (2003). Ionization of a critical adenosine residue in the neurospora Varkud Satellite ribozyme active site. Biochemistry 42, 4265­4276. 14. Lilley, D.M. (2004). The Varkud satellite ribozyme. RNA 10, 151­ 158. 15. Adams, P.L., Stahley, M.R., Kosek, A.B., Wang, J., and Strobel, S.A. (2004). Crystal structure of a self-splicing group I intron with both exons. Nature 430, 45­50. 16. Winkler, W.C., Nahvi, A., Roth, A., Collins, J.A., and Breaker, R.R. (2004). Control of gene expression by a natural metaboliteresponsive ribozyme. Nature 428, 281­286. 17. Teixeira, A., Tahiri-Alaoui, A., West, S., Thomas, B., Ramadass, A., Martianov, I., Dye, M., James, W., Proudfoot, N.J., and Akoulitchev, A. (2004). Autocatalytic RNA cleavage in the human b-globin pre-mRNA promotes transcription termination. Nature 432, 526­530. 18. West, S., Gromak, N., and Proudfoot, N.J. (2004). Human 50 / 30 exonuclease Xrn2 promotes transcription termination at cotranscriptional cleavage sites. Nature 432, 522­525. 19. Mandal, M., and Breaker, R.R. (2004). Gene regulation by riboswitches. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 5, 451­463. 20. Barrick, J.E., Corbino, K.A., Winkler, W.C., Nahvi, A., Mandal, M., Collins, J., Lee, M., Roth, A., Sudarsan, N., Jona, I., et al. (2004). New RNA motifs suggest an expanded scope for riboswitches in bacterial genetic control. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 6421­ 6426. 21. Silverman, S.K. (2003). Rube Goldberg goes (ribo)nuclear? Molecular switches and sensors made from RNA. RNA 9, 377­383. 22. Jadhav, V.R., and Yarus, M. (2002). Coenzymes as coribozymes. Biochemie 84, 877­888. 23. Roth, A., and Breaker, R.R. (1998). An amino acid as a cofactor for a catalytic polynucleotide. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 6027­6031. 24. Soukup, G.A., and Breaker, R.R. (1999). Relationship between internucleotide linkage geometry and the stability of RNA. RNA 5, 1308­1325.

