Microbial Pathogenesis 35 (2003) 57­62 www.elsevier.com/locate/micpath

Altering tissue tropism of Listeria monocytogenes by ectopically expressing human E-cadherin in transgenic mice
Yang Luoa, Anee Leeb, Hao Shenb, Glenn L. Radicea,*
a

Center for Research on Reproduction and Women's Health, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 1335 Biomedical Research Building II/III 421 Curie Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA b Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA Received 17 January 2002; received in revised form 23 April 2003; accepted 1 May 2003

Abstract The Gram-positive bacterium Listeria monocytogenes invades a variety of cells in vitro and in vivo. Here, we show that L. monocytogenes is able to enter muscle cells if provided with the appropriate host receptor. Using a cardiac-specific promoter, human E-cadherin was misexpressed in the heart of transgenic mice. First, we demonstrate that L. monocytogenes is capable of infecting the E-cadherin-expressing, but not the N-cadherin-expressing cardiomyocytes in vitro. Second, we show that L. monocytogenes infects the heart of transgenic animals after administering the bacteria intravenously. This unique system may prove useful for understanding basic aspects of L. monocytogenes cell biology by comparing infection of muscle versus epithelial cells. q 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: L. monocytogenes; Invasion; Cardiomyocyte; Cadherin; Transgenic mice

1. Introduction Listeria monocytogenes is a food-borne pathogen responsible for serious illness in humans due to its unique ability to cross three barriers during infection: the intestinal barrier, the blood-brain barrier, and/or the placental barrier [1,2]. Host cell infection begins with the internalization of the bacteria either by phagocytosis in the case of macrophages or induced phagocytosis (invasion) in the case of normally non-phagocytic cells. E-cadherin mediates infection in non-phagocytic cells (i.e. epithelial cells) by interacting with the bacterial surface protein, internalin A [3,4]. This interaction is cadherin specific since only E-cadherin, not N-cadherin, mediates infection in cultured fibroblasts [4]. Furthermore, it was shown that a single amino acid change at position 16 of extracellular domain 1 of E-cadherin is responsible for the host specificity [5]. This amino acid differs in mouse E-cadherin, thus explaining why mouse E-cadherin does not support internalin A-mediated infection in mice. It was recently demonstrated
Abbreviations: hE-cad, human E-cadherin; E, embryonic day. * Corresponding author. Tel.: þ 1-215-898-0164; fax: þ1-215-573-5408. E-mail address: radice@mail.med.upenn.edu (G.L. Radice). 0882-4010/03/$ - see front matter q 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/S0882-4010(03)00091-3

that transgenic mice expressing human E-cadherin in the intestinal epithelium developed listeriosis when infected orally with wild-type L. monocytogenes [6]. In addition to E-cadherin, its cytoplasmic binding proteins, catenins, are required for bacterial uptake via their linking the cadherin to the actin cytoskeleton [7]. Cadherins are a family of calcium-dependent cell adhesion receptors found in adherens type junctions [8,9]. Two family members, E- and N-cadherin, are generally not co-expressed in the same cell type. E-cadherin is expressed in most epithelia whereas N-cadherin is found primarily in muscle and neuronal cell types. Previous studies from our laboratory showed that cardiac-specific expression of human E-cadherin was sufficient to restore myocyte adhesion and cardiac looping morphogenesis in N-cadherin-deficient mouse embryos demonstrating that these two classical cadherins were functionally interchangeable in the primitive heart [10]. Furthermore, we found that misexpression of E-cadherin in the adult heart led to dilated cardiomyopathy in transgenic mice [11]. In these previous studies, we generated transgenic mice that express the human E-cadherin gene under the control of the aMyosin Heavy Chain (aMHC) promoter that directs tissue-specific expression in the myocardium. In the present study, we used

58

Y. Luo et al. / Microbial Pathogenesis 35 (2003) 57­62

these transgenic mice to determine whether human E-cadherin could mediate L. monocytogenes infection in N-cadherin-expressing heart muscle.

2. Results For in vitro analysis of L. monocytogenes infection, we used embryonic myocytes recovered from the primitive heart tube since the majority of cells at this early stage are myocytes. Wild-type and transgenic mouse embryos were recovered at E10 (embryonic day 10). Heart tubes were isolated, cells disassociated, and cardiac cells grown for 3 days in culture. Approximately 80% of the cells in culture were myocytes as determined by immunostaining for sarcomeric myosin (data not shown). To confirm the expression of the aMHC/Ecad transgene in cultured myocytes, indirect immunofluorescence was performed on cardiac cells isolated from the embryonic hearts. The cellular distribution of cadherins was examined for N-cadherin alone in wild-type (Fig. 1(A)) or double-stained

for N- (Fig. 1(B)) and E-cadherin (Fig. 1(C)) in transgenic myocytes. In wild-type myocytes (Fig. 1(A)), N-cadherin was primarily localized to regions of cell ­ cell contact. In the case of transgenic myocytes (Fig. 1(B) and (D)), mouse N- and human E-cadherin co-localized in both regions of cell ­cell contact plus extrajunctional sites as shown by the merged image (Fig. 1(D)). The perinuclear staining of both cadherins observed in the transgenic myocytes (Fig. 1(B) and (C)) was not found in wild-type myocytes (Fig. 1(A)) suggesting that an increase in total cadherin led to its accumulation in extrajunctional sites (i.e. endoplasmic reticulum). Based on their similar cellular distribution, both cadherins appear to be treated equally when expressed in heart muscle (i.e. no preference for N-cadherin at the plasma membrane). To examine the entry of L. monocytogenes into muscle cells, the gentamicin survival assay [12] was performed on wild-type (N-cadherin positive) and transgenic (N- and E-cadherin positive) myocytes. Myocyte cultures were exposed to bacteria and double stained with an antibody against L. monocytogenes and FITC-phalloidin to visualize

Fig. 1. Co-localization of N- and E-cadherin in transgenic myocytes. Myocyte cultures were examined by indirect immunofluorescence for distribution of endogenous N-cadherin in wild-type myocytes (A) and transgenic myocytes were double-stained for N- (B) and E-cadherin (C). The images from the double immunostained cultures were merged (D) to demonstrate the co-localization of the cadherins in regions of cell ­cell contact (arrows) as well as extrajunctional sites. wt, wild-type; hE-cad, transgenic. Bar, 50 mm.

Y. Luo et al. / Microbial Pathogenesis 35 (2003) 57­62

59

polymerized actin, which is used by the bacteria for intracellular movement. No bacteria were observed in wild-type (Fig. 2(A)), in contrast, myocytes expressing human E-cadherin were infected with L. monocytogenes

(Fig. 2(C)). The merged image (Fig. 2(D)) demonstrated the presence of actin around the bacteria as well as actin tails (Fig. 2(D), inset) confirming the intracellular location of the bacteria. The identity of the cells as myocytes was

Fig. 2. Infection by L. monocytogenes in cultured transgenic myocytes. Wild-type (A and B) and transgenic (C ­F) embryonic myocytes were exposed to either wild-type (A ­D) or internalinA-deficient (E and F) L. monocytogenes in vitro. The infected cultures were double stained with an antibody against L. monocytogenes (red) and FITC-phalloidin (green). Human E-cadherin promoted infection of wild-type bacteria in the transgenic myocytes (C and D), but not internalinA mutant bacteria (E and F). The intracellular location of L. monocytogenes was confirmed by the F-actin surrounding the bacteria in the merged image (D, inset). Bacteria appeared with short actin tails (arrow) in the myocytes. wt, wild-type; hE-cad, transgenic. Bar, 50 mm.

60

Y. Luo et al. / Microbial Pathogenesis 35 (2003) 57­62

confirmed by the presence of striated myofibrils as illustrated by the FITC-phalloidin staining (Fig. 2(B), (D) and (F)). To demonstrate that entry was mediated by interaction between E-cadherin and internalinA, transgenic myocytes were exposed to L. monocytogenes mutant for the internalinA gene, the receptor for human E-cadherin. No mutant bacteria were observed in the transgenic myocytes (Fig. 2(E)) consistent with internalinA/E-cadherin-mediated entry. Human E-cadherin co-localized with mouse N-cadherin in the intercalated disc structure found between myocytes in the adult heart [11]. To determine whether transgenic animals were susceptible to cardiac infection, L. monocytogenes was injected into the tail vein of 3 month old animals. The animals were sacrificed after 2 days, and heart samples were obtained. To examine the myocardium for the presence of bacteria, immunohistochemistry was performed on sections of heart tissue from wild-type and transgenic mice. Sections were stained with an antibody against L. monocytogenes and FITC-phalloidin to visualize polymerized actin, which marks both the myofibrils of the myocyte and the actin surrounding the bacteria. No bacteria were observed in the wild-type (Fig. 3(A)), however, foci of bacteria were readily observed in the transgenic heart (Fig. 3(B)). Furthermore, transgenic mice injected with L. monocytogenes mutant for the internalinA gene did not contain bacteria in the heart (Fig. 3(C)) consistent with internalinA/E-cadherin-mediated entry.

3. Discussion We have altered the tissue tropism of L. monocytogenes by ectopically expressing human E-cadherin in the heart of transgenic mice. Although N- and E-cadherin show about 60% amino acid similarity in extracellular domain 1 including conservation of a key proline residue at position 16 [13], N-cadherin was not capable of supporting L. monocytogenes infection in myocytes. This result is consistent with previous findings using cultured fibroblasts transfected with the N-cadherin cDNA [4]. Furthermore, the presence of N-cadherin on the myocyte cell surface did not appear to interfere with internalinA/E-cadherin-mediated entry. The bacteria surrounded by actin filaments generate tails as they move through the cytosol. There is considerable interest in how L. monocytogenes spreads from cell to cell
R Fig. 3. L. monocytogenes infection in hearts of transgenic mice. Wild-type (A) and transgenic (B and C) mice were injected intravenously with either wild-type (A and B) or internalinA-deficient (C) L. monocytogenes. After 48 h, the animals were sacrificed and hearts removed for immunohistochemistry. Heart sections were double-stained with an antibody against L. monocytogenes (red) and FITC-phalloidin (green). Bacteria were only observed in the transgenic heart infected with wild-type (B) and not internalinA-deficient (C) L. monocytogenes. WT, wild-type; hEcad, transgenic. Bar, 50 mm.

Y. Luo et al. / Microbial Pathogenesis 35 (2003) 57­62

61

the cardiomyocyte system described here may prove useful for comparison to its normal host cell. For example, the actin tails appeared shorter in the myocytes compared to the epithelial cell line, Caco-2, consistent with less available free actin in the muscle cells (Y.L., A.L., H.S, G.R., unpublished data). Our results demonstrate that although L. monocytogenes does not normally infect the mouse heart, it is capable of invading the myocardium in our transgenic model. The process by which bacteria reach the heart from the circulation remains to be determined in future studies. It has recently become clear that misexpression of cadherins can influence the cellular behavior of tumor cells. For example, the ectopic expression of N-cadherin in squamous cell carcinoma cell lines [14] as well as breast cancer cells [15,16] either in the presence or absence of endogenous E-cadherin leads to increased invasiveness in vitro and in vivo. The ability of cancer cells to alter their cadherin profile suggests that other diseases such as cardiovascular disease may also be affected by inappropriate cadherin expression. In future studies, it will be interesting to examine cardiac tissue from patients to determine whether pressure overload, viral infection, and other insults may lead to inappropriate expression of E-cadherin in heart muscle. For example, misexpression may result from demethylation of the E-cadherin promoter and its subsequent transcriptional activation in cardiomyocytes. In conclusion, it will be interesting to determine whether our animal model may provide a novel paradigm to examine bacterial infection in the heart.

temperature. The cultures were washed in PBS, and mounted for analysis with a confocal microscope.

5. In vitro and in vivo Listeria monocytogenes invasion Wild-type (10403s) and mutant (EJL12DInlA) L. monocytogenes were grown overnight at 30 8C with aeration in brain heart infusion (BHI). Bacteria were washed with DMEM and resuspended in warm DMEM containing 20% FCS. Embryonic myocytes were isolated from wild-type and transgenic embryos at E10 and cultured for 3 days. Cells were infected with L. monocytogenes at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of approximately 100. The cells were incubated at 37 8C with 5% CO2 for 1 h and then the media was removed and warm fresh DMEM containing 20% FCS and 50 mg/ml gentamicin was added to kill extracellular bacteria. Cells were incubated at 37 8C with 5% CO2 and infection was allowed to proceed for 2 h. Cultures were fixed and double stained with FITC-phalloidin (Sigma, St Louis, MO) and rabbit polyclonal anti-Listeria O, 1:500 (Difco, Sparks, MD) as described above. In vivo analysis was performed by injecting L. monocytogenes (106 pfu) into the tail vein of wild-type and transgenic mice. After 2 days, hearts were removed, fixed, paraffin-embedded, and processed for immunohistochemistry as previously described [11]. Bacterial infection was confirmed by examining spleen and liver.

4. Materials and methods 4.1. Cardiomyocyte cultures and immunohistochemistry Embryos were collected on E10, and the yolk sac from each embryo was harvested for genotyping by PCR analysis as described previously [10]. Heart tubes were isolated, trypsinized, and plated on fibronectin-coated coverslips in 24-well dishes. The myocytes were cultured in DMEM with high glucose and 15% FBS. After 3 days, the cultures were fixed in freshly prepared 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature. The cells were washed with PBS, and treated with 0.5% Triton X-100/PBS for 10 min. The samples were washed in PBS before blocking with 5% skim milk/PBS for 30 min. Antibodies were diluted in 5% skim milk/PBS as follows: rat monoclonal anti-N-cadherin, 1:50 (MNCD-2; a kind gift from Masatoshi Takeichi, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, Kobe, Japan) and mouse monoclonal anti-E-cadherin, 1:100 (HECD-1; Zymed, So. San Francisco, CA). Samples were incubated overnight at 4 8C with primary antibodies. After washing in PBS, cultures were incubated with the appropriate secondary antibody, 1:100 (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA): Cy3-anti-mouse IgG, FITC-anti-rat IgG, or Cy3-anti-rabbit IgG, for 1 h at room

Acknowledgements We thank Drs Michal Elovitz, Navneet Narula, and Karen Knudsen for their comments on the manuscript; Lauren Zenewicz for initial help with the Listeria experiment; Melanie Lieberman and Yanming Xiong for maintaining the animal colony; and the University of Pennsylvania Biomedical Imaging Core facility for use of the confocal microscope. Y.L. was supported in part by a postdoctoral fellowship from the PA/DE Affiliate of the American Heart Association (0225364U). This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (HL57554 to G.L.R.) and (AI45025 to H.S.).

References
[1] Cossart P, Lecuit M. Interactions of Listeria monocytogenes with mammalian cells during entry and actin-based movement: bacterial factors, cellular ligands and signaling. EMBO 1998;17:3797 ­806. [2] Portnoy DA, Auerbuch V, Glomski IJ. The cell biology of Listeria monocytogenes infection: the intersection of bacterial pathogenesis and cell-mediated immunity. J Cell Biol 2002;158:409­14. [3] Gaillard JL, Berche P, Frehel C, Gouin E, Cossart P. Entry of L. monocytogenes into cells is mediated by internalin, a repeat protein reminiscent of surface antigens from gram-positive cocci. Cell 1991; 65:1127­41.

62

Y. Luo et al. / Microbial Pathogenesis 35 (2003) 57­62 [11] Ferreira-Cornwell MC, Luo Y, Narula N, Lenox JM, Lieberman M, Radice GL. Remodeling the intercalated disc leads to cardiomyopathy in mice misexpressing cadherins in the heart. J Cell Sci 2002;115: 1623­34. [12] Gaillard JL, Berche P, Mounier J, Richard S, Sansonetti P. In vitro model of penetration and intracellular growth of Listeria monocytogenes in the human enterocyte-like cell line Caco-2. Infect Immun 1987;55:2822­9. [13] Miyatani S, Shimamura K, Hatta M, Nagafuchi A, Nose A, Matsunaga M, Takeichi M. Neural cadherin: role in selective cell­cell adhesion. Science 1989;245:631­5. [14] Islam S, Carey TE, Wolf GT, Wheelock MJ, Johnson KR. Expression of N-cadherin by human squamous carcinoma cells induces a scattered fibroblastic phenotype with disrupted cell­ cell adhesion. J Cell Biol 1996;135:1643­54. [15] Nieman MT, Prodoff RS, Johnson KR, Wheelock MJ. N-cadherin promotes motility in human breast cancer cells regardless of their Ecadherin expression. J Cell Biol 1999;147:631­ 43. [16] Hazan RB, Phillips GR, Qiao RF, Norton L, Aaronson SA. Exogenous expression of N-cadherin in breast cancer cells induces cell migration, invasion, and metastasis. J Cell Biol 2000;148:779­90.

[4] Mengaud J, Ohayon H, Gounon P, Mege RM, Cossart P. E-cadherin is the receptor for internalin, a surface protein required for entry of L. monocytogenes into epithelial cells. Cell 1996;84:923­32. [5] Lecuit M, Dramsi S, Gottardi C, Fedor-Chaiken M, Gumbiner B, Cossart P. A single amino acid in E-cadherin responsible for host specificity towards the human pathogen Listeria monocytogenes. EMBO 1999;18:3956­ 63. [6] Lecuit M, Vandormael-Pournin S, Lefort J, Huerre M, Gounon P, Dupuy C, Babinet C, Cossart P. A transgenic model for listeriosis: role of internalin in crossing the intestinal barrier. Science 2001;292: 1722­5. [7] Lecuit M, Hurme R, Pizarro-Cerda J, Ohayon H, Geiger B, Cossart P. A role for alpha-and beta-catenins in bacterial uptake. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:10008­13. [8] Gumbiner BM. Regulation of cadherin adhesive activity. J Cell Biol 2000;148:399 ­403. [9] Yagi T, Takeichi M. Cadherin superfamily genes: functions, genomic organization, and neurologic diversity. Genes Dev 2000;14:1169­ 80. [10] Luo Y, Ferreira-Cornwell M, Baldwin H, Kostetskii I, Lenox J, Lieberman M, Radice G. Rescuing the N-cadherin knockout by cardiac-specific expression of N- or E-cadherin. Development 2001; 128:459­69.

