Methods 34 (2004) 200­214 www.elsevier.com/locate/ymeth

The intracellular antibody capture technology: towards the high-throughput selection of functional intracellular antibodies for target validation
Michela Visintin,a Michele Quondam,a and Antonino Cattaneoa,b,¤
b

Lay Line Genomics SpA, Via di Castel Romano 100, 00128 Rome, Italy International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Area Science Park, Padriciano 99, 34012 Trieste, Italy Accepted 8 April 2004 Available online 7 July 2004

a

Abstract Several approaches have been developed over the past decade to study the complex interactions that occur in biological system. The ability to carry out a comprehensive genetic analysis of an organism becomes more limited and diYcult as the complexity of the organism increases because complex organisms are likely to have not only more genes than simple organisms but also more elaborate networks of interactions among those genes. The development of technologies to systematically disrupt protein networks at the genomic scale would greatly accelerate the comprehensive understanding of the cell as molecular machinery. Intracellular antibodies (intrabodies) can be targeted to diVerent intracellular compartments to speciWcally interfere with function of selected intracellular gene products in mammalian cells. This technique should prove important for studies of mammalian cells, where genetic approaches are more diYcult. In the context of large-scale protein interaction mapping projects, intracellular antibodies (ICAbs) promise to be an important tool to knocking out protein function inside the cell. In this context, however, the need for speed and high throughput requires the development of simple and robust methods to derive antibodies which function within cells, without the need for optimization of each individual ICAb. The successful inhibition of biological processes by intrabodies has been demonstrated in a number of diVerent cells. The performance of antibodies that are intracellularly expressed is, however, somewhat unpredictable, because the reducing environment of the cell cytoplasm in which they are forced to work prevents some antibodies, but not others, to fold properly. For this reason, we have developed an in vivo selection procedure named Intracellular Antibody Capture Technology (IACT) that allows the isolation of functional intrabodies. The IAC technology has been used for the rapid identiWcation of antigen­antibody pairs in intracellular compartments and for the in vivo identiWcation of epitopes recognized by the selected intracellular antibodies. Several optimizations of the IAC technology for protein knock-out have been developed so far. This system oVers a powerful and versatile proteomic tool to dissect diverse functional properties of cellular proteins in diVerent cell lines.  2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Intracellular antibodies; Intrabodies; scFv; Library; Phage display; Functional genomics

1. Introduction The virtually unlimited repertoire of immunoglobulins is widely used as a source of speciWc reagents for biochemical or physiological studies in which speciWc gene products can be inhibited or modulated in vitro [41].

¤ Corresponding author. Tel.: +39-06-80319053; fax: +39-0680319065. E-mail address: a.cattaneo@laylinegenomics.com (A. Cattaneo).

The potential of using antibodies to interfere with biological processes inside the cell in a highly speciWc manner has been successfully demonstrated [3,28]. Intracellular antibodies can be used in diVerent experimental strategies to speciWcally interfere with function of selected intra- or extracellular gene products in mammalian cells [5]. Intrabody approaches are receiving great attention especially for applications in functional genomics and proteomics programs, which generate the need for technologies that will accelerate the determination of

1046-2023/$ - see front matter  2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2004.04.008

M. Visintin et al. / Methods 34 (2004) 200­214

201

protein function, the validation of therapeutical targets, and the prioritization of drug discovery pipelines. Antibodies are a class of therapeutic molecules that can be used for protein knock-out based research, for target validation programs, and as lead drug candidates themselves. Notwithstanding the signiWcant proof of principle demonstrations showing the potential of targeting intracellular antibodies to achieve selective, speciWc, and localized protein knock-down or knock-out in diVerent biological systems [5], it became evident that not all antibody domains work eYciently as intracellular antibodies. Indeed, in the reducing environment of the cell cytoplasm or nucleus antibody domains cannot form the intrachain disulWde bonds, which are critical in folding of almost all antibodies [4,6] and thus often generic intrabodies exhibit insolubility, instability, and/or incorrect protein folding. A selection procedure for the isolation of antibodies able to fold correctly and to bind antigens under condition of intracellular expression was recently developed [34,36], the Intracellular Antibody Capture Technology (IACT), an in vivo selection procedure to obtain functional intracellular antibodies using a twohybrid approach. The IAC technology identiWes physically interacting antibody­antigen pairs [35]. IACT provides, as an output, antibody domains: (i) that recognize a given protein antigen of interest and (ii) are fully functional inside the cell. IACT provides a rapid and eVective solution to the main bottleneck that limited so far the application of intracellular antibodies to functional genomics and proteomics, namely the unpredictable performance of antibodies, derived from large natural or synthetic repertoire, when expressed intracellularly. IACT is a rapid and eVective selection step that substitutes other lengthy methods of screening and optimizes the isolation of validated intracellular antibodies from antibody repertoires of diverse origin. IACT represents the solution that allows to exploit the

potential of intrabodies for functional genomics and proteomics. Two functionally distinct domains of the transcription factor lexA and VP16 are brought into proximity with each other by virtue of their fusion to antigens and antibodies, respectively, which physically interact. Reconstitution of the transcription factor is assayed using two reporter genes (HIS3 and LacZ) (Fig. 1). In the original format of the technology, the library of V genes of antibody domains might be derived from lymphocytes which may have undergone antigen stimulation or from a natural preselected or immunized donor phage display library (Fig. 2). In this contribution, we describe the pLinker220 and pMIC-BD1 vectors, that allow the implementation of this selection system. We also describe a modiWed vector in which the nuclear localization signal present in lexA DNA-binding domain is removed, so that the selection is more stringent. We describe also the methodology used to construct scFv libraries starting from diVerent V genes sources, including, immunized mice spleen, human biopsy, phage display libraries, and monoclonal antibodies.

2. The pMIC-BD1 and pMIC-BD2 vectors In our Intracellular Antibody Capture Technology, target proteins fused in-frame to the DNA-binding domain of the Escherichia coli lexA protein and the scFv library fused to the activation domain of the herpes simplex virus VP16 protein are coexpressed in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae L40 reporter strain [14]. As bait vectors, we constructed pMIC-BD1 and pMIC-BD2 vectors, designed to contain bacterial chloramphenicol resistance, TRP1 gene (which allows yeast containing this plasmid to grow in minimal medium lacking tryptophan) and the 2 origin of replication. These plasmids contain the entire region of the E. coli lexA protein, expressed from the yeast alcohol dehydro-

Fig. 1. A schematic view of the Intracellular Antibody Capture Technology (IACT). The scFv library is screened in yeast with the antigen "bait." Only those scFv that retain the speciWc binding ability in vivo can activate the reporter genes, His3 and LacZ.

202

M. Visintin et al. / Methods 34 (2004) 200­214

Fig. 2. DiVerent sources of V genes for IAC technology. When making an intracellular antibody search from natural V genes, a number of diVerent sources of B cells can be considered. ScFv can be used in addition to whole antibodies for intracellular expression. V regions are found in lymphocytes which may or may not have undergone antigen stimulation. Antibody V regions can be derived from: hybridoma cell lines, phage display library, peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL), tonsils, mouse spleen cells, and biopsy. Such genes are ampliWed using primers which recognize the 5 end of the V genes and the 3 end of the J genes. V regions from heavy and light chains can be assembled into an activation domain (AD) vector to create the AD scFv library, providing the source of scFvs readily to be used for the Intracellular Antibody Capture Technology (IACT). This technology is mainly based on the yeast two-hybrid system. The antigen fused to the DNA-binding domain is expressed in the yeast cells carrying reporter genes, under control of a regulatory sequence. A second plasmid which expresses the AD scFv library is introduced into the same strain. The interaction of the activation domain fusion scFv with the DNA-binding fusion antigen results in the expression of the reporter construct. This procedure allows one to isolate scFv­antigen interaction pairs under condition of intracellular expression.

genase I (ADH1) promoter, followed by a polylinker for cDNA insertion, to generate in-frame fusions to lexA [37] (Fig. 3). The pMIC-BD2 vector was constructed to allow the interaction between the antigen and the scFv to occur only in the cytoplasm. In fact, with this vector the antigen is expressed in yeast cells without the intrinsic nuclear localization signal of lexA. Using this vector, scFv and antigen are forced to interact in the cell cytoplasm before the complex is translocated into the nucleus and activates transcription. This means that selection is more stringent, since the antigen­antibody complex must remain bound during the translocation to the nucleus. The choice of using pMIC-BD2 instead of pMIC-BD1 is mainly recommended when looking for antibodies that bind to antigens that easily enter into the nucleus and in general for baits that require a more stringent selection. 3. The pLinker220 vector The pLinker220 plasmid (Fig. 4) for the antibody library expression, a derivative of VP16* vector [34­ 36,38], contains two nuclear localization signals (NLS)

from the SV40 Large T antigen at the 5 and 3 ends of the polylinker for inserting the VL­linker­VH scFv fragments, followed by in-frame fusion of the VP16 acidic activation domain. Transcription of the fusion protein is from the yeast ADH1 promoter. The vector contains the LEU2 gene as nutritional selection marker, the 2 origin of replication, a bacterial origin of replication ColE1, and the -lactamase gene for prokaryotic selection. As mentioned above, diVerent origins of V genes can be chosen for the construction of scFv or of scFv library for the IACT selections. In the next paragraphs, we will explain how to subclone or make cDNA synthesis and ampliWcation of V genes from the diVerent sources.

4. Source and format of antibody genes A number of recent technological developments have greatly facilitated the genetic engineering of immunoglobulins. The use of PCR has allowed the variable regions to be rapidly cloned either from a speciWc

M. Visintin et al. / Methods 34 (2004) 200­214

203

Fig. 3. pMIC-BD1 and pMIC-BD2. Map of the polylinker and description of the lexA based DNA-binding domain vectors used in IAC technology.

hybridoma source, or from libraries generated from immunized or non-immunized lymphocytes (see Fig. 2). Techniques of genetic engineering and expression have been applied to the production of antibodies in a variety of expression systems. The domain structure of the antibody is favorable to manipulation; the novel proteins produced retain their antibody-derived activity and acquire new properties as well. The ability to screen for antigen binding by displaying immunoglobulin variable regions on the surface of Wlamentous bacteriophages has opened up the possibility of bypassing the immune system to generate novel antibody speciWcities in vitro. Combinatorial libraries produced in bacteriophage present an alternative to animal immunization as a source of antigen-binding speciWcities. The protocols provided below refer to antibody domains in the single chain Fv fragment format, but smaller antibody domains, such as single VH domains, can also be used in this selection approach. Indeed, sin-

gle VH domains have been shown to provide a good source of intracellular binding reagents [27]. The protocols presented in this chapter compare the generation of diverse scFv libraries for IAC selections, starting from diVerent V repertoire sources, by a standard cloning in the two-hybrid vectors described above. 4.1. Phage display libraries as input for IAC selections One good source of antibody domains are phage display libraries. Phage display enables the isolation of antibody genes from large libraries according to the binding speciWcities they encode. Functional antibody fragments are displayed on the surface of Wlamentous bacteriophage by introducing variable region genes into the viral genome, fused to a gene encoding a viral coat protein [11,18,40]. Diverse libraries from peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) of naïve or immunized donors or fully synthetic

204

M. Visintin et al. / Methods 34 (2004) 200­214

Fig. 4. pLinker220. Map of the polylinker and description of the VP16 based activation domain vector used in IAC technology.

libraries are provided. In general, in the phage display format, genes encoding single chain Fv fragments were made by randomly combining heavy and light chain V genes using PCR, and the combinatorial library reaches a nominal diversity greater than 109 members. A small, yet signiWcant, proportion of these will be functional intrabodies. IACT allows accessing the functional intrabodies within such large combinatorial libraries. To reduce the complexity of the antibody phage library to allow the transformation of yeast cells with at least 106 scFv library members (to allow IAC selection step), the phage library is Wrst screened in vitro to generate a population of phages enriched for antigen-speciWc scFv (Fig. 5). The scFv phage library is panned against the desired target antigen which is coated onto Immunosorb tubes (Nunc) at the concentration of 10­100 g/ml. Panning is performed as described [17]. Soluble biotinylated antigen can be used as a pre-selection step, in alternative to panning [36]. It was shown [36] that a single enrichment round of a naïve scFv library on a given antigen, prior to the IAC selection in yeast, provides the optimal solution to the problem of enriching the input library for antigenspeciWc scFv and reducing its complexity to a size com-

Fig. 5. In vitro enrichment of antibody repertoire. A phage library displaying a repertoire of scFv is screened in vitro with an antigen coated onto a surface. Only phages displaying the speciWc scFv bind to the antigen.

patible with the eYciency of transformation in yeast. Eluates from the Wrst round of preselection of the phage library are infected into TG1 E. coli bacteria. After

M. Visintin et al. / Methods 34 (2004) 200­214

205

infection, colonies were collected and the bulk DNA encoding for the polyclonal anti-target antigen scFv fragment is subcloned into pLinker220. This can be done directly if the restriction sites Xanking the scFv library [25] are compatible with the polylinker used in pLinker220. Otherwise, VP16* [34­36,38] can be used instead of pLinker220 that has a polylinker suitable for cloning diVerent libraries [26,33]. In the case in which none of the polylinkers described are compatible with the scFv library ends, polyclonal scFv libraries must be re-ampliWed by using primers encompassing appropriate restriction sites. The Wrst examples of phage display based IACT published so far [30,36] demonstrated that a rapid preselection of phage antibody libraries may represent one possibility to provide a diverse but enriched input library in yeast, allowing the subsequent selection of several functional antibodies readily suitable for intracellular expression. A Xowchart for implementing a phage derived IAC selection is outlined in Fig. 3. The intracellular antibody capture strategy involves: in vitro screening of a phage scFv with the target antigen to produce a sub-library enriched for antigen-speciWc scFv. Naïve phage antibody libraries [25,26,33], displaying scFv, consisting of greater than 5 £ 109 members should be used. 4.1.1. Selection of phage antibody library 1. To a 75 £ 12 mm Nunc-immunotube (Maxisorp; Cat. No. 4-44202), add 2 ml PBS and 10 mg/ml of puriWed protein (e.g., made by E. coli, Pichia pastoris or baculovirus expression systems). Leave overnight at 4 °C to coat. 2. Next day wash the tube 3£ with PBS­Tween 20 (0.1%), 3£ with PBS (simply pour solution in and pour out again immediately). 3. Fill tube to brim with MPBS 2% (PBS containing 2% Marvel). Cover with paraWlm and incubate at room temperature for at least 30 min to block. 4. Prepare phage mix: 100 l of PEG concentrated phage (»1011­1012 TU) (aliquots were stored in 30% glycerol at ¡80 °C) + 100 l of puriWed tag protein (200 g/ml) (iVusion tags is used in recombinant protein expression and puriWcation) + 300 l PBS and 500 l of 4% MPBS. Store remainder of phage prep. at 4 °C. 5. Wash tube 2£ with PBS­Tween 20 (0.1%), 2£ with PBS. 6. Transfer phage mix from step 4 to the Immunotube. Seal tube with paraWlm. Incubate for 30 min at room temperature on under and over turntable and then let it stand for at least a further 1.5 h at room temperature. 7. Wash tubes with 20 washes PBS­Tween 20 (0.1%) and then 20 washes with PBS. Each washing step

is performed by pouring buVer in and out immediately. 8. Elute phage from tube by adding 1 ml of 100 mM triethylamine (make fresh: 140 l per 10 ml water, pH 12). Rotate the tube for 8 min on an under and over turntable. 9. Transfer solution to an Eppendorf tube with 0.5 ml of 1 M Tris­HCl, pH 7.4, and mix by inversion to neutralize the phage eluate. 10. Transfer to ice for later re-infection. 11. Grow TG1 E. coli [K12, (lac-pro), supE, thi, hsd 5/ F traD36, proA+B+, lacIq, lacZ M15] to an OD600 of 0.5. 12. Add to 5 ml (2 £ 109 bacteria) TG1 500 l of selected phagemid particles and let it stand for 40 min at 37 °C with occasional agitation. 13. After the infection event, spread the infected bacteria on 2YT, 100 g/ml ampicillin, and 2% glucose plates. To select the highest diversity of antigen-speciWc scFv binders, one round of in vitro panning of the library using antigen-coated immunotubes is employed. Typically, one would expect a reduction in complexity from the initial complexity of about 5 £ 109 to 104­105, compatible for yeast transformation. 4.1.2. Construction of an activation domain-fusion scFv library DNA phagemids from the Wrst cycle of phage antibody selection are extracted (Qiagen midiprep kit) and scFv fragment DNAs are subcloned into SWI/NotI sites of pVP16* or NheI­BssHII sites of pLinker220 plasmids. The ligation mix is then electroporated into electrocompetent DH5 F (Gibco-BRL, Rockville, MD) [F /endA1 hsdR17(rK-mK+) supE44 thi-1 recA1 gyrA (Nalr) relA1 (lacZYA-argF)U169 deoR (
80dlac (lacZ)M15] and plated on LB 100 g/ml ampicillin plates to obtain the ADlibrary. The Wnal libraries should have a diversity of approximately 105­106 diVerent clones. 4.1.3. Selection of intracellular antibodies using the twohybrid system The AD-fusion scFv library is transformed in L40 yeast containing the bait plasmid following a maxi-scale LiAc transformation protocol, as described in [35]. 4.1.4. Materials I 500 g scFv library-VP16 DNA, I 150 ml YC-UKW, I 2 L YPAD, I 1 L YPA, I 1.5 L YC-UKWL + 10 YC-UKWL plates (100 mm), I 1.5 L YC-WHULK + 100 YC-WHULK plates (100 mm), I 100 ml of 10£ TE,

206
I I I I

M. Visintin et al. / Methods 34 (2004) 200­214

20 ml of 10£ LiAc, 1 ml of 10 mg/ml denatured salmon sperm, 150 ml of 50% PEG 4000, 20 ml DMSO.

4.1.5. Procedure 1. Day 1: grow L40 yeast containing bait plasmid in YC-UKW O/N. 2. Day 2: inoculate 100 ml of YC-UKW with an aliquot of the overnight culture to Wnd a dilution that places the 100 ml culture to logarithmic phase the next day. 3. Day 3: transfer enough overnight culture in 1 L of prewarmed to 30 °C YPAD to produce an OD600 D 0.3. 4. Grow at 30 °C for 3 h. 5. Centrifuge the cells at 1500g for 5 min at room temperature. 6. Wash pellet in 500 ml of 1£ TE and then centrifuge again the cells at 1500g for 5 min at room temperature. 7. Resuspend pellet in 20 ml of 1£ LiAc, 0.5£ TE and transfer to a new Xask. 8. Add 500 g DNA library and 1 ml denatured salmon sperm. 9. Add 140 ml of 1£ LiAc, 40% PEG 3350, and 1£ TE; mix and incubate for 30 min at 30 °C with gently shaking. 10. Add 17.6 ml DMSO; swirl to mix. 11. Heat shock for 10 min at 42 °C in a water bath swirl occasionally to mix. 12. Rapidly cool at room temperature cells in a water bath diluting with 400 ml YPA. 13. Pellet cells by centrifugation and wash with 500 ml YPA. 14. After centrifugation, resuspend pellet in 1 L of prewarmed YPAD. 15. Incubate for 1 h at 30 °C with gently shaking. 16. Pellet cells from 1 ml: resuspend in 1 ml YC-UKWL; spread 100 l of 1:1000, 1:100, and 1:10 dilutions for transformation eYciency controls. 17. Pellet cells from the remaining culture. 18. Wash pellet with 500 ml YC-UKWL. 19. Resuspend in 1 L of prewarmed YC-UKWL and incubate O/N at 30 °C with gently shaking. 20. Day 4: pellet cells and wash twice with 500 ml YC-WHULK. 21. Resuspend Wnal pellet in 10 ml YC-WHULK. 22. Spread dilutions of the total on YC-UKWL plates to compare to the number of primary transformants. 23. Spread part of the remaining transformation suspension on YC-WHULK plate. Store in 30% glycerol/YC-WHULK the cotransformed library at ¡80 °C. After the scoring of His+ yeast colonies, a X-Gal lift assay is performed as described [35]. Individual ADfusion scFv plasmids are isolated from yeast cells as described below.

4.1.6. Plasmid isolation from yeast 1. Inoculate single, well-isolated yeast transformant colonies into 5 ml of appropriate selective media at 30 °C with shaking at 250 rpm until the culture is saturated (16­24 h). 2. Spin down the culture by centrifuging at 5000g and resuspend cells in 250 l BuVer 1 containing 0.1 mg/ ml RNase A; transfer the cell suspension in a 1.5 ml microfuge tube. 3. Add 0.3 g of acid-washed glass beads and vortex for 5 min at room temperature. 4. Spin at maximum speed for 5 min and transfer the supernatant to a new 1.5 ml microfuge tube. 5. Add 250 l lysis buVer P2 to the supernatant and invert gently 4­6 times to mix. Incubate at room temperature for 5 min. 6. Add 350 l neutralization buVer N3 to the tube and invert immediately 4­6 times the tube. 7. Centrifuge at maximum speed for 10 min. 8. Transfer the cleared lysate to QIAprep spin column placed in a 2 ml collection tube by pipetting. 9. Centrifuge for 1 min at maximum speed; discard the Xow-through. 10. Wash QIAprep spin column by adding 0.75 ml BuVer PE and centrifuging for 1 min. 11. Discard the Xow-through and centrifuge for an additional 1 min to remove residual ethanol from wash buVer. 12. Place QIAprep spin column in a clean 1.5 ml microfuge tube. 13. Add 25 l of H2O to the center of each QIAprep spin column; let it stand for 1 min and centrifuge for 1 min at maximum speed. Then transform the 1 l of extracted DNA into bacteria using electroporation and plate on LB with 100 g/ml ampicillin. Incubate the plate overnight at 37 °C. Pick several bacterial colonies and inoculate individually into 5 ml LB containing 100 g/ml ampicillin. Grow overnight at 37 °C with shaking. Extract plasmid DNA from each bacterial overnight culture using QIAprep Spin Miniprep Kit according to manufacturer's instruction. Elute DNA with 50 l of elution buVer. A quick comparison of the various scFv-VP16 clones can be achieved by a gelDNA Wngerprinting method of the product on 2% agarose gels. 4.1.7. Fingerprinting PCR bands Each individual V region of scFv gives an own "Wngerprint." Fingerprinting carried out on V genes will give a number of discrete bands. They can be carried out on V regions ampliWed from cDNA from individual clones: a good library contains diVerent Wngerprinting of each clone. Pick one clone with a toothpick and dissolve it in 100 l ddH2O. Use 1 l in PCR mix:

M. Visintin et al. / Methods 34 (2004) 200­214

207

DNA clone PCR buVer dNTP 2 mM Taq VHmixBACK VKmixFOR ddH2O 94 °C for 1 min 58 °C for 1 min 72 °C for 1 min 72 °C for 10 min 4 °C for 24 h

1 l 2 l 2 l 1 l (10 pmol/ l) (10 pmol/ l) 12 l 30 cycles

[21,24] [21,24]

}

Check PCR ampliWcations on a 1.5% agarose gel, using 3 l each PCR mix. After veriWcation, use the other 17 l of reaction mix for digestion: DNAmix BstNI (20 U/ l) NEB buVer 2 BSA ddH2O 17 l 0.2 l 4 l 0.4 l 18.4 l

Put to incubate at 60 °C for 2 h. Add 5 l of 6£ gel loading buVer to each tube and load on 4% Metaphor/Nusieve TBE gel. Run 60 V for 120 min. A deWnitive comparison of the isolated scFv is obtained from DNA sequence. The isolated AD-fusion scFv plasmids must then undergo a secondary screening, for Wnal validation, by cotransformation with the antigen bait and, in parallel, with a control unrelated antigen vectors into L40 yeast strain [35]. The Wnal validation for a positive interaction is assessed testing the cotransformed yeast colonies for His and lacZ gene activation. 4.2. Variable domains from hybridomas, immunized splenocytes, and peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) as input for IAC selections Antibody variable regions for IAC selections can be isolated directly from lymphocytes or derived cells (hybridomas), rather than from phage display libraries, as discussed above. Sequencing of immunoglobulin genes revealed a diverse repertoire of V genes, and the presence of members in each human and mouse V gene family [29]. Primer usage for PCR ampliWcation of variable region genes, scFv assembly strategy, and subsequent directional cloning using a single rare cutting restriction enzyme are the prerequisites for a good V region isolation and cloning procedure. The starting material for immunoglobulin genes repertoires isolation is total RNA or mRNA from human or mousecells (splenocytes, peripheral lymphocytes or hybridoma cells) with RNA puriWcation systems (Qiagen).

Hybridoma. Antibody variable regions can be derived from a hybridoma cell line, or from a panel of hybridoma cell lines. RNA isolation from hybridoma is prepared from 5 £ 108 cells grown in roller bottles. RNA is selected by using Oligotex mRNA puriWcation system (Qiagen). cDNA synthesis is performed by using random hexamers according to the manufacturer's instructions [21]. Splenocytes. If isolating splenocytes from a hyperimmune mouse is chosen as strategy of choice to enrich for antibody variable regions speciWc for the protein antigen of interest, mice should be immunized with 5­100 g protein per mouse per injection, to elicit a strong antibody response. In general, strong IgG responses are elicited by small, repeated doses of antigen. The mice should be immunized a minimum of twice, but repeated immunizations, followed by tail bleeding to check the immune response, is often recommended. The Wrst immunization should contain antigen diluted 1:1 with Freund's complete adjuvant, and subsequent immunizations should contain Freund's incomplete adjuvant. Antigen delivered without adjuvant elicits a strong, but short-lived response, and it is only used for the last boost injection, before sacriWcing the mice. Four days after the Wnal immunization, all mouse tails should be bled, an ELISA performed, the mice with the strongest immune response should be selected and the spleens of immunized mice are collected. Spleens are placed in a sterile Petri dish with PBS and cleaned using a sterile needle to produce a single cell suspension. Cells are carefully washed with PBS, then resuspended with water to lyse the red cells, and immediately resuspended again in PBS. Cells are pelleted and used immediately for RNA extraction or frozen at ¡80 °C. Immunization could be performed also by the DNA vaccination procedure [2,12,22]. This technique has the potential to replace protein based immunization. In fact, after injection of non-replicating transcription units, encoding heterologous proteins, the latter are expressed from the injected DNA taken up by host cells, processed and presented to the immune system, thereby eliciting antigen-speciWc immune responses [10]. This technique has two signiWcant advantages over protein based immunization: (i) It does not require the puriWcation of the protein, which is time consuming and in some cases, such as for example with membrane proteins, is very diYcult or impossible. (ii) The immunogen is synthesized in the mammalian host, thus undergoing proper posttranslational modiWcations and folding into the native structure. Direct intramuscular or intradermal inoculation of plasmid DNA encoding sequences of viral proteins results in the synthesis of these proteins, causing humoral and/or cellular immune responses in the recipient. Several advantages are associated with DNA

208

M. Visintin et al. / Methods 34 (2004) 200­214

immunization, e.g., cheap to produce, heat stability, amenable to genetic manipulation, mimic viral infection, and especially no handling of protein thus allowing the selection of intracellular antibodies directly from gene sequences. To pursue this DNA-vaccination based "from gene to intrabody" procedure, genes encoding for the protein antigens of interest could be cloned in various viral vectors based on human viruses developed as gene transfer vehicles for gene therapy applications and vaccination or in vectors based on non-human viruses [16]. In our successful proof of principle applications for DNA vaccination as a way to enrich for protein-speciWc antibody variable regions, before IACT selections, mice were immunized three times intradermally using the BioRad delivery device (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The abdominal area of mice is shaved, and 1 mm gold particles carrying 1­3 g DNA are shot at 400 psi, every 2 weeks. The Xowchart of this methodology is outlined in Fig. 6.

4.3. PCR ampliWcation of VL and VH fragments After the synthesis of Wrst strand cDNA, from lymphocyte RNA, using random hexamers or oligo dT according to manufacturer's instructions, the pooled cDNA is used for the ampliWcation of V genes. A set of primers able to recognize all functional human [19,24] and mouse V genes [15] have been designed, and are used, as appropriate. To prevent the overrepresentation of few V regions in the pool V genes library, we prefer performing individual ampliWcations using single 5 and 3 primer pairs, in parallel. Instead, small pools of VH 5 and 3 primers and VL 5 and 3 primers could be used. Each ampliWcation is detected and quantiWed on a gel. cDNA H 2O 10£ PCR buVer dNTP 2.5 mM MgCl2 25 mM Primer sense Primer antisense Taq polymerase 94 °C for 5 min 94 °C for 1 min 60 °C for 1 min 72 °C for 1 min 72 °C for 10 min 4 °C for 24 h 0.5 l 30.5 l 5 l 5 l 3 l 2.5 l 2.5 l 1 l

(10 pmol/ l) (10 pmol/ l)

}

30 cycles

Fig. 6. From immunized mice to an enriched antibody repertoire. Mice are immunized, boosted, and tested until an antibody response of the desired speciWcity is elicited. Before proceeding with the sacriWce it is critical that the mouse exhibits antibodies of the desired speciWcity. Bcells are isolated from the immunized mouse and used for the extraction of RNA. cDNA is synthesized using random hexamers and used as a template for the ampliWcation of natural V regions. V genes are subsequently cloned as described.

Aliquots of PCRs are checked on 1.5% agarose gel. Cut out the gel band containing the variable regions. Extract the DNA using the Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen) according to manufacturer's instructions. The same amount of DNA for each ampliWcation is collected and used for a subsequent ampliWcation, to increase the amount of DNA available and for the addition of extra sites for the cloning procedures. This step, called pull through, might be avoided if the assembly step is made by a two-cloning step procedure. V regions may be assembled into scFv fragments in diVerent ways; in the following, we describe two methods that were successfully used for the construction of diVerent libraries [32,37] (Fig. 7). (a) PCR assembly methods. V regions are ampliWed with regions of overlap that create a linker between the two variable domains (Fig. 7, left). (b) Two-cloning step assembly. V regions are cloned in two diVerent cloning steps. To do this cloning procedure, restriction enzymes which do not cut very frequently within V regions must be used. The assembly is performed by joining VL and VH libraries obtained by two diVerent cloning steps into the same backbone. In general, it is preferred to clone the VL Wrst and then the VH, to avoid loss of diversity during cloning steps.

M. Visintin et al. / Methods 34 (2004) 200­214

209

The enzymes used to clone the library in pLinker220 would be BssHII and NheI, if the PCR assembly methods are chosen, otherwise BssHII and BspEI or SalI for the VL and XhoI and NheI for the VH, if the twocloning step assembly methods are preferred (Fig. 7, right). One signiWcant and successful example of IAC selection based on V gene input deriving from hyperimmune mice was recently performed [31,32]. In this contribution, we constructed a murine scFv library from mice immunized with the rotavirus non-structural protein NSP5, and this library was to selected with IACT, using NSP5 protein as an antigen bait. Intracellular antibodies were found that speciWcally recognized the full-length NSP5, forming antigen-speciWc aggresomes in the cytoplasm of cotransfected cells and that were able to immunoprecipitate the coexpressed antigen. Moreover, these antibodies are able to reduce the formation of the viroplasm and to inhibit viruses to replicate, when expressed in cells sustaining rotavirus infection. Biopsy. The construction of a large library of single-chain Fv (scFv) antibody fragments involves a random assortment of heavy and light chains. Although useful for the production of recombinant

antibodies, this method is not adapted to the study of the autoantibody repertoire formed in vivo, such as for instance during autoimmune diseases or in tumorinWltrating B lymphocytes. To attain this objective, incell PCR should be used, to obtain in situ pairing of the variable (V) region genes of the immunoglobulin heavy (H) and light (L) chains [7,8]. This method is based on ampliWcation and recombination of the VH and VL genes within B cells isolated from diVerent tissue biopsies. Degenerated primers are used to amplify the known major human VH and VL gene families [24]. After reverse transcription PCR and three rounds of PCR including recombination between VH and VL using the Cre-loxP system, a unique 800 bp band corresponding in size to scFv fragments should be obtained. It was proved that the recombination between VH and VL genes occurs inside the same cell. This method allows one to obtain the exact VH/VL pairing that occurs in vivo during the autoimmune process. These VH/VL antibody pairings can then be expressed in the IAC format, and challenged against identiWed protein baits or against a library containing potential binders, to allow their identiWcation.

Fig. 7. Assembling V genes. V regions may be assembled in a number of diVerent ways. Two diVerent methods are outlined here. In the PCR assembly of V genes (left), V regions are ampliWed with regions of overlap. With a number of ampliWcation cycles without the addition of external primers, VH regions are joined to VL and subsequently the full scFv is ampliWed with the addition of external primers and other cycles of PCR. In the assembly of VL and VH genes by cloning (right), the ampliWed V genes are cloned separately. VL and VH PCR product are digested with BssHII/SalI, and with XhoI/NheI, respectively, and cloned in pLinker220.

210

M. Visintin et al. / Methods 34 (2004) 200­214

We have successfully isolated by IACT, challenged with human peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL), validated intrabodies against various human proteins.

5. Evaluation of the library quality Theoretical considerations on the relationship between repertoire size and aYnity have suggested that the larger the repertoire, the greater is the chance of Wnding a good antibody. However, in the case of hyperimmune scFv libraries it was demonstrated that the complexity requested to obtain a good source of antibodies speciWc for the target antigen could be moderate [9,10]. It was shown that speciWc scFv, with nanomolar aYnities, similar to those obtained in a secondary immune response in vivo, could be isolated from a hyperimmune library with 105­107 diVerent clones [1,10,23]. The pattern of VH and VL pairings provides an evaluation of the complexity of the scFv library. Library complexity is a critical determinant of whether or not screens of scFv-VP16 fusion library will

be successful; moreover, the pattern of pairings provides also a "Wngerprint" that allows one to distinguish the response of the library to diVerent antigens [13]. The complexity of the library is the number of independent clones present in the original unampliWed library. It is relatively straightforward to create libraries with diversity of 106 in pLinker220 (Fig. 8). A critical parameter for determining library quality is the percentage of recombinant clones. Before the original library is ampliWed to prepare DNA for transformation in yeast, the percentage of recombinant scFv should be determined by PCR­BstNI Wngerprinting: randomly selected clones are screened using primers that anneal in 5 and 3 ends of VL and VH independently and digesting with BstNI (Fig. 9). DNA sequence and Western blot on yeast expressing scFv-VP16 proteins randomly chosen from the library represent additional evaluations to be taken into consideration for quality control of the library generated. Finally, the ultimate practical test of library quality is to screen the library with a panel of baits of diVerent origins. We have been able to apply the described protocols to a very large number of diVerent protein antigens, conWrming that fully validated intrabodies can be easily generated from diVerent V-region gene sources, and such that in all cases the isolated intrabodies are fully functional when expressed in mammalian cells.

6. VIDA: a validated intrabody database The growing accumulation of a very large number of validated intrabodies from diVerent sources and against diVerent antigens has led to the availability of a large dataset of DNA sequences of validated intrabodies. A Wrst analysis of these sequences has led to the identiWcation of an "intrabody sequence Wngerprint," the socalled intrabody consensus sequence (ICS) [36]. The growing number of functional intrabody sequences has now been organized in a sequence database of validated intrabody sequences (VIDA, validated intrabody database), that are allowing to deWne a second generation set of libraries, based on a ICS consensus scaVold with improved solubility and expression properties in vivo. These second generation intrabody libraries should provide a source for intrabodies in the future. However, many existing antibodies and antibody libraries will continue to be employed, and it would be very useful to be able to predict a priori whether a given antibody is likely to be a functional intrabody or not. We describe in the following a procedure to do so, VIDA Mage, based on the VIDA database of murine and human intrabody sequences. VIDA Mage is a software tool that provides a prediction for a given antibody domain to be a functional intracellular antibody.

Fig. 8. Flowchart for Wnal step in construction of a VP16-fusion scFv library in pLinker220 vect.

M. Visintin et al. / Methods 34 (2004) 200­214

211

Fig. 9. Characterization of the VP16-fusion scFv library by BstNI Wngerprinting analysis of PCR ampliWed V genes. The various scFv-VP16 clones can be compared by using DNA Wngerprinting after digestion with a frequent cutting restriction enzyme such as BstNI (CCA/TGG). This comprises PCR ampliWcation of insert VL and VH or scFv DNA followed by digestion and analysis of the product on agarose gel. The isolated scFv clones are also characterized by DNA sequencing of the scFv-VP16 diVerent clones.

The VIDA Mage procedure is based on the assembly of two matrices, one derived from the VH domain sequences and another from VL domain sequences. We arranged these matrices from both human and mouse databases. In the matrices, the abscissa values correspond to the aminoacid position of the antibody domain and the ordinate values to the aminoacid types. Resulting from multi-alignment of the VIDA database, the matrix dimensions are of 133 by 20 for matrices for the VH domain and of a 127 by 20 for VL domain matrices. Matrix values correspond to the aminoacid frequency in the VIDA database for each scFv sequence position, as described by the formula: ¡ log(P(i, aa) C err), where P(i, aa) is the probability to Wnd the aminoacid aa in the position i and err is the error estimation (equal to 1/scFv sequence number). The matrix abscissa positions corresponding to CDR1, CDR2, and CDR3 ipervariable regions in the V

domains have no representative frequency values and for this reason these positions were not considered. Given an input sequence to be tested, the VIDA Mage procedure aligns the sequence on Kabat database multialignment. The alignment process is fundamental to obtain a good prediction score. After alignment, VIDA Mage compares each aminoacid position with the corresponding matrix value and returns the score corresponding of the aminoacid frequency in the VIDA database. The sum of matrix values for each aminoacid type and sequence position makes the Wnal score. This score was normalized to a 1­100 range and called it IPS (intrabody prediction score; high score D high chances that the sequence corresponds to a good intrabody). The program can analyze a VH + VL sequence or a single domain sequence (VH or VL). The input sequence can be inserted using cut and paste command or taking them from a text Wle. The program has a graphical output that shows the score of the whole of the sequence or the score of a single part of the sequence. The VIDA Mage tool permits the user to ask to the following questions:

212

M. Visintin et al. / Methods 34 (2004) 200­214

(i) Does a given test scFv sequence represent a functional intrabody? (ii) Where does a given intrabody sequence need to be modiWed, in order to improve it and to develop it into a good intrabody? To answer to the Wrst question, we Wrst calculated the IPS distributions of each VIDA database (mouse/human and VH/VL). The position of an input test sequence in this distribution returns the possibility that this sequence represents a good intrabody. At this stage, to simplify, we considered four output categories: (A) best chances to be an intrabody, with an IPS of 74 or higher; (B) moderate chances, with an IPS of 65­73; (C) insuYcient chance, with an IPS of 55­64; and (D) very bad chance, with less of 55. As the VIDA set is steadily increasing in size, the prediction system can become more accurate, but already at this stage its predictive value is good and well validated, in that antibody sequences known to be good or bad intrabodies, respectively, consistently provide scores in the correct and expected range. We applied VIDA Mage analysis to the entire Kabat database of antibody sequences. The distribution of the Kabat IPS shows a peak at an IPS value of around 50 (Fig. 10). We can see that only 0.5% of the whole dataset of antibody sequences are in the best prediction A category, while the 7.1% are in the B category (moderate chances) and the 27.6% in C category (insuYcient chances). This conWrms that good intrabodies are indeed present in the antibody repertoire, but in a low percentage. For answering the second question, the VIDA Mage procedure divides the scFv sequences in four regions and calculates the IPS for each sequence region: in this way it is very easy to identify the sequence part that needs to be modiWed to improve the scFv Wnal stability. With the improving of VIDA size, the VIDA Mage procedure will be more accurate and it should lead to suggest also the single aminoacid sequence substitution. The VIDA Mage is a Windows PC based system software. It is free upon email request. To make the VIDA Mage easily accessible to all users, we made also a simpliWed procedure accessible directly from the web: using

an internet browser, the user can paste a scFv sequence and specify the VIDA set (mouse or human), so that he can have back the IPS score for his sequence. The procedure is available to the address: http:// www.laylinegenomics.com/vidamage/index.htm.

7. Conclusions In the traditional mode of cell biology, antibodies have been used for protein knock-out in vivo experiments on a protein-by-protein basis. We propose for the near future a scaling up of protein knock-out at the genomic scale were protein function might be attacked in a high-throughput parallel manner. An absolute prerequisite for this is the availability of robust and reliable sources of validated intracellular antibodies, all of which would function in protein interference studies in cells. To this aim we have developed the Intracellular Antibody Capture Technology (IACT), a yeast two-hybrid based system that allow the selection of antibody fragments suitable for intracellular expression. This methodology was shown to fulWll the requirement for antibodies with improved thermodynamic stability and solubility properties, able to function in all cases as intracellular antibodies. This technology has been adapted for the expression in yeast of libraries of V genes provided from diVerent sources. This approach has already prove successful in selecting antibody fragments against a wide number of diVerent antigens. The plasmid carrying the scFv library and the baits might be also introduced into the same yeast cell using a mating strategy. If the screen is carried out in a colony array format, such that each clone is spatially addressed within the array, the clones only have to be identiWed once. This high-throughput format makes IACT suitable for the automation required for largescale projects. With this approach, several antigen baits might be screened in the same experiment, allowing the complete protein knock-out tool kit to study intracellular protein­protein interactions at a large-scale level. Current approaches to drug target validation include antisense, gene knock-out, and RNAi technologies [20,39,42], which, although popular, have only limited relevance because they do not work directly on the protein, the target of most drugs. This makes the intracellular antibody technology a very good complement to these gene or RNA based knock-out systems. However, the intracellular antibody technology for selective protein knock-out permits distinctive tools for proteomic applications. In fact, targeting the protein instead of the RNA allows bypassing the so-called "RNA reserve problem," according to which it is not uncommon that 80­90% reduction in the RNA levels still results in full protein function. Moreover, with antibodies isolated

Fig. 10. The distribution of intrabody prediction score (IPS) for the Kabat dataset of antibody sequences.

M. Visintin et al. / Methods 34 (2004) 200­214

213

against protein­protein interaction domains, it is possible to selectively inhibit a subset of the protein "functions" while leaving the others intact. Antibodies can also be used downstream in functional selection schemes for "pull-down" and isolation of the recognized proteins that can be identiWed with set of tools and technologies for proteomics. IACT thus allows the identiWcation of novel drug target and at the same time the elucidation of their function in the biological context of interest. Finally, IACT would provide itself a good resource of drugs candidates since antibody has the potential for treating diseases and thus can be used as therapeutic agents. References
[1] P. Amersdorfer, C. Wong, S. Chen, T. Smith, S. Deshpande, R. Sheridan, R. Finnern, J.D. Marks, Molecular characterization of murine humoral immune response to botulinum neurotoxin type A binding domain as assessed by using phage antibody libraries, Infect. Immun. 65 (1997) 3743­3752. [2] F. Benvenuti, O.R. Burrone, Genetic vaccination for the immunotherapy of B-cell malignancies, Curr. Gene Ther. 2 (2002) 235­242. [3] S. Biocca, P. Pierandrei-Amaldi, A. Cattaneo, Intracellular expression of anti-p21ras single chain Fv fragments inhibits meiotic maturation of Xenopus oocytes, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 197 (1993) 422­427. [4] S. Biocca, F. Ruberti, M. Tafani, P. Pierandrei-Amaldi, A. Cattaneo, Redox state of single chain Fv fragments targeted to the endoplasmic reticulum, cytosol and mitochondria, Biotechnology (N. Y.) 13 (1995) 1110­1115. [5] A. Cattaneo, S. Biocca, Intracellular Antibodies: Development and Applications, 1997. [6] A. Cattaneo, S. Biocca, The selection of intracellular antibodies, Trends Biotechnol. 17 (1999) 115­121. [7] N. Chapal, M. Bouanani, M.J. Embleton, I. Navarro-Teulon, M. Biard-Piechaczyk, B. Pau, S. Peraldi-Roux, In-cell assembly of scFv from human thyroid-inWltrating B cells, Biotechniques 23 (1997) 518­524. [8] N. Chapal, S. Peraldi-Roux, D. Bresson, M. Pugniere, J.C. Mani, C. Granier, L. Baldet, B. Guerrier, B. Pau, M. Bouanani, Human anti-thyroid peroxidase single-chain fragment variable of Ig isolated from a combinatorial library assembled in-cell: insights into the in vivo situation, J. Immunol. 164 (2000) 4162­4169. [9] I.H. Choi, S.G. Park, J.H. Chung, I.J. Kim, H.J. Hong, Generation of human Fab monoclonal antibodies against preS1 of hepatitis B virus using repertoire cloning, Hybridoma 17 (1998) 535­540. [10] P.S. Chowdhury, J.L. Viner, R. Beers, I. Pastan, Isolation of a high-aYnity stable single-chain Fv speciWc for mesothelin from DNA-immunized mice by phage display and construction of a recombinant immunotoxin with anti-tumor activity, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 (1998) 669­674. [11] T. Clackson, H.R. Hoogenboom, A.D. GriYths, G. Winter, Making antibody fragments using phage display libraries, Nature 352 (1991) 624­628. [12] G. Gregoriadis, A. Bacon, W. Caparros-Wanderley, B. McCormack, A role for liposomes in genetic vaccination, Vaccine 20 (2002) B1­B9. [13] A.D. GriYths, S.C. Williams, O. Hartley, I.M. Tomlinson, P. Waterhouse, W.L. Crosby, R.E. Kontermann, P.T. Jones, N.M. Low, T.J. Allison, et al., Isolation of high aYnity human antibodies directly from large synthetic repertoires, EMBO J. 13 (1994) 3245­3260.

[14] S.M. Hollenberg, R. Sternglanz, P.F. Cheng, H. Weintraub, IdentiWcation of a new family of tissue-speciWc basic helix­loop­helix proteins with a two-hybrid system, Mol. Cell. Biol. 15 (1995) 3813­ 3822. [15] A. Krebber, S. Bornhauser, J. Burmester, A. Honegger, J. Willuda, H.R. Bosshard, A. Pluckthun, Reliable cloning of functional antibody variable domains from hybridomas and spleen cell repertoires employing a reengineered phage display system, J. Immunol. Methods 201 (1997) 35­55. [16] P. Loser, A. Huser, M. Hillgenberg, D. Kumin, G.W. Both, C. Hofmann, Advances in the development of non-human viral DNA-vectors for gene delivery, Curr. Gene Ther. 2 (2002) 161­ 171. [17] J.D. Marks, A.D. GriYths, M. Malmqvist, T.P. Clackson, J.M. Bye, G. Winter, By-passing immunization: building high aYnity human antibodies by chain shuZing, Biotechnology (N. Y.) 10 (1992) 779­783. [18] J.D. Marks, H.R. Hoogenboom, T.P. Bonnert, J. McCaVerty, A.D. GriYths, G. Winter, By-passing immunization. Human antibodies from V-gene libraries displayed on phage, J. Mol. Biol. 222 (1991) 581­597. [19] J.D. Marks, M. Tristem, A. Karpas, G. Winter, Oligonucleotide primers for polymerase chain reaction ampliWcation of human immunoglobulin variable genes and design of family-speciWc oligonucleotide probes, Eur. J. Immunol. 21 (1991) 985­991. [20] R.A. Martienssen, Maintenance of heterochromatin by RNA interference of tandem repeats, Nat. Genet. 35 (2003) 213­214. [21] R. Orlandi, D.H. Gussow, P.T. Jones, G. Winter, Cloning immunoglobulin variable domains for expression by the polymerase chain reaction, 1989, Biotechnology 24 (1992) 527­531. [22] A. Reyes-Sandoval, H.C. Ertl, DNA vaccines, Curr. Mol. Med. 1 (2001) 217­243. [23] G. Rojas, J.C. Almagro, B. Acevedo, J.V. Gavilondo, Phage antibody fragments library combining a single human light chain variable region with immune mouse heavy chain variable regions, J. Biotechnol. 94 (2002) 287­298. [24] D. Sblattero, A. Bradbury, A deWnitive set of oligonucleotide primers for amplifying human V regions, Immunotechnology 3 (1998) 271­278. [25] D. Sblattero, A. Bradbury, Exploiting recombination in single bacteria to make large phage antibody libraries, Nat. Biotechnol. 18 (2000) 75­80. [26] M.D. Sheets, P. Amersdorfer, R. Finnern, P. Sargent, E. Lindquist, R. Schier, G. Hemingsen, C. Wong, J.C. Gerhart, J.D. Marks, E. Lindqvist, EYcient construction of a large nonimmune phage antibody library: the production of high-aYnity human singlechain antibodies to protein antigens [published erratum appears in Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96 (2) (1999) 795], Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 (1998) 6157­6162. [27] T. Tanaka, M.N. Lobato, T.H. Rabbitts, Single domain intracellular antibodies: a minimal fragment for direct in vivo selection of antigen-speciWc intrabodies, J. Mol. Biol. 331 (2003) 1109­1120. [28] P. Tavladoraki, E. Benvenuto, S. Trinca, D. De Martinis, A. Cattaneo, P. GaleY, Transgenic plants expressing a functional singlechain Fv antibody are speciWcally protected from virus attack, Nature 366 (1993) 469­472. [29] I.M. Tomlinson, G. Walter, P.T. Jones, P.H. Dear, E.L. Sonnhammer, G. Winter, The imprint of somatic hypermutation on the repertoire of human germline V genes, J. Mol. Biol. 256 (1996) 813­817. [30] E. Tse, M.N. Lobato, A. Forster, T. Tanaka, G.T. Chung, T.H. Rabbitts, Intracellular antibody capture technology: application to selection of intracellular antibodies recognising the BCR-ABL oncogenic protein, J. Mol. Biol. 317 (2002) 85­94. [31] F. Vascotto, Rotavirus NSP5: characterisation of the phosphorylation and study of the function with selected intracellular

214

M. Visintin et al. / Methods 34 (2004) 200­214 antibodies, Thesis Submitted for the Degree of Doctor Philosophiae, 2003. F. Vascotto, M. Visintin, A. Cattaneo, O.R. Burrone, Inhibition of rotavirus assembly and virus replication by intrabodies speciWc for NSP5 (submitted). T.J. Vaughan, A.J. Williams, K. Pritchard, J.K. Osbourn, A.R. Pope, J.C. Earnshaw, J. McCaVerty, R.A. Hodits, J. Wilton, K.S. Johnson, Human antibodies with sub-nanomolar aYnities isolated from a large non-immunized phage display library [see comments], Nat. Biotechnol. 14 (1996) 309­314. M. Visintin, E. Tse, H. Axelson, T.H. Rabbitts, A. Cattaneo, Selection of antibodies for intracellular function using a two-hybrid in vivo system, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 96 ( 1999) 11723­11728. M. Visintin, A. Cattaneo, Selecting intracellular antibodies using the two-hybrid system, in: R. Kontermann, S. Dubel (Eds.), Antibody Engineering, vol. 1, Springer Lab Manual, Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, 2001, p. 790. M. Visintin, G. Settanni, A. Maritan, S. Graziosi, J.D. Marks, A. Cattaneo, The intracellular antibody capture technology (IACT): towards a consensus sequence for intracellular antibodies, J. Mol. Biol. 317 (2002) 73­83. M. Visintin, G.A. Meli, I. Cannistraci, A. Cattaneo, Intracellular Antibodies for Proteomics: From genes to intracellular antibodies: SPLINT, a single pot library of stable antibodies, J. Immunol. Methods, in press. A.B. Vojtek, S.M. Hollenberg, J.A. Cooper, Mammalian Ras interacts directly with the serine/threonine kinase Raf, Cell 74 (1993) 205­214. N.R. Wall, Y. Shi, Small RNA: can RNA interference be exploited for therapy?, Lancet 362 (2003) 1401­1403. G. Winter, A.D. GriYths, R.E. Hawkins, H.R. Hoogenboom, Making antibodies by phage display technology, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 12 (1994) 433­455. G. Winter, C. Milstein, Man-made antibodies, Nature 349 (1991) 293­299. J. Zhang, N. Zheng, P. Zhou, Exploring the functional complexity of cellular proteins by protein knockout, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 30 (2003) 30.

[32]

[37]

[33]

[38]

[39] [40]

[34]

[35]

[41] [42]

[36]

