ARCHIVES

OF BIOCHEMISTRY

AND

BIOPHYSICS

166, 139-144

(1975)

Action

of the Adenosine Triphosphate Analog, lmidodiphosphate in Mitochondria
JOAQUIM
AND

Adenylyl

RONALD

I,. MELNICK,

TAVARES DE SOUSA,' LESTER PACKER

JOHN

MAGUIRE,

Department University

of Physiology-Anatomy, of California, Berkeley,

and Energy and Environment California 94720, and Polytechnic York Received July 8, 1974

Division, Lawrence Institute of New

Berkeley Laboratory, York, Brooklyn, New

Adenylyl imidodiphosphate (AMP-PNP), and analog of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), is a potent competitive inhibitor of mitochondrial ATPase activity. It inhibits both the soluble oligomycin-insensitive ATPase (K, = 9.2 x 1O-7 M) and the bound oligomycinsensitive APTase (K, = 1.3 x lOmE M). ATPase activity of inside-out submitochondrial preparations are more sensitive to AMP-PNP in the presence of an uncoupler (K, = 2.0 x 10ml M). Mitochondrial ATP-dependent reactions (reversed electron transfer and potassium uptake) do not proceed if ATP is replaced with AMP-PNP; however, the analog does affect these systems. Oxidative phosphorylation of whole mitochondria and submitochondrial preparations were unaffected by AMP-PNP.

The interaction of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) with rat liver mitochondrial ATPase was studied using adenylyl imidodiphosphate (AMP-PNP),2 an analog of ATP. Yount et al. (1) synthesized AMPPNP and showed that it was chemically and structurally similar to ATP, the sole difference being the replacement of the third oxygen bridge of the triphosphate chain with an imido bridge. The analog binds Mg2+ as does ATP and thus is a suitable replacement for a reaction involving Mg-ATP (1). Another study by Yount et al. (2) showed that AMP-PNP is a strong competitive inhibitor of myosin ATPase. The analog interacts at the ATP binding site of the myosin ATPase; however, it is not hydrolyzed nor does its binding elicit contraction in glycerinated muscle fibers. These findings prompted us to investigate the interaction of AMP-PNP with mito' Present address: of Porto, Portugal. z Abbreviations: phosphate; FCCP, thoxy phenylhydrazone. Faculty of Medicine, University

chondrial ATPase, during ATP hydrolysis and ADP phosphorylation, as an indicator of the influence of ATP binding to ATPase during different active states of mitochondria.
METHODS Preparation of Mitochondria, Submitochondrial Preparations, and F,-ATPase

AMP-PNP, carbonylcyanide

adenylyl imidodip-trifluorome139

Rat liver mitochondria were prepared by the method of Stancliff et al. (3) and submitochondrial preparations were prepared by sonication of the mitochondria according to Kielly and Bronk (4). Soluble F,-ATPase was prepared by the method of Catterall and Pederson (5). All systems were studied at 30°C and at pH 8.0. Duke and Morales (6) have noted that AMP-PNP is more similar to ATP at pH 7.5-8.0 than at pH 6.5-7.0. ATP hydrolysis was measured on a Cary 14 spectrophotometer by following the oxidation of NADH at 340 nm in a coupled reaction. The concentrations of reaction components were 5 mM MgSO,, 3.3 mM phosphoenol pyruvate, 0.2 IIIM NADH, 5 units/ml of lactate dehydrogenase, 8 units/ml of pyruvate kinase, 250 mM sucrose, and 50 mM Tris-acetate buffer. Membrane-bound ATPase assays were performed in the presence of 2 mM KCN; 1 FM concentration of the uncoupler FCCP was present where indicated.

Copyright All rights

0 1975 by Academic Press, of reproduction in any form

Inc. reserved.

140
Reversed Electron Transfer Phosphorylation and Mitochondrial

MELNICK

ET AL.

Reversed electron transfer was measured as described by Dannielson and Ernster (7) except that 1 mM ATP was used. Phosphorylation in whole mitochondria was measured polarographically using a Clark oxygen electrode (Chance and Williams (8)). The concentrations of reaction components were, 10 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl,, 3 mM NaPO,, 5 mM sodium succinate, and 5 mM Tris buffer; where indicated, ADP was added to make a final concentration of 144 CtM. ATP-Dependent Potassium Uptake

Mitochondrial swelling was measured by observing changes in percentage of light transmission due to potassium uptake (Gooch and Packer (9)). The concentrations of assay components were 2 mM ATP, 2 &ml rotenone, 0.01 pg/ml valinomycin, 28.6 mM potassium acetate, 100 mM sucrose, and 5 mM Tris buffer. Phosphorylation in Submitochondrial Preparations

I/[ATP]

irntd-`I of F, (soluble ATP-

FIG. 1. Lineweaver-Burk plot ase) with and without AMP-PNP.

To determine the phosphorylation capacity (P/O ratio) of submitochondrial preparations, NADH oxidation was quantitated by measuring the decrease in absorbancy at 340 nm. The ATP formed during NADH oxidation was trapped as glucose-6-phosphate using hexokinase and glucose. The concentrations of reactants were 7 units/ml hexokinase, 17 mM glucose, 2.5 mM NaPO,, 3.3 mM MgSO,, 0.25 mM NADH, 250 mM sucrose, and 50 mM Tris buffer. Upon completion of NADH oxidation, EDTA (8 mM) and KCN (2 mM) were added to inhibit adenylate kinase and transhydrogenase, respectively. The ATP that was trapped as glucose-6-phosphate was quantitated by measuring the formation of NADPH (at 340 nm) upon addition of NADP (0.5 mM) and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (2 units/ml). The ratio of NADPH formed to NADH oxidized was used to indicate the phosphorylation capacity of the preparations. A blank was subtracted to account for adenylate kinase activity during the NADH oxidation. Protein was determined by the method of Lowry et al. (10) using bovine serum albumin as a standard. MATERIALS ATP, NADH, pyruvate kinase, lactate dehydrogenase, phosphoenol pyruvate, NAD, rotenone, hexokinase, NADPH, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, and ADP were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. Valinomycin was obtained from Calbiochem. FCCP was a gift from DuPont. All other compounds were of reagent grade. RESULTS

Control

100
l/[ATP] (mM-`I

with

FIG. 2. Lineweaver-Burk and without AMP-PNP.

plot

of SMP

ATPase

As shown in Figs. 1, 2, and 3 AMP-PNP inhibits mitochondrial ATPase as it inhib-

its ATP hydrolysis. In all of our studies hydrolysis of AMP-PNP forming ADP was never detected. The analog was found to be a potent competitive inhibitor of the ATP hydrolyzing systems. Figure 1 indicates the effect of AMP-PNP on the hydrolytic activity of the soluble oligomycin-insensitive (F,) ATPase. The Michaelis constant of 9.7 x 10e4 M is similar to that reported by Hammes and Hilborn (11) for solubilized ATPase from beef heart mitochondria. Our study showed that AMP-PNP was a strong

ADENYL

IMIDODIPHOSPHATE

IN MITOCHONDRIA

141

competitive inhibitor of this enzyme with a Of 9-O X IOe7 M. The effect of AMP-PNP on the bound oligomycin-sensitive ATPase was studied with inside-out submitochondrial preparations made by sonication of whole mitochondria (Figs. 2, 3). (The use of such preparations `eliminates the possibility of the analog's affecting translocation of ATP rather than ATP hydrolysis.) ATP hydrolysis by the submitochondrial preparations was insensitive to atractyloside. The ATPase reaction was studied with and without the uncoupler FCCP. In both cases, the analog acted as a strong competitive inhibitor of the ATP hydrolytic reaction. These results (Ki without FCCP = 1.3 x 10m6 M; Ki with FCCP = 2.0 x 10m7 M) indicate that relative affinity of ATPase for the analog differed in the coupled and uncoupled states. The Michaelis constants for the bound ATPase were also similar to those reported for bound ATPase from beef heart mitochondria. Since AMP-PNP binds to an ATP binding site and was not hydrolyzed, it seemed to be a suitable probe for testing whether the ATP-dependent reactions were due to
Ki

ATP hydrolysis or to binding of ATP. AMP-PNP was substituted for ATP to study the ATP-driven reversed electron transfer reaction from succinate to the reduction of NAD+. In this system NADH did not form. If there is only one ATP binding site, then this finding would discount the possibility that binding of adenine nucleotide at the ATPase activity site represents the driving force, i.e., ATP hydrolysis would be necessary. An interesting observation was noted when ATP was added to this reaction system. In the absence of AMP-PNP, NADH formed almost instantaneously and the reaction went to completion as the ATP became depleted. ATP hydrolysis was determined separately under the same conditions. In the presence of AMP-PNP, thf ATPase activity was markedly decreased; however, the effect on the reversed electron transfer was not comparably affected (Fig. 4). In the latter system the reversed electron transfer reaction showed an initial lag, which was dependent on the concentration of analog, followed by NADH formation at a rate only slightly less than the initial rate elicited by the control. The reversed electron transfer

SMP +I,,M

(ATPose) FCCP

k, =~OXIO-~M

-50

-2 5

0

25
1 /[ATP]

50
(mfvl-`1

75

IO 0

FIG. FCCP.

3. Lineweaver-Burk

plot of SMP

ATPase

with

and without

AMP-PNP

and the uncoupler

142

MELNICK

ET AL.
ATPose oct,wty Cp mole/ mln/mg) 0 17

I
SMP 1018mg/mll

I
2 ATP

4

I
(nun)

6

I

8

I

Time

FIG. 4. Succinate

reduction

of NAD+

driven

by ATP

hydrolysis

with

and without

AMP-PNP.

whole mitochondria. Potassium uptake driven by ATP was followed by measuring changes in light transmission caused by mitochondrial swelling (Fig. 5). This reac tion was dependent on ATP and did not proceed if ATP was replaced by AMPPNP. However, if the analog was added prior to ATP, then the system was markedly inhibited. The inhibition could be either at the site of ATP hydrolysis or at the site of translocation of the ATP. Whole mitochondria were also studied to see whether AMP-PNP interferes with oxidative phosphorylation. As seen in Fig. 6, even at 0.45 mM AMP-PNP, there was no significant change in the phosphorylating capacity of whole mitochondria. If the analog is translocated (12), then the catalytic site of the ATPase has a much greater FIG. 5. ATP-dependent potassium uptake by whole mitochondria with and without AMP-PNP. affinity for ADP than AMP-PNP under phosphorylating conditions. reaction also was observed to continue for a The possibility still remains that AMPlonger time as compared to the control, PNP did not affect oxidative phosphorylaprobably because the lower ATPase activ- tion of whole mitochondria because it did ity inhibited the depletion of the ATP not cross the inner mitochondrial memsupply, yet increased the efficiency of brane during succinate oxidation. To deATP-driven NAD+ reduction. termine the influence of the possible presThe effect of the analog was also investi- ence of a membrane barrier or of translocagated on an ATP-dependent reaction of tion, we studied the effect of AMP-PNP on

V

ADENYL

IMIDODIPHOSPHATE

IN MITOCHONDRIA TABLE
EFFECT OF AMP-PNP

143
I
OF SMP's

phosphorylation in "inside-out" submitochondrial preparations (Table I), in which the ATPase is exposed to the external medium. Once again, phosphorylation of ADP was unaffected by the analog. If AMP-PNP can bind at the active site of mitochondrial ATPase, then the lack of detectable inhibition may be due to the enzyme having a higher affinity for ADP. Catterall and Pederson reported a K,(ADP) of 3.8 x 10m6 M during oxidative phosphorylation of rat liver submitochondrial preparations, a value much lower than the K,(ATP) for the hydrolytic reaction. This difference makes physiological sense as the primary role of the enzyme is to synthesize ATP.
DISCUSSION

ON PHOSPHORYLATION

ADP (FM)
1400 1400 140 140 140

AMP-PNP (PM) 0 600 0
260

FCCP (l/d +

p/o

0.44 0.44 0.24 0.25 0.04

0

It is generally believed that the ATPase complex in mitochondria functions reversibly in the synthesis and hydrolysis of ATP. The studies reported here show that although the analog, AMP-PNP, interacts with the ATPase to competitively inhibit the hydrolytic reaction, it does not affect the rate or efficiency of the phosphorylation of ADP to ATP in whole mitochondria or submitochondrial preparations. In order to competitively inhibit ATP hydrolysis, the analog must bind to an ATP binding site. If there is only one adenine nucleotide binding site and if it is the ATPase catalytic site, then from our studies on th.e effect of the analog on ATP

FIG. 6. Effect of AMP-PNP whole mitochondria.

on phosphorylation

in

hydrolysis it would be expected that AMPPNP would interfere with the phosphorylation of ADP. Because no inhibition was observed, it could be that ADP out-competes AMP-PNP for the ATPase active site under energized conditions, or else the presence of AMP-PNP does not affect the binding of ADP and release of ATP from the enzyme. This prediction implies that AMP-PNP is bound during ATP synthesis which may not be the case. The ATPase energy-linked catalytic site may be made more accessible to AMP-PNP when mitochondria are uncoupled. A comparison of Figs. 2 and 3 shows that FCCP renders the ATPase more sensitive to inhibition by AMP-PNP. The possibility still remains, however, that there is more than one ATP binding site on the mitochondrial ATPase and that the analog interacts at a nonenergy-linked ATP binding site when mitochondria are energized. Thus, under phosphorylation conditions AMP-PNP would not interfere with ADP phosphorylation. The ATP-driven reversed electron transfer reaction in submitochondrial preparations requires coupling between ATP hydrolysis and NAD reduction. The greater production of NADH noted in the presence of AMP-PNP indicates that in terms of coupling ATP hydrolysis to NAD+ reduction this system is more efficient. The paradox of an inhibitor which promotes a more efficient system can be resolved if it is assumed that the mitochondrial membrane contains two different ATPase enzymes, or one ATPase in two different states-one state being energy-linked and the other being non-energy-linked. The latter situation could occur if there is a mixed population in the submitochondrial preparations, coupled and uncoupled sys-

144

MELNICK

ET

AL.

terns. Only the coupled or energy-linked system can drive the reversed electron transfer. Since uncoupling with FCCP rendered the ATPase more sensitive to inhibition by the analog, it may be that the analog preferentially inhibits the non-energy-linked system, leaving the energylinked system available to drive the reversed electron transfer. Potassium uptake with valinomycin in the presence of ATP also requires a coupled mitochondrial system. In this case the analog had a strong inhibitory effect. Inhibition, though, may be at the site of adenine nucleotide translocation rather than at the ATPase catalytic site. Although Klingenberg et al. (12) have shown that AMP-PNP interacts with the adenine nucleotide carrier of the inner mitochondrial membrane, it may be that the analog interferes with ATP translocation, thus inhibiting ATP-driven potassium uptake. In order to explain how the analog works in whole mitochondria more information will be needed concerning the interaction of AMP-PNP with the adenine nucleotide carrier and its subsequent effect on ADP and ATP translocation. From this discussion it is inevitable that further studies of the interaction of AMP-PNP with ATPase are warranted. Such a study may resolve some of the problems of the mechanism and reversibility of the mitochondrial ATP synthetase complex. Preliminary results of such work have recently been reported (14, 15). Garrett and Penefsky (15), Penefsky (16) noted that AMP-PNP competitively inhibits beef

heart mitochondrial ATPase without fecting oxidative phosphorylation.
REFERENCES

af-

1. YOIJNT, R. G., BABCOCK, D., BALLANTYNE, W., AND OJALA, D. (1971) Biochemistry 10, 2484-2489. 2. YOUNT, R. G., OJAL~ D., AND BABCOCK, D. (1971) Biochemistry 10, 2490-2496. 3. STANCLIFF, R. C., WILLIAMS, M. A., UTSUMI, K., AND PACKER, L. (1969) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 131, 629-642. 4. KIELLEY, W. W., AND BRONK, J. R. (1958) J. Biol. Chem. 230, 521-533. 5. CA~ERALL, W. A., AND PEDERSEN, P. L. (1971) J. Viol. Chem. 246,4987-4994. 6. DUKE, J. A., AND MORALES, M. F. (1973) Organization of Energy Transducing Membranes, University of Tokyo Press. 7. DANIELSON, L., AND ERNSTER, L. (1963) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 10, 91-96. 8. CHANCE, B., AND WILLIAMS, G. R. (1955) J. Biol. Chem. 217, 383-393. 9. GOOCH, V., AND PACKER, L. (1971) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 245, 17-20. 10. LOWRY, 0. H., ROSEBROUGH, N. J., FARR, A. L., AND RANDALL, R. J. (1951) J. Biol. Chem. 193, 265-275. 11. HAMMES, G. G., AND HILBORN, D. A. (1971) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 233, 580-590. 12. KLINGENBERG, M., GREBE, K., AND SCHERER, B. (1971) Fed. Eur. Biochem. Sot. Lett. 16, 253-256. 13. CA~ERALL, W. A., AND PEDERSEN, P. L. (1972) J. Biol. Chem. 247, 7969-7976. 14. MELNICK, R. L., TAVARES DE SOUSA, J., MAGUIRE, J., AND PACKER, L. (1974) Fed. Proc. 33, 1518. 15. GARRETT, N. E., AND PENEFSKY, H. S. (1974) Fed. Proc. 33, 1399. 16. PENEFSKY, H. S. (1974) J. Viol. Chem. 249, 3579-3585.

