Wednesday, March 4, 2009
The amphipacity of the natively unstructured amyloid-beta (Ab40) peptide may play an important role in its aggregation into beta-sheet rich fibrils that is linked to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Using the air/water interface as an ideal hydrophobic interface, we characterized Ab's surface activity and the structure, assembly, and morphology of Ab adsorbed to the air/water interface. Ab dissolved in water readily adsorbed to the air/water interface to form a contiguous film with a surface pressure of approximately 14 mN/m and showed an apparent critical micelle concentration of about 100 nM. Adsorbed Ab was ° composed of a single molecular layer extending approximately 20 A into the aqueous subphase with in-plane ordering that gave rise to X-ray diffraction peaks. Analysis of the diffraction peaks showed that the air/water interface induced the otherwise unstructured Ab peptides to self-assemble into nano-size clusters with Ab peptides folded in a beta-sheet conformation. The presence of these clusters was further confirmed by imaging the morphology of the Ab film using atomic force microscopy. The formation of these ordered clusters was not affected by solution pH, ionic strength, or the presence of cosolutes sucrose and urea at concentrations that are known to stabilize and denature native proteins in solution, suggesting that the hydrophobic interface-driven Ab folding and assembly is robust and strongly favorable. Furthermore, Ab adsorbed at the air/water interface can seed fibril growth in solution when re-introduced into the bulk. Our results implicate that that interface-induced Ab folding and self-assembly may serve as a mechanism by which Ab aggregation occurs in vivo. 2927-Plat Thermodynamic and Kinetic Characterization of MST1 and Rassf5 conserved Sav/Rassf/Hpo (SARAH) Domain Interactions Diana Constantinescu Aruxandei, Agne Koturenkiene, Christian Herrmann. Ruhr-Universitat, Bochum, Germany. ¨ The molecular switch Ras exhibits its biological function- control of growth, differentiation and apoptosis through the interaction with a multitude of different effectors. It is apparent that growth-inhibitory properties of Ras are mediated via noncatalitic polypeptides of Rassf (Ras Association Domain Family). Tumour suppressor Rassf5 (also termed Nore1) binds directly to active Ras via the Ras Binding Domain (RBD). It is also known to form self-associated complex as well as heterodimers with the proapoptotic serine/threonine Mammalian Sterile 20-like kinase (MST1), the human ortholog for Hippo (Hpo), through their common conserved C-terminal Sav/Rassf/Hpo (SARAH) domains [1, 2]. This unique interaction motif connects the proteins involved in the recent discovered pathway mediated by proteins of the MST family, which promotes apoptosis and restricts cell proliferation [3-6]. For a better understanding of MST1 and Nore1 homo- and hetero- interactions via the SARAH domains, we have investigated the thermodynamics and kinetics of association/dissociation as well as the unfolding mechanism of this domain by use of different biophysical and biochemical methods, such as Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC), size-exclusion chromatography, artificial chemical cross-linking, Isothermal Titration Calorimetry (ITC), Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy (CD). MST1 and Nore1 SARAH domains are shown to form not only homodimers, but also higher oligomers. Nevertheless, the heterodimers rather than homodimers are preferentially formed. Finally, we propose a possible mechanism for the thermal unfolding of MST1 and Nore1 SARAH homo- and heterocomplexes. References: [1] S. Ortiz-Vega et al., Oncogene 21, 1381-1390 (2002). [2] E. Hwang et al., PNAS 104, 9236-9241 (2007). [3] S. Pantalacci et al., Nat Cell Biol 5, 921-927 (2003). [4] S. Wu et al., Cell 114, 445-456 (2003). [5] K.F. Harvey et al., Cell 114, 457-467 (2003). [6] H. Scheel et al., Curr. Biol. 13, 899-900 (2003). 2928-Plat Chromophore Isomerization Has Large Effects On The Residual Structure Of The Fully Unfolded State Of The Blue Light Receptor Photoactive Yellow Protein Byoung-Chul Lee1, Wouter D. Hoff2. 1 Biological Nanostructures Facility, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA, 2Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK, USA. Protein folding occurs between a well-defined fully folded native state and a structurally much less studied fully unfolded state. We use denaturant m values and changes in heat capacity DCp to probe folding transitions in photoactive yellow protein (PYP). PYP is a bacterial photoreceptor that exhibits rhodopsin-like photochemistry based on the trans to cis photoisomeriation of its covalently attached p-coumaric acid (pCA) chromophore. We report strong

569a

effects of the isomerization state of the pCA on the residual structure of the ``fully unfolded'' state of PYP by comparing the unfolding of two partially unfolded states of PYP: the acid-denatured state pBdark, which contains transpCA, and the partially unfolded pB photocycle intermediate, which contains cis-pCA. Our characterization of pBdark by circular dichroism spectroscopy and quenching of aromatic fluorescence indicates a strong loss of tertiary structure in pBdark. Despite its low tertiary structure content, pBdark retains considerable cooperativity for unfolding. As expected, the unfolding of pBdark is associated with values for denaturant m value and DCp that are smaller than those for the native pG state of PYP. A range of published studies show that the pB state is partially unfolded. We characterize the pB state based on its specific cold denaturation. Despite its partially unfolded nature, we find that the denaturant m values and DCp values for unfolding of the pB state are essentially the same as those for the native pG state. These results provide experimental evidence that pCA trans to cis photoisomerization causes significant loss of residual structure in the ``fully unfolded'' state of PYP. Such large changes in the residual structure of the fully unfolded states have important implications for describing and understanding protein folding. 2929-Plat Pressure Induced Denaturation in Proteins: Stability and Kinetics Kingshuk Ghosh1, S. Banu Ozkan2. 1 University of Denver, Denver, CO, USA, 2Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. Intricate interplay of temperature and pressure on protein folding leads to interesting phase diagram. In addition, kinetics of pressure induced folding exhibit complex behavior. Here, we propose a simple mesoscopic model, a combination of landscape theory and microscopic details based on polymer physics to investigate this interesting phenomenon. The model is applied to experimental data to understand physical principles of pressure induced denaturation.

Platform BF: Exocytosis & Endocytosis
2930-Plat Massive Endocytosis (MEND) Activated by Ca and Polyamines in Fibroblasts and Cardiac Myoyctes: Dependencies on nucleotides, PIP2, cholesterol, clathrin, and other factors Vincenzo Lariccia, Donald Hilgemann. University of Texas Southwestern Medical Ctr, Dallas, TX, USA. We describe four protocols that result in internalization of ~50% of the surface membrane of BHK fibroblasts and cardiac myocytes within <1 min. To do so, we use patch clamp with large pipette tips for cell dialysis and Na/Ca exchangers to evoke cytoplasmic Ca transients (5 to 200 mM Ca2þ) for 1-5 s. Endocytosis is monitored via capacitance and/or optically by standard membrane dyes. In the first protocol, ATP is depleted from the cytoplasm, a Ca transient is evoked, and MEND is then activated by replenishment of ATP and GTP. GTP alone is not sufficient, Ca transients are required, and AMPPNP does not subsitute for ATP. Second, when membrane cytoskeleton is stabilized with phalloidin, MEND is made `available' for 1 to 3 min, and it occurs within 5 s during a Ca transient without ATP depletion. Third, high ATP concentrations (4 to 8 mM) promote MEND to occur within 20 to 60 s after (but not during) a Ca transient. Fourth, polyamines, spermine or spermidine, at physiological concentrations (1 mM) cause MEND to occur within <5 s during Ca transients without ATP depletion. MEND is not blocked by protein domains and other interventions that block chathrin-dependent endocytosis or by tyrosine kinase inhibitors. MEND is blocked by cholesterol depletion, GTPgS, and PIP2 phosphatases, and MEND is promoted by perfusion of PIP2 into cells when ATP and GTP are depleted. In neonatal myocytes, transient GTPgS perfusion substitutes for Ca transients in permissive steps leading to MEND activation upon ATP perfusion. We conclude that MEND is a regulated and massive cell stress response that can remove large fractions of the cell surface of multiple cell types by clathrin-independent mechanisms. 2931-Plat Distinct Dynamics Of Endocytic Clathrin Coated Pits And Coated Plaques Saveez Saffarian, Tom Kirchhausen. Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Clathrin is the scaffold of a conserved molecular machinery that has evolved to capture membrane patches, which then pinch off to become traffic carriers. These carriers are the principal vehicles of receptor-mediated endocytosis and are the major route of traffic from plasma membrane to endosomes. We report here the use of in vivo imaging data, obtained from spinning disk confocal and total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy, to distinguish between two modes of endocytic clathrin coat formation, which we designate as ``coated pits'' and ``coated plaques''. Coated pits are small, rapidly forming structures

