trends in plant science Research News

The role of the cytoskeleton and a molecular motor in trichome morphogenesis
Plant cells assume a variety of shapes and the distinctive shape of cells in tissues and organs is important for their function and in generating plant form. In spite of the importance of cell architecture in plant development, the molecular mechanisms that control cell shape are far from understood. In recent years, Arabidopsis trichomes have been widely used as a model system to investigate cell fate, pattern formation and cell morphogenesis1­3. Trichomes in Arabidopsis are large (300­500 m tall), unicellular structures that develop from epidermal cells on most aerial parts. Trichomes on leaves are regularly spaced and have a distinctive shape with a stalk and usually three branches (Fig. 1). The development of trichomes involves a series of complex morphogenetic events that include the formation of a trichome initial, tubular growth of the trichome initial, initiation of branches, expansion of stalk and branches, and maturation3. Although the involvement of the cytoskeleton in the polar growth of plant cells such as pollen tips, root hairs and the Fucus zygote has been established, little has been known, until recently, about the role of the cytoskeleton in morphogenesis4. Genetic, biochemical and cell biological studies with trichomes during the past four years have provided interesting insights into the role of the cytoskeleton and of a Ca2 /calmodulin (CaM)-regulated microtubule motor protein in trichome morphogenesis. These studies indicate that actin and microtubule cytoskeleton and a microtubule motor protein have a pivotal role in cell expansion and branching during trichome development.
Polar growth and branching of the trichome initial

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Trends in Plant Science

The first hint that the microtubules might play a role in trichome morphogenesis came from genetic and molecular studies with the zwichel (zwi) mutant5 (see below). More direct evidence for the role played by microtubules in trichome morphogenesis has been reported recently6,7. Using pharmacological agents that disrupt or stabilize the microtubule cytoskeleton it was shown that the microtubule cytoskeleton is necessary to establish the polarity in trichome initials and to initiate branches6,7. Treatment of developing trichomes with drugs that interfere with microtubules results in balloon-like structures and inhibition of branching. Using Arabidopsis plants expressing a green fluorescent protein (GFP) fused to a microtubule-associated protein 4 (MAP4), it has been reported that

Fig. 1. (a­d) Scanning electron micrographs of Arabidopsis trichomes on wild-type leaves and zwichel (zwi) mutant leaves. (a) Wild type, (b) zwi, (c) zwi-w2 mutant and (d) zwi9311-11. In the zwi-w2 mutant, most trichomes have two branches but the length of the second branch is varied. In the zwi9311-11 mutant, ~40% of trichomes are unbranched and the remainder have two branches. Scale bars 100 m. (e) Diagram of KCBP/ZWI showing various structural domains. MyTH4, myosin tail homology 4; CBD, CaM-binding domain; MTB-1, microtubule binding domain-1; ATPS, ATP-sensitive; MTB-2, microtubule binding domain-2; ATPI, ATP-insensitive. All domains except MyTH4 and talin-like domains were identified using in vitro assays with bacterially expressed truncated proteins11,15. (f,g) Bundling of microtubules by the C-terminal region of KCBP/ZWI. Taxolstabilized microtubules were incubated with truncated protein containing the motor and CaM-binding domains, and the microtubules were visualized by video-enhanced differential interference contrast microscopy, (f) microtubules; (g) microtubules plus KCBP/ZWI; (h) microtubules plus KCBP/ZWI in the presence of Ca2 /CaM (Ref. 16).

during trichome branching, microtubules reorient with respect to the longitudinal growth axis8. However, further studies that involve time-lapse images of MAP::GFP localization are necessary to follow the reorganization of microtubules during different stages of trichome development and to

strengthen the above conclusion. The microtubule-stabilizing drug paclitaxel (taxol) was used on two mutants, zwi and stichel with trichomes that have a reduced number of branches or no branches, respectively8. Both mutants showed initiation of new branch points suggesting that stabilization of microtubules
December 2000, Vol. 5, No. 12

1360 - 1385/00/$ ­ see front matter © 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

503

trends in plant science Research News
is necessary to initiate branches. Mutants (fass and ton) that show perturbed cortical microtubules also have unbranched trichomes, which further supports the role of microtubules in trichome branching2.
Importance of the actin cytoskeleton for expansion of trichome branches

Similar studies with actin cytoskeleton-disrupting drugs indicate that F-actin is necessary during the later stages of trichome development6,7. Immunolocalization studies and visualization of actin cytoskeleton in live cells with GFP-tagged actin-binding protein indicate that the organization of F-actin changes during trichome morphogenesis6,7. Chemicals that promote depolymerization or stabilization of actin cytoskeleton did not effect branching but produced distorted trichomes. Interestingly the morphology of these trichomes is similar to those observed in a distorted class of mutants, suggesting that at least some of the affected genes probably code for proteins (e.g. myosins, actin-depolymerizing factors, actin binding proteins) involved in actin organization and dynamics. An examination of trichomes of several distorted mutants showed abnormal actin organization such as that found in trichomes treated with F actin antagonists6,7.
Mutations in ZWICHEL affect trichome stalk expansion and branching

Genetic screens of Arabidopsis plants for altered trichome morphogenesis have identified genes that affect various aspects of trichome development including trichome initiation, branching, trichome size and shape9. In zwi mutants, trichomes have a short stalk with one or two branches depending on the severity of the allele (Fig. 1), suggesting that ZWI is required for expansion of the stalk and branching5,10. The ZWI gene has been cloned5: the protein encoded by ZWI is identical to a kinesin-like calmodulin-binding protein (KCBP) that was previously isolated from Arabidopsis in a protein­protein interactionbased screening using labeled CaM (Ref. 11).
KCBP/ZWI is a novel member of the kinesin superfamily

kinesin superfamily known to contain these domains. Although the significance of the MyTH4 and talin-like region is not known, they are probably involved in a cross-talk between microtubule and actin cytoskeleton12. Co-sedimentation studies with actin and the N-terminus of KCBP should indicate whether KCBP could bind actin. Motility studies have shown that KCBP/ZWI is a minus-end motor14. KCBP/ZWI has been shown to have two microtubule binding (MTB) sites15 (Fig. 1). MTB-1 is in the motor domain and is ATP sensitive, which is characteristic of kinesin-like proteins. MTB-2 is located in the N-terminal region and is not ATP sensitive. KCBP/ZWI has also been shown to be capable of bundling microtubules16. The Cterminal region of KCBP/ZWI containing the motor- and CaM-binding domains induces microtubule bundling (Fig. 1). The C-terminal region-induced bundles are dissociated in the presence of Ca2 /CaM (Fig. 1). The N-terminal tail of KCBP/ZWI, which contains an ATP-insensitive microtubule binding site, is also capable of bundling microtubules and this bundling is not affected by Ca2 /CaM. KCBP/ZWI is ubiquitous and highly conserved in flowering plants and a homolog has also been isolated from a gymnosperm (Ref. 17; S.E. Abdel-Ghany and A.S.N. Reddy, unpublished). Although, a homolog of KCBP/ZWI has not been found in the completely sequenced genomes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Caenorhabditis elegans, a CaM-binding Cterminal kinesin (kinesin C) has been cloned recently from sea urchin18. Kinesin C differs from KCBP/ZWI in not having MyTH4 and talin-like regions in the N-terminus12.
How does KCBP/ZWI function in cell expansion and branching?

that KCBP/ZWI, a microtubule motor, is required for branching indicates that it might be involved in reorientation of microtubules thereby directing the deposition of cellulose microfibrils. The two microtubule binding sites on KCBP/ZWI and its ability to bundle microtubules support the idea that it participates in microtubule reorganization15,16. In addition, the minus-end motor activity of KCBP/ZWI suggests that it could be involved in directed transport of secretory vesicles to regions of localized growth. Using GFP-labeled MAP4 it has been shown that cortical microtubule arrays are arranged in transverse orientation during the tubular stage of the stalk. However, as the trichome cell develops further the subcortical microtubules begin to show a dichotomy toward their apical ends that coincides with the appearance of new growth foci denoting branch initials8. Using paclitaxel, a known microtubule stabilizer, zwi mutants can be induced to form similar growth points indicative of branch formation in normal trichomes. Transient stabilization of microtubules can seemingly compensate for KCBP/ ZWI activity, suggesting that it might be involved in the stabilization of microtubules8. The two microtubule binding sites might be involved in stabilization, or possibly a KCBP/ZWI-interacting protein(s) might be responsible for the stabilization.
KCBP/ZWI probably interacts with several other proteins

Kinesin and kinesin-like proteins (KLPs) are microtubule-based motor proteins that perform a variety of important cellular and developmental functions including intracellular transport of vesicles and organelles, and microtubule organization and dynamics12. Like other KLPs, KCBP/ZWI has a motor domain and a coiled­coiled region (Fig. 1). In addition, KCBP/ZWI has some unique domains ­ a CaM-binding domain at the Cterminus, a myosin tail homology 4 (MyTH4) region and a talin-like domain in the N-terminal tail13. KCBP/ZWI was the first member of the
504
December 2000, Vol. 5, No. 12

The cytoskeleton in plant cells plays an important role in determining the direction of cell expansion4. The deposition of new cell wall material is one of the key processes involved in cell expansion and the final shape of a cell depends on precisely guided deposition of cell wall material. Although localization of KCBP/ZWI to cortical microtubules has not been reported, genetic studies with zwi mutants strongly indicate a role for KCBP/ZWI in cell expansion and branching. How does KCBP/ZWI influence trichome branching that requires localized cell wall expansion? In plant cells, cortical microtubule arrays are known to play a vital role in cell expansion by controlling the orientation of newly synthesized cellulose microfibrils4. Hence, the microtubule reorientation, which can be accomplished by either depolymerization or polymerization of microtubules or movement of existing microtubules, could play a role in trichome branching. Both these processes might involve motors and the fact

Three extragenic suppressors (suppressor of zwichel-3; suz1, suz2 and suz3) that rescued trichome branch number defect in a zwi mutant have been isolated recently19. All three suppressors were found to be allele specific. Such allele-specific interactions often indicate physical interactions between mutant proteins and hence the wild-type proteins. Genetic studies have shown that SUZ2 might interact not only with ZWI but also with FURCA1, another gene involved in trichome branching. In addition, a plant-specific protein kinase and a putative calcium binding protein also show direct interaction with KCBP (Ref. 20) (T. Thomas et al., unpublished). These reports indicate that KCBP/ZWI interacts with several other proteins in the cell and might function as a multiprotein complex.
Ca2 /CaM involvement in trichome branching and cell expansion

KCBP/ZWI-driven motility, microtubule bundling and its interaction with microtubules is inhibited in the presence of Ca2 /CaM (Refs 14­16). Because the motor domain of KCBP/ZWI, which is regulated by Ca2 /CaM, is essential for trichome branching, it is likely that Ca2 through CaM regulates trichome branching5,12. Based on in vitro data on

trends in plant science Research News
Ca2 /CaM regulation of KCBP/ZWI, it is reasonable to predict that an artificial elevation of Ca2 , an important messenger in plants21 might induce the zwi phenotype in wild-type trichomes. Localization of KCBP/ZWI in trichomes of wild-type and zwi mutants during different stages of trichome development should provide further insights into its role in microtubule organization.
KCBP/ZWI function might be redundant in other cells

Several alleles of zwi have been characterized5,19. However, all of the zwi mutants appear to grow normally with only the defect in trichome morphogenesis5,19. The lack of a phenotype in other tissues suggests that either KCBP/ZWI is nonessential or another motor with overlapping functions might substitute for ZWI function in other tissues. In Arabidopsis, there are many ( 50) kinesinlike proteins, including several C-terminal motors12 (A.S.N. Reddy and I. Day, unpublished). In trichomes, the other kinesins with functional overlap might not be expressed or they might not substitute for ZWI function in trichomes. Several reports indicate that the functions of many kinesins in non-plant systems are redundant12. Hence, it is not surprising that mutations in KCBP/ZWI affect only trichome morphogenesis and not other aspects of plant growth and development5. The mutations have been found in the C-terminal region (after 520 amino acids) of the protein in all the zwi alleles that have been characterized at the molecular level, whereas the N-terminal region is not affected5,19. This raises the possibility that the N-terminal region of ZWI might perform some functions in other tissues and cells other than trichomes, whereas trichome development requires the full-length protein. In non-plant motors different domains have been shown to perform distinct functions even in the absence of other domains in the protein12.
KCBP/ZWI has functions in cells other than trichomes

The reports described here point to the importance of actin and microtubule cytoskeleton organization and dynamics in plant cell morphogenesis. Genetic and biochemical evidence implies a role for KCBP/ZWI in microtubule organization and dynamics. To further our understanding of the role of KCBP/ZWI, it is essential to clone zwi suppressors and other interactors, and biochemically characterize the proteins encoded by these genes. Localization of KCBP using the full-length and truncated versions of KCBP::GFP fusions during different stages of trichome development in wild-type and mutant plants should provide further insights into the role of KCBP in trichome morphogenesis. In addition, the cloning of other genes that affect trichome morphogenesis, especially the ones that cause a distorted phenotype, should help to identify the proteins that regulate cytoskeleton organization and dynamics in trichomes.
Acknowledgements

8

9 10

11

12 13

14

We thank David Oppenheimer and Martin Hülskamp for providing seeds of zwichel mutants; Salah Abdel-Ghany for preparing scanning electron micrographs of trichomes. Work in our laboratory was supported by grants from the National Science Foundation and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to A.S.N.R.
Anireddy S.N. Reddy* and Irene S. Day Colorado State University, Dept of Biology, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA

15

16

17 *Author for correspondence (tel 1 970 491 5773; fax +1 970 491 0649; e-mail reddy@lamar.colostate.edu) References 1 Oppenheimer, D.G. (1998) Genetics of plant cell shape. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 1, 520­524 2 Hülskamp, M. et al. (1999) Pattern formation and cell differentiation: trichomes in Arabidopsis as a genetic model system. Int. Rev. Cytol. 186, 147­178 3 Szymanski, D.B. et al. (2000) Progress in the molecular genetic analysis of the trichome initiation and morphogenesis in Arabidopsis. Trends Plant Sci. 5, 214­219 4 Kost, B. et al. (1999) Cytoskeleton in plant development. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 2, 462­470 5 Oppenheimer, D.G. et al. (1997) Essential role of a kinesin-like protein in Arabidopsis trichome morphogenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94, 6261­6266 6 Szymanski, D.B. et al. (1999) Organized F-actin is essential for normal trichome morphogenesis in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 11, 2331­2348 7 Mathur, J. et al. (1999) The actin cytoskeleton is required to elaborate and maintain spatial 18

19

KCBP/ZWI is expressed in all tissues tested as well as in developing leaves and in cultured cells in a cell cycle-regulated manner5,11,22. KCBP is localized to mitotic microtubule arrays including the preprophase band and phragmoplast, suggesting its involvement in cell division. Furthermore, microinjection of antibodies that abolish Ca2 /CaM regulation of KCBP/ZWI causes early breakdown of the nuclear envelope, metaphase arrest and abnormal cell plate formation in stamen hair cells23. In addition, the suz1 zwi-3 double mutant is male sterile because of a defect in pollen germination and pollen tube growth, suggesting that KCBP/ZWI might also have a role in morphogenesis of other cell types19.

20

21 22

23

patterning during trichome cell morphogenesis in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 126, 5559­5568 Mathur, J. and Chua, N.H. (2000) Microtubule stabilization leads to growth reorientation in Arabidopsis trichomes. Plant Cell 12, 465­477 Hülskamp, M. (2000) Cell morphogenesis: how plants split hairs. Curr. Biol. 10, R308­R310 Hülskamp, M. et al. (1994) Genetic dissection of trichome cell development in Arabidopsis. Cell 76, 555­566 Reddy, A.S.N. et al. (1996) A novel plant calmodulin-binding protein with a kinesin heavy chain motor domain. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 7052­7060 Reddy, A.S.N. Molecular motors and their functions in plants. Int. Rev. Cytol. (in press) Reddy, V. and Reddy, A.S.N. (1999) A plant calmodulin-binding motor is part kinesin and part myosin. Bioinformatics 15, 1055­1057 Song, H. et al. (1997) In vitro motility of AtKCBP, a calmodulin-binding kinesin-like protein of Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94, 322­327 Narasimhulu, S.B. and Reddy, A.S.N. (1998) Characterization of microtubule binding domains in the Arabidopsis kinesin-like calmodulin-binding protein. Plant Cell 10, 957­965 Kao, Y-L. et al. (2000) Bundling of microtubules by motor and tail domains of a kinesin-like calmodulin-binding protein from Arabidopsis: regulation by Ca2 /calmodulin. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 267, 201­207 Abdel-Ghany, S.E. and Reddy, A.S.N. (2000) A novel calcium/calmodulin-regulated kinesinlike protein is highly conserved between monocots and dicots. DNA Cell Biol. 19, 567­578 Rogers, G.C. et al. (1999) Identification of kinesin-C, a calmodulin-binding carboxyterminal kinesin in animal (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus) cells. J. Mol. Biol. 294, 1­8 Krishnakumar, S. and Oppenheimer, D.G. (1999) Extragenic suppressors of the Arabidopsis zwi-3 mutation identify new genes that function in trichome branch formation and pollen tube growth. Development 126, 3079­3088 Day, I.S. et al. (2000) Interaction of a kinesinlike calmodulin-binding protein with a protein kinase. J. Biol. Chem 275, 13737­13745 Reddy, A.S.N. Calcium: silver bullet in signaling. Plant Sci. (in press) Bowser, J. and Reddy, A.S.N. (1997) Localization of a kinesin-like calmodulinbinding protein in dividing cells of Arabidopsis and tobacco. Plant J. 12, 1429­1438 Voss, J.W. et al. (2000) The kinesin-like calmodulin binding protein is differentially involved in cell division. Plant Cell 12, 979­990

December 2000, Vol. 5, No. 12

505

