Abstracts / Chemistry and Physics of Lipids 149S (2007) S74­S91

S79

PO 130

A novel catabolic pathway of glycosphingolipids mediated with a Klotho-related protein
Yasuhiro Hayashi 1 , Nozomu Okino 1 , Yoshimitsu Kakuta 1 , Toshihide Shikanai 2 , Motohiro Tani 3 , Hisashi Narimatsu 2 , Makoto Ito 1 of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Kyushu University, Japan; 2 Research Center for Medical Glycoscience, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Japan; 3 Department of Chemistry, Kyushu University, Japan Using C6-NBD-glucosylceramide (GlcCer) as a substrate, we detected the activity of a conduritol B epoxide (CBE)-insensitive neutral glycosylceramidase in cytosolic fractions of zebrafish embryos, mouse and rat brains and human fibroblasts [Hayashi et al., 2005. Anal. Biochem. 345, 181­186]. The candidates for the enzyme were assigned to the Klotho (KL), whose family members share a -glucosidase-like domain but whose natural substrates unknown. Among this family, only the KL-related protein (KLrP) is capable of degrading C6-NBD-GlcCer when expressed in CHOP cells, in which Myc-tagged KLrP was exclusively distributed in the cytosol. In addition, knockdown of endogenous KLrP by siRNA increased the cellular level of GlcCer. Purified recombinant KLrP hydrolyzed 4-methylumbelliferylglucose, C6-NBD-GlcCer, and authentic GlcCer at pH 6.0. The enzyme also hydrolyzed the corresponding galactosyl derivatives but each kcat/Km was much lower than that for glucosyl derivatives. The X-ray structure ° of KLrP at 1.6 A resolution revealed that KLrP is a ( / )8 TIM barrel, in which E165 and E373 at the carboxyl termini of -strands 4 and 7 could function as an acid/base catalyst and nucleophile, respectively. The distance between carboxyl oxygens of these two ° residues is 5.3 A indicating that the reaction proceeds with the anomeric carbon retained upon cleavage, rather than inverted. The substrate-binding cleft of the enzyme was occupied with palmitic acid and oleic acid when the recombinant protein was crystallized in a complex with glucose. GlcCer was found to well fit the cleft of the crystal structure of KLrP. These results clearly indicate that KLrP is a novel GlcCer-degrading enzyme in
1 Department

cytosol and suggest that the enzyme is involved in the novel catabolic pathway of GlcCer on the cytosolic faces of Golgi apparatus or ER. doi:10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2007.06.181 PO 131

Brownian motion of magnetic particle chains in ferrofluids: A theoretical study
Yuk Kwan Ho, Kin Wah Yu Physics Department, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China Magnetic particles can form particle chains in a carrier ferrofluid due to the attractive magnetic interactions between them. However, there is also random Brownian Force acting on the particles and it tends to break the particle chains. If the size of the particles are not large enough, the magnetic interaction will not be strong enough to overcome this random Brownian Force and, as a result, the chains will break. In other words, they will form stable particle chains as long as the sizes of them are sufficiently large. In this work, we will study the motion of these particle chains. There are two major kinds of motions. They are vibrational motion and rotational motion. For the vibrational motion, it is mainly in the transverse direction because the longitudinal one is not easy to be excited due to the strong steric repulsion provided by the surfactant of the particles. The particles mainly interact via the long ranged hydrodynamic interaction as well as the magnetic interaction. Hydrodynamic drag due to translation also plays an important role in the system. For the rotational motion, the particles also interact via the hydrodynamic interaction but with no magnetic one. The statistical properties of the system such as the correlation functions were calculated and the results were compared with the fluctuation­dissipation theory and the equipartition principle. It was found that they are obeyed at the equilibrium state. doi:10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2007.06.182

