Dispatch R1053

Dispatches

Vesicular Transport: EnSNAREd by GAPs
How are SNARE proteins included into transport vesicles? One way is through the interaction with ArfGAP proteins. A recent study reports that the ArfGAP Hrb can wrap around the SNARE VAMP7, causing its endocytosis by clathrincoated vesicles. Pak P. Poon1,2 and Anne Spang3,* Transport between various cellular organelles as well as to the plasma membrane is achieved by membrane-bound vesicles. The directionality and specificity of this transport is regulated at least in part by so-called SNARE proteins, which are located on the vesicle and target compartment membrane. After successful formation of a trans-four-helix bundle between one SNARE on the vesicle and three on the target membrane, fusion of the transport vesicle with the target compartment can proceed. The correct distribution and localization of SNARE proteins is critical: each transport vesicle must contain at least one SNARE that can engage in a SNARE complex at the target membrane, and SNAREs that are being recycled to their donor compartment need to be transported in an inactive state and sorted to the appropriate membrane compartments. Ever since the discovery of SNAREs [1], the search for the mechanism behind SNARE sorting has kept researchers busy. In the absence of applicable in vivo systems, Springer and Schekman [2] developed a simple yeast-based in vitro system to show that, despite the absence of a recognizable conserved linear peptide motif, SNAREs were bound by components of the coat protein complex II (COPII). COPII serves as the coat for vesicles in the delivery of cargo from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the ER­Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC) in mammalian cells and to the Golgi in yeast. The binding results led them to propose that the SNARE­coat interaction (called a primer interaction) could serve a starting point for vesicle formation [3]. A similar assay established that the small G protein Arf1 and coatomer, the main constituents of the coat protein complex I (COPI), could also be recruited to SNARE proteins. This interaction required a conformational change in the SNAREs, which was brought about by the yeast Arf GTPase-activating proteins (ArfGAPs) Gcs1 and Glo3 [4,5]. The precise mechanism of interaction remained unclear, however. Now, recent work by Pryor et al. [6] reports that the recycling of the vesicle SNARE VAMP7 is dependent on the ArfGAP Hrb, which binds only to the `open' conformation of the VAMP7 longin domain, an amino-terminal domain found in some SNAREs. When VAMP7 is not complexed with other SNAREs, the longin domain folds over the SNARE domain of VAMP7 (resulting in the `closed' conformation). Upon engagement in a SNARE complex, the longin domain is displaced from the SNARE domain, thereby leading to the open conformation. Thus, Hrb can bind VAMP7 when VAMP7 is engaged in a cis-SNARE complex resulting from a completed fusion event. As evident from the crystal structure reported by Pryor et al. [6], a 20-amino-acid region from Hrb wraps around the longin domain. Hrb carries clathrin-binding motifs that are found in clathrin adaptors; hence Hrb provides a link between SNARE recognition and inclusion into clathrin-coated vesicles. The longin domain of VAMP7 seems to be important for the proper cycling of this SNARE, because mutations in the longin domain or deletion of the longin domain result in mis-targeting to the plasma membrane [7], presumably because these VAMP7 mutants cannot be recycled. The retrieval of VAMP7 in a cis-SNARE complex would imply that the SNARE complex is not disassembled immediately by N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF), which acts to unwind SNARE complexes after fusion events [8]. The absence of disassembly would indicate that either Hrb has a higher affinity than NSF for VAMP7 in the cis-SNARE complex, or the local concentration of Hrb is higher than that of NSF, or NSF is spatially excluded from the site of VAMP7 endocytosis. Does recruitment of VAMP7 by the ArfGAP Hrb represent a general mechanism for SNARE inclusion into vesicles? In yeast the ArfGAPs Gcs1 and Glo3 can interact with a variety of SNAREs, not just those containing a longin domain, and promote the subsequent recruitment of Arf1 and coatomer [5,9]. Moreover, SNARE interaction is seen even when a GAP-dead version of Glo3 is used [10]. The similarity between Hrb and Glo3 is not restricted to the GAP domain in the amino terminus but extends to the unstructured regions of the molecules, which in the case of Hrb contain the VAMP7-binding segment. These findings indicate that, despite the differences in the mode of SNARE recognition, ArfGAPs play a central role in the inclusion of SNAREs in transport vesicles. Until now, more was known about the inclusion of SNAREs in COPII vesicles than their inclusion in COPI vesicles. The binding sites in the COPII cargo recruiter Sec24 have been determined for the ER­Golgi SNAREs Bet1, Sec22, and Sed5 [11]. The vesicle SNAREs Bet1 and Sec22 seem to be included in COPII-coated vesicles in the uncomplexed form, whereas the syntaxin Sed5, which at steady state is on the cis-Golgi, is transported predominantly in a SNARE complex containing the ER­Golgi SNAREs Bos1 and Sec22. In contrast to the situation for Hrb, Liu et al. [12] showed that the longin domain of Sec22 is necessary but not sufficient for export of Sec22 from the ER and that SNARE-complex formation is not a prerequisite for exit. Moreover, Mancias and Goldberg [13] demonstrated that the closed conformation of Sec22 binds to Sec24, unlike the open conformation of VAMP7 binding to Hrb. So why should the inclusion of SNAREs into transport vesicles follow such different rules? Sec22 needs to be transported in a state in which it

Current Biology Vol 18 No 22 R1054

can engage in a trans-SNARE complex at the cis-Golgi, while VAMP7 is recycled from the plasma membrane to endosomal compartments, most likely in an inactive state to avoid interfering with vesicle consumption. Perhaps if VAMP7 were included in transport vesicles in an active, fusion-competent state, the uncoated vesicle might fuse back to the plasma membrane. Hence different strategies (i.e. complexed vs. uncomplexed) for inclusion of SNARE proteins into transport vesicles may reflect the requirement of the particular SNARE in the next fusion event. A corollary to this model is that SNAREs that reside at organelle membranes, the target membrane of vesicles, should be transported in an inactive state. At least for Sed5, the syntaxin at the cis-Golgi, this seems to be the case [11]. Since the SNAREs can use different mechanisms for inclusion into transport vesicles, the proteins responsible for differential inclusion also may be diverse. As discussed above, ArfGAPs play an important role in COPI-mediated trafficking that may be similar to that played by Sec24 in the COPII context. What about other factors? ENTH-domain proteins can potentially act as SNARE­cargo receptors for endosomal SNAREs when they are transported from the trans-Golgi network to endosomes [14,15]. The Batten disease related protein Btn2 seems to act on the pathway from late endosomes to the Golgi [16]. The number of SNARE recruiters found so far is insufficient to account for the number of transport pathways. Thus, we will likely see more such interactions discovered in the future. Moreover, individual SNAREs may use a variety of signals

for inclusion into different vesicles. Unfortunately, since the recognition between SNAREs and cargo receptors or coat proteins does not involve linear motifs but rather interaction surfaces, such as the unstructured region of Hrb wrapping around VAMP7, these interactions are difficult to predict using bioinformatic tools. We are just starting to grasp the complexity by which SNAREs, and probably other cargo as well, are sorted by non-linear motifs into transport vesicles. The `address labels' on proteins may be more complicated than previously anticipated, so that some motifs may reach a complexity similar to that seen with localization signals responsible for spatially restricted mRNAs [17].
References
1. Sollner, T., Whiteheart, S.W., Brunner, M., Erdjument-Bromage, H., Geromanos, S., Tempst, P., and Rothman, J.E. (1993). SNAP receptors implicated in vesicle targeting and fusion. Nature 362, 318­324. 2. Springer, S., and Schekman, R. (1998). Nucleation of COPII vesicular coat complex by endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi vesicle SNAREs. Science 281, 698­700. 3. Springer, S., Spang, A., and Schekman, R. (1999). A primer on vesicle budding. Cell 97, 145­148. 4. Rein, U., Andag, U., Duden, R., Schmitt, H.D., and Spang, A. (2002). ARF-GAP-mediated interaction between the ER-Golgi v-SNAREs and the COPI coat. J. Cell Biol. 157, 395­404. 5. Schindler, C., and Spang, A. (2007). Interaction of SNAREs with ArfGAPs precedes recruitment of Sec18p/NSF. Mol. Biol. Cell 18, 2852­2863. 6. Pryor, P.R., Jackson, L., Gray, S.R., Edeling, M.A., Thompson, A., Sanderson, C.M., Evans, P.R., Owen, D.J., and Luzio, J.P. (2008). Molecular basis for the sorting of the SNARE VAMP7 into endocytic clathrincoated vesicles by the ArfGAP Hrb. Cell 134, 817­827. 7. Martinez-Arca, S., Rudge, R., Vacca, M., Raposo, G., Camonis, J., Proux-Gillardeaux, V., Daviet, L., Formstecher, E., Hamburger, A., Filippini, F., et al. (2003). A dual mechanism controlling the localization and function of

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

exocytic v-SNAREs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 9011­9016. Sollner, T., Bennett, M.K., Whiteheart, S.W., Scheller, R.H., and Rothman, J.E. (1993). A protein assembly-disassembly pathway in vitro that may correspond to sequential steps of synaptic vesicle docking, activation, and fusion. Cell 75, 409­418. Robinson, M., Poon, P.P., Schindler, C., Murray, L.E., Kama, R., Gabriely, G., Singer, R.A., Spang, A., Johnston, G.C., and Gerst, J.E. (2006). The Gcs1 Arf-GAP mediates Snc1,2 v-SNARE retrieval to the Golgi in yeast. Mol. Biol. Cell 17, 1845­1858. Lewis, S.M., Poon, P.P., Singer, R.A., Johnston, G.C., and Spang, A. (2004). The ArfGAP Glo3 is required for the generation of COPI vesicles. Mol. Biol. Cell 15, 4064­4072. Mossessova, E., Bickford, L.C., and Goldberg, J. (2003). SNARE selectivity of the COPII coat. Cell 114, 483­495. Liu, Y., Flanagan, J.J., and Barlowe, C. (2004). Sec22p export from the endoplasmic reticulum is independent of SNARE pairing. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 27225­27232. Mancias, J.D., and Goldberg, J. (2007). The transport signal on Sec22 for packaging into COPII-coated vesicles is a conformational epitope. Mol. Cell 26, 403­414. Chidambaram, S., Zimmermann, J., and von Mollard, G.F. (2008). ENTH domain proteins are cargo adaptors for multiple SNARE proteins at the TGN endosome. J. Cell Sci. 121, 329­338. Miller, S.E., Collins, B.M., McCoy, A.J., Robinson, M.S., and Owen, D.J. (2007). A SNARE-adaptor interaction is a new mode of cargo recognition in clathrin-coated vesicles. Nature 450, 570­574. Kama, R., Robinson, M., and Gerst, J.E. (2007). Btn2, a Hook1 ortholog and potential Batten disease-related protein, mediates late endosome-Golgi protein sorting in yeast. Mol. Cell. Biol. 27, 605­621. Hamilton, R.S., and Davis, I. (2007). RNA localization signals: deciphering the message with bioinformatics. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 18, 178­185.

1Department of Microbiology and Immunology and 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada B3H 1X5. 3Biozentrum University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland. *E-mail: anne.spang@unibas.ch

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.10.002

Binocular Vision: Only Half a Brain Needed
A recent study on zebrafish has shown that, by rerouting afferents from two eyes into a normally monocular brain structure, a fully functional binocular circuitry can be made to develop spontaneously. Frank Sengpiel The precise integration of information from the two eyes by binocular neurons is generally considered the preserve of mammals with more-or-less front-facing eyes. The partial crossing-over of the optic nerve fibres at the chiasm, and the accurate retinotopic register of afferents from

the two eyes in the superior colliculus of the midbrain and especially in the primary visual cortex, enable the convergence of information from the left and right eye about the same location in visual space onto binocular neurons in those structures [1,2]. These neurons typically have very similar receptive-field properties for each eye. But is there something special about the layout of these binocular brain regions, or their neural circuitry, that enables them to integrate two inputs meaningfully, or could other structures

