Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Lipid Research
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/plipres

Review

Novel functions of acyl-CoA thioesterases and acyltransferases as auxiliary enzymes in peroxisomal lipid metabolism
Mary C. Hunt a,*, Stefan E.H. Alexson a,b
a b

Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Toxicology, Arrhenius Laboratory, Stockholm University, Svante Arrhenius väg 16F, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden Karolinska Institutet, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical Chemistry, C1-74, Karolinska University Hospital at Huddinge, SE-141 86 Stockholm, Sweden

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t
Peroxisomes are single membrane bound organelles present in almost all eukaryotic cells, and to date have been shown to contain approximately 60 identified enzymes involved in various metabolic pathways, including the oxidation of a variety of lipids. These lipids include very long-chain fatty acids, methyl branched fatty acids, prostaglandins, bile-acid precursors and xenobiotics that are either b-oxidized or a-oxidized in peroxisomes. The recent identification of several acyl-CoA thioesterases and acyltransferases in peroxisomes has revealed their various functions in acting as auxiliary enzymes in a- and b-oxidation in this organelle. To date, 9 functional acyl-CoA thioesterases and acyltransferases have been identified in mouse and 4 functional acyl-CoA thioesterases and acyltransferases in human, thus these enzymes make up a substantial portion of peroxisomal proteins. This review will therefore focus on new and emerging roles for these enzymes in assisting with the oxidation of various lipids, amidation of lipids for excretion from peroxisomes, and in controlling coenzyme A levels in peroxisomes. Ó 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Acyl-CoA thioesterases Peroxisomes Acyl-CoA Acyltransferases Coenzyme A Alpha-oxidation Beta-oxidation Omega-oxidation

Contents 1. 2. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Identification and characterization of acyl-CoA thioesterases in peroxisomes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.1. Characterization of peroxisomal acyl-CoA thioesterases. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.1.1. The Type-I family of acyl-CoA thioesterases. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.1.2. ACOT8 is a peroxisomal ACOT with very broad substrate specificity and possibly functions in regulation of intraperoxisomal CoASH levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.1.3. ACOT12 is a short-chain ACOT that may be involved in acetate formation from peroxisomal b-oxidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Role of acyl-CoA thioesterases as auxiliary enzymes in regulation of peroxisomal a- and b-oxidation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.1. An overview of peroxisomal b-oxidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.1.1. Peroxisomes contain lipid-binding proteins that influence ACOT activity and b-oxidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.2. Acyl-CoA thioesterases and carnitine acyltransferases are differently expressed and may promote production of different metabolites in tissues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.2.1. Acyl-CoA thioesterases in regulation of coenzyme A (CoASH) levels in peroxisomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.2.2. Involvement of ACOT4 and ACOT8 in regulation of peroxisomal b-oxidation of dicarboxylic acids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.2.3. ACOT6 in regulation of methyl branched fatty acid oxidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.2.4. Acyl-CoA thioesterases and synthesis of polyunsaturated fatty acids. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . The acyltransferases involved in conjugation (amidation) of bile acids and fatty acids in peroxisomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.1. The acyl-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase gene cluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.1.1. Peroxisomes contain a bile-acid conjugating enzyme catalyzing the terminal step in bile-acid synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.1.2. Peroxisomes contain two putative acyl-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferases that conjugate fatty acids and possibly other carboxylic acids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Regulation of peroxisomal acyl-CoA thioesterases and acyltransferases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.1. Regulation of Acots and acyltransferases in peroxisomes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Concluding remarks and perspectives. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406 406 406 406 409 409 410 410 411 411 412 412 414 415 415 415 415 416 418 418 418

3.

4.

5. 6.

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +46 8 16 4162; fax: +46 8 16 4315. E-mail address: mary.hunt@gmt.su.se (M.C. Hunt). 0163-7827/$ - see front matter Ó 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.plipres.2008.05.001

406

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421

Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 418 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 418

1. Introduction Peroxisomes are nearly ubiquitous organelles present in fungi, yeast, plant and animal cells. The peroxisome was originally identified by a Swedish graduate student, Johannes Rhodin in 1954, however at that time it was known as a `microbody' [1]. The peroxisome later received its name in the 1960s from the pioneering work of Christian de Duve and co-workers, owing to the fact that this organelle contained enzymes to produce and degrade hydrogen peroxide [2,3]. The discovery by Goldfischer et al. in 1973 that peroxisomes are involved in certain human diseases [4] paved the way for the discovery of the importance of peroxisomes in the oxidation of various types of lipid molecules. One of the milestones in peroxisome research was the identification of a fatty acid b-oxidation system in mammalian peroxisomes (distinct from the mitochondrial b-oxidation system), and this led to a boost in research that revealed a discrete set of enzymes that catalyze the degradation of a variety of lipids (for reviews see [5­7]). These studies showed that rat and mouse liver peroxisomes contain three acylCoA oxidases, which identified separate pathways for b-oxidation of different lipids in peroxisomes. These acyl-CoA oxidases catalyze the b-oxidation of straight-chain acyl-CoAs (catalyzed by acyl-CoA oxidase 1, ACOX1), b-oxidation of the side-chain of bile-acid precursors (catalyzed by ACOX2) and methyl branched-chain CoA esters (catalyzed by ACOX3). It is now well established that peroxisomes have many metabolic roles including b-oxidation, aoxidation, glyoxylate metabolism, ether-phospholipid synthesis, cholesterol and isoprenoid metabolism and bile-acid synthesis. There are numerous existing reviews regarding the biochemistry of peroxisomes, peroxisome biogenesis and peroxisomal disorders [8­13], therefore these aspects will not be discussed in detail in this review. The recent identification and characterization of acyl-CoA thioesterases (ACOTs) and acyltransferases has now established distinct roles for these enzymes in peroxisomes and the current review will focus on the novel functions of these proteins as auxiliary enzymes in peroxisomal lipid metabolism. There are currently six ACOTs characterized in mouse peroxisomes (Acot3, 4, 5, 6, 8 and 12), but only three in human peroxisomes (ACOT4, ACOT8 and ACOT12, although it has not been confirmed that human ACOT12 is peroxisomal). The combined activity of these ACOTs catalyzes the hydrolysis of short to long-chain acylCoAs and a variety of methyl-branched, dicarboxylyl and bile acid-CoAs. Under certain conditions, such as when there is a high flux of fatty acids into peroxisomal b-oxidation and/or the presence of slowly oxidized substrates, it is likely that CoASH will be sequestered to become limiting for the thiolase reaction and ACOTs may then play important functions to promote b-oxidation by providing CoASH for the thiolase reaction. Peroxisomes catalyze an incomplete b-oxidation of various lipids, resulting in the export of chain-shortened products as the free acid or as taurine or glycine conjugated products. In addition to ACOTs producing free carboxylic acids, a family of related acyltransferases has also been identified in mouse and rat peroxisomes, with three acyltransferases in mouse, whereas human peroxisomes contain only one functional acyltransferase. This family of acyltransferases conjugates bile acids and fatty acids to taurine in the mouse, which can then be excreted. This review will firstly focus on the identification of these enzymes, followed by a discussion as to their metabolic functions as auxiliary enzymes in peroxisomes. A list of currently identified ACOT and acyltransferase enzymes in mouse and human peroxi-

somes are given in Tables 1 and 2 respectively, together with the current and previous nomenclature, tissue expression and substrate specificity. 2. Identification and characterization of acyl-CoA thioesterases in peroxisomes 2.1. Characterization of peroxisomal acyl-CoA thioesterases ACOT activity was first identified as early as the 1950s, with the partial purification of a succinyl-CoA thioesterase from pig heart [14]. Since then several different families of ACOTs have been identified and characterized, as reviewed in [15]. As these genes were cloned by various groups, they were all given different names which led to confusion, and therefore a recent nomenclature has been introduced, in which the gene name is Acot and the genes are numbered sequentially1 [16]. The reaction carried out by ACOTs involves the cleavage of the thioester bond of acyl groups attached to coenzyme A, to release the free acid and CoASH (Fig. 1A). The acyl groups can vary and have been identified as long-, medium- and short-chain fatty acids, dicarboxylic acids, branched-chain fatty acids or bile acids, depending on the ACOT enzyme involved. The second group of enzymes reviewed here are the acyl-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferases, which catalyze the transfer of carboxylic acids from the CoA ester to an amino acid, usually taurine or glycine (Fig. 1B and C). 2.1.1. The Type-I family of acyl-CoA thioesterases Initial interest in ACOT activity in rodents stems from the findings that the activity is highly inducible in livers of rats treated with peroxisome proliferators, such as fibrates that act as hypolipidemic agents. Subcellular fractionation of rat livers showed that the activity is mainly increased in mitochondria, cytosol and peroxisomes by these compounds [17­20]. Peroxisome proliferators act as hypolipidemic agents in part by increasing fatty acid degradation via activation of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARa), which is a lipid activated transcription factor that is a key regulator of genes involved in fatty acid metabolism [21]. The increase in ACOT activity by PPARa activators suggested that these enzymes may be beneficial for fatty acid degradation (regulation of expression of the ACOT enzymes will be discussed in more detail in Section 5). Biochemical analysis of highly purified peroxisomes revealed ACOT activity with short, medium and long-chain acyl-CoAs (from C2­C20-CoA) [22,23] and partial purification of a peroxisomal ACOT revealed a long-chain acyl-CoA thioesterase activity [22]. A similar long-chain ACOT activity was purified from rat liver mitochondria and cytosol and at that time, an antibody raised against a purified mitochondrial acyl-CoA thioesterase (ACOT2, formerly known as MTE-I), identified sequence related proteins in mitochondria, cytosol and peroxisomes, suggesting a related protein family [24,25]. In the genomic era, the cloning of specific candidate genes was carried out, which resulted in the identification of several distinct peroxisomal acyl-

1 According to human and mouse nomenclature guidelines, human symbols are entirely capitalized (e.g. ACOT4), whereas the mouse symbols are lowercase except for the first letter (e.g. Acot4). Mouse and human genes are italicized, whereas mouse protein symbols are nonitalicized uppercase letters. In yeast, uppercase italics denotes the gene (PTE1) and lowercase italics denotes a mutation (pte1) and mixed case-p designates the protein (Pte1p).

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421 Table 1 Characteristics of MOUSE peroxisomal acyl-CoA thioesterases and acyltransferases Gene Carboxy terminal sequence -AKL -CRL -AKL -SKL -SKL Previous nomenclature and aliases PTE-Ia PTE-Ib, Pte2b PTE-Ic PTE-Id PTE-2, PTE1 CACH-1, MGC105114 mCACH-1, CACH BACAT, BAT Substrate (CoA ester) [reference] Long chain [28] Succinyl, glutaryl [27] Medium chain [28] Chromosome and accession number 12 D3 NP_599007 12 D3 NP_599008 12 D3 NP_663419 Tissue expression

407

Protein family ­ Predicted polypeptide size and subunit composition

Acot3 Acot4 Acot5 Acot6 Acot8

Kidney Liver, kidney Brain, WAT WAT, kidney, liver Ubiquitous ­ mainly Prox. intestine, kidney, liver Prox. intestine, liver, kidney Liver Liver, kidney Kidney

a/b hydrolase superfamily 46 kDa ­
predicted monomer

a/b hydrolase superfamily 46 kDa ­
predicted monomer

a/b hydrolase superfamily 46 kDa ­
predicted monomer

Acot12 -SVL Baat -SQL

Pristanoyl, phytanoyl 12 D3 NP_766168 [29] All tested CoA esters 2 H3 NP_573503 [27,39,40] Short chain [46] 13 C3 NP_083066 Bile acids [130] 4 B3 NP_031545

a/b hydrolase superfamily 46 kDa ­
predicted monomer Hot-dog fold protein family 35 kDa ­ predicted tetramer Protein family unknown 62 kDa ­ dimer or tetramer a/b hydrolase superfamily 46 kDa ­ predicted monomer a/b hydrolase superfamily 46 kDa ­ predicted monomer a/b hydrolase superfamily 46 kDa ­ predicted monomer

Acnat1 -SKL Acnat2 -SKL

Long chain, very long 4 B3 ABE98441 chain [148] Unknown 4 B3 EU564338

The peroxisomal targeting signal shown as a tripeptide at the carboxyterminal end is indicated. Acot: acyl-CoA thioesterase; Baat: bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase; Acnat: acyl-CoA: amino acid N-acyltransferase; Prox: proximal; WAT: white adipose tissue. Subunit composition is predicted based on related enzymes. Acot12 is known to be a dimer or tetramer in rat [167].

Table 2 Characteristics of HUMAN peroxisomal acyl-CoA thioesterases and acyltransferases Gene Carboxy terminal sequence -PKL -SKL -SKFa -SQL Previous nomenclature and aliases PTE-1b, PTE-2b,hPTE-1 PTE-2, hTE, hACTEIII, PTE1 CACH-1, MGC105114 mCACH-1, CACH BACAT, BAT Substrate (CoA ester) [reference] Succinyl, glutaryl, long chain [31] medium and long chainb [34] Short chain [47] Bile acids, long chain/very long chain [131,133] Chromosome and accession number 14q24.3 NP_689544 20q12-q13.1 NP_005460 5q14.1 NP_570123 9q22.3 NP_001692 Tissue expression Kidney, liver Ubiquitous Liverc Liver, gallbladder mucosa
c

Protein family - predicted polypeptide size and subunit composition

ACOT4 ACOT8 ACOT12 BAAT

a/b hydrolase superfamily 46 kDa ­
predicted monomer Hot-dog fold protein family 35 kDa ­ predicted tetramer Protein family unknown 62 kDa ­ dimer or tetramer a/b hydrolase superfamily 46 kDa ­ predicted monomer

The peroxisomal targeting signal shown as a tripeptide at the carboxyterminal end is indicated. ACOT: acyl-CoA thioesterase; BAAT: bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase. Subunit composition is predicted based on related enzymes. ACOT12 is known to be a dimer or tetramer in rat [167]. a Peroxisomal localization not confirmed. b Activity only tested with saturated acyl-CoA. As the mouse and rat enzymes are active on a broad range of acyl-CoAs, it is likely that the human enzyme has a similar broad substrate specificity. c Based on GEO Profiles (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).

CoA thioesterases. One particular gene family that was identified at that time was named the Type-I acyl-CoA thioesterase gene family which, based on enzyme activity measurements and Western blot analysis, was suggested to code for closely related enzymes in cytosol, mitochondria and peroxisomes [22,24]. Subsequent molecular cloning of this gene family identified a cluster of six related genes, localized on chromosome 12 D3 in mouse [26­29] (Fig. 2). Four of these six genes code for enzymes that localize in peroxisomes as they all contain peroxisomal type 1 targeting signals (PTS1) at their carboxyterminal ends. In mouse, these four peroxisomal acyl-CoA thioesterases are named Acot3, 4, 5 and 6, which show approximately 65­80% sequence identity to each other. These four proteins end with the amino acid sequences AKL (ACOT3 and ACOT5), -CRL (ACOT4) and -SKL (ACOT6) (Fig. 2), which targets them to peroxisomes as confirmed in all cases using green fluorescent fusion protein experiments [27­ 29]. The open reading frames of all four genes are encoded by three exons and the exon/intron boundaries are conserved in this gene family. The Acot3 and Acot5 show the highest degree of sequence similarity (82%) and were therefore characterized simultaneously in a study in 2004 [28]. Expression of the recombinant proteins re-

vealed that ACOT3 is a long-chain acyl-CoA thioesterase (highest activity with C14­C18-CoA, whereas ACOT5 is a medium-chain acyl-CoA thioesterase (highest activity with C10-CoA). Interestingly, ACOT3 and ACOT5 had little or no activity towards 3-hydroxy-palmitoyl-CoA, an intermediate in peroxisomal b-oxidation, suggesting that these enzymes hydrolyze the substrates/products at the beginning and end of individual of b-oxidation cycles, but not the oxidized intermediates within the individual cycles [28]. Acot3 mRNA is expressed as two splice variants, which show a tissue-specific expression in liver and kidney [28]. In contrast, Acot5 is mainly expressed in white adipose tissue and brain [30]. The ACOT4 shows the lowest percentage sequence similarity to the other peroxisomal thioesterases (65%) and indeed was the first thioesterase to reveal a more `specific' substrate specificity, being active only with succinyl-CoA (Km % 13 lM) and glutaryl-CoA (Km % 37 lM) [27], suggesting a role in dicarboxylic acid metabolism. The mouse Acot4 mRNA is expressed mainly in liver, kidney and proximal intestine, with the former two organs being involved in dicarboxylic acid formation and metabolism. Interestingly, analysis of the cluster of the human Type-I ACOT genes revealed only one functional peroxisomal gene, encoded for by a homologue of

408

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421

Fig. 1. The reactions catalyzed by acyl-CoA thioesterases (ACOTs) and acyl-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferases (ACNAT and BAAT). ACOTs hydrolyze the CoA ester of various fatty acids into the free fatty acid + coenzyme A (CoASH). The substrate shown is stearoyl-CoA (C18-CoA) but can be long-chain, medium-chain, short-chain, branched-chain, bile acid-CoAs or dicarboxylyl-CoAs, depending on the ACOT enzyme involved. (B) The reaction catalyzed by acyl-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase (ACNAT) is the conjugation (or amidation) of fatty acids (long-chain and very long-chain) to taurine, resulting in the production of an N-acyltaurine and CoASH. The substrate shown is stearoyl-CoA (C18-CoA). (C) The bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase (BAAT) catalyzes the conjugation (amidation) of bile acids to glycine or taurine, resulting in a conjugated bile acid. Choloyl-CoA is shown as the substrate, with glycine as the acceptor, resulting in the formation of choloylglycine. Human BAAT can also conjugate fatty acids to glycine or taurine as shown in the reaction in (B) above.

Fig. 2. The Type-I acyl-CoA thioesterase gene cluster in human and mouse. The Type-I human acyl-CoA thioesterases are localized in a cluster on human chromosome 14q24.3, encoding two cytosolic, one mitochondrial and one peroxisomal enzyme (ACOT4). The peroxisomal ACOT4 contains a carboxyterminal -PKL, which functions as a peroxisomal targeting signal. In mouse, a similar cluster is found on chromosome 12 D3, containing four peroxisomal Acots (Acot3, 4, 5 and 6), one mitochondrial and one cytosolic gene. Each of the four peroxisomal ACOTs contain a peroxisomal targeting signal of -CRL, -AKL, or -SKL.

mouse Acot4, which contains a carboxyterminal -PKL and is localized in peroxisomes (Fig. 2) [31]. This was a surprising finding, given that the mouse genome contained four peroxisomal Type-I Acots. However, functional analysis revealed that the human ACOT4 protein could in fact catalyze the hydrolysis of the same substrates as the combined activities of mouse ACOT3, ACOT4

and ACOT5 (i.e. long-chain acyl-CoAs, succinyl-CoA/glutaryl-CoA and medium-chain acyl-CoAs) [31], showing that evolution of the human genome resulted in an enzyme that apparently adopted the activities of three distinct mouse enzymes. In human, analysis of the genome also revealed the presence of a further gene on chromosome 19q13.12, which showed 91% sequence identity to the

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421

409

human ACOT4 gene and contains a peroxisomal targeting signal of PKL. However, this gene on chromosome 19 lacks introns and contains several stop codons, and is therefore likely a pseudogene, even though the mRNA is expressed as identified by ESTs in pancreatic islets, brain and placenta [31]. The final peroxisomal enzyme encoded for by the Type-I gene cluster in mouse was recently identified as ACOT6, a thioesterase that is apparently only active on phytanoyl-CoA and pristanoylCoA [29]. The corresponding mRNA is mainly expressed in white adipose tissue, where it is co-expressed with Acox3, the rate-limiting enzyme in branched-chain acyl-CoA oxidation. In human, there is a homologue of the mouse Acot6, which is however unlikely to code for a functional protein as this gene appears to be transcribed from the second exon, and translated from an ATG at the end of exon 2, therefore resulting in a much shorter peptide [31]. The human ACOT6 contains the carboxyterminal tripeptide -SKI, which localizes the protein in the cytosol in human skin fibroblasts, when fused to green fluorescent protein [31]. Searches in databases suggest that homologues of the Type-I family of Acot genes are widespread in animals from nematodes to human, but are not found in yeast, fungi, plants or insects. Sequence analysis, secondary structure predictions and site-directed mutagenesis experiments identified the Type-I ACOTs as members of the a/b-hydrolase protein superfamily, members of which contain a lipase/esterase active site motif that is characterized by a conserved serine residue located in a GlyXaaSerXaaGly motif (GxSxG) [32]. In addition these a/b-hydrolases contain a conserved histidine residue and an aspartic/glutamic acid residue, which together with the nucleophile constitute a catalytic triad in this protein family. 2.1.2. ACOT8 is a peroxisomal ACOT with very broad substrate specificity and possibly functions in regulation of intraperoxisomal CoASH levels A further peroxisomal acyl-CoA thioesterase named ACOT8, (previously known as PTE-2, PTE1 or hACTEIII/hTE), has also been characterized, which is not related to the Type-I gene family discussed above. This enzyme was initially identified by a yeast two-hybrid screening as a protein that interacted with, and activated, the HIV-1 Nef protein [33,34]. Nef is a 27-kDa myristoylated cytoplasmic protein that is involved in CD4 down-regulation and it was suggested that interaction of ACOT8 and Nef assisted in mediation of Nef-induced CD4 down-regulation. Nef is not a bona fide peroxisomal protein, but apparently ``piggy-backs" into peroxisomes by interacting with ACOT8, although only in about 10­20% of the cells examined [35]. The human ACOT8 and its yeast counterpart PTE1 were identified by Jones et al. in 1999 as peroxisomal proteins, and deletion of the yeast Pte1p resulted in impaired growth on fatty acids, implying a role for this gene in fatty acid oxidation [36]. The yeast Pte1p had significant thioesterase activity with decanoyl-CoA, however the substrate specificity was not studied for the human enzyme at this time. It is of interest to note that knockdown of the Pte1p in yeast resulted in the loss of about 80% of the decanoyl-CoA thioesterase activity in yeast extracts, suggesting that Pte1p accounts for the majority of the thioesterase activity in yeast. The yeast Pte1p was further characterized by Maeda et al. in 2006 [37]. Using a pte1D strain expressing polyhydroxy-alkanoate synthase (PHAC1) as a metabolic marker, they elegantly showed that Pte1p is important in hydrolyzing short to medium straight chain and methyl branched fatty acids, and that the metabolic effect of the pte1D on longer chain fatty acids was much less affected. In Arabidopsis thaliana, the ACOT8 homologue, called ACH2, contains a carboxyterminal -SKL and is therefore likely also a peroxisomal enzyme [38]. The cloned A. thaliana enzyme is active on long-chain saturated and unsaturated acyl-CoAs, but was insensitive to feedback inhibition by CoASH even up to

100 lM, and it was suggested that ACH2 is unlikely to have a role in fatty acid oxidation in plants. Yeast does not contain any homologues to the Type-I ACOTs or ACOT12 (described in Section 2.1.3), and therefore it is likely that the only yeast peroxisomal thioesterase is PTE1. Further characterization of the ACOT8 enzyme in mouse and rat identified it as an acyl-CoA thioesterase which hydrolyzes a very wide variety of CoA esters [27,39,40]. In fact ACOT8 hydrolyzes all acyl-CoA esters tested so far, indicating that this enzyme likely recognizes the CoA moiety of the substrate for binding and not the thioesterified acyl-chain. In support of this, to date ACOT8 is one of only two peroxisomal ACOT enzymes regulated by CoASH with an estimated IC50 of $10­15 lM [39]. As the human ACOT8 enzyme shows about 80% sequence identity to the rat [40] and mouse [39] enzymes, it is likely that the human ACOT8 also hydrolyzes a wide variety of acyl-CoA substrates. Interestingly, over-expression of human ACOT8 in murine and human T-cell lines resulted in an up-regulation of peroxisomal biogenesis, further supporting a link between metabolic activity and peroxisome proliferation [41]. Crystallization of the Escherichia coli homolog of ACOT8 (E. coli thioesterase II) identified a `double hot dog' tertiary fold, with a novel catalytic site containing aspartic acid, glutamine and threonine [42]. This is one of the few crystal structures currently available for homologues of the mammalian ACOT enzymes, however work is currently underway to crystallize several of these mammalian proteins. In E. coli however, there are seven different hot-dog fold thioesterases encoded by the E. coli genome that have a known X-ray structure, but the biological function is only known in the case of one thioesterase [43]. 2.1.3. ACOT12 is a short-chain ACOT that may be involved in acetate formation from peroxisomal b-oxidation ACOT12 is the most recently identified peroxisomal ACOT, which is active on short-chain acyl-CoAs. This enzyme was originally identified as an extra-mitochondrial short-chain thioesterase with highest activity towards acetyl-CoA, and some activity also with butyryl-CoA and hexanoyl-CoA [44­46]. ACOT12 is a protein of 555 amino acids in human (556 in mouse), and mouse and rat proteins contain a variant of the type 1 peroxisomal targeting signal of -SVL. However, the carboxy terminus of human ACOT12 ends with the amino acid sequence -STF [47], suggesting that in rodents the protein is peroxisomal, but this may not be the case in human. Previous work using subcellular fractionation and Western blotting revealed the protein and activity in peroxisomal fractions in rat liver, suggesting that ACOT12 is indeed a peroxisomal protein, or that at least it may have a dual localization in peroxisomes and cytosol [48]. In addition, a very recent proteomics study on mouse kidney peroxisomes also identified ACOT12 in peroxisomes [49]. ACOT12 shows some interesting features that clearly distinguishes it from the other peroxisomal ACOTs. ACOT12 is a 62 kDa protein that contains two thioesterase domains with homology to bacterial thioesterases and some other mammalian ACOTs (but not to the Type-I ACOTs), and a C-terminal part that contains a steroidogenic acute regulatory protein-related lipid transfer (START) domain [47], which is likely to be involved in lipid binding. The enzyme appears to be an acetyl-CoA thioesterase, with lower activities with propionyl-CoA and butyryl-CoA [44]. Also, the enzyme activity is activated by ATP and inhibited by ADP [50] indicating a possible metabolic regulation of acetate production by nucleotide levels in peroxisomes. The rat ACOT12 enzyme is also inhibited by CoASH (approx. 80% inhibition at 40 lM, IC50 approximately 10 lM) [50]. So far, ACOT12 and ACOT8 are the only peroxisomal thioesterases currently identified that are regulated by CoASH. In summary, the mouse genome contains six currently characterized peroxisomal Acots, namely Acot3, Acot4, Acot5, Acot6, Acot8 and Acot12, whereas human contains only three, ACOT4, ACOT8 and

410

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421

ACOT12, although ACOT12 in human has not yet been confirmed as peroxisomal (see Table 2). The revised nomenclature and the substrate specificities of these enzymes is shown in Table 1 (mouse) and Table 2 (human). It is intriguing that rodents contain a number of ACOTs with distinct substrate specificities, which indicates that these enzymes play important roles in regulation of peroxisomal lipid metabolism. 3. Role of acyl-CoA thioesterases as auxiliary enzymes in regulation of peroxisomal a- and b-oxidation 3.1. An overview of peroxisomal b-oxidation Peroxisomal b-oxidation of carboxylic acids (summarized in Fig. 3) is generally believed to act as a chain-shortening system and thereby provide mitochondria with suitable substrates. Alternatively, the peroxisomal b-oxidation may be considered to function as a detoxification system to metabolize carboxylic acids into more water-soluble products that can be excreted. In addition to the physiological CoA esters that undergo b-oxidation in peroxisomes, such as very long-chain fatty acids, bile acid intermediates, eicosanoids, and methyl branched fatty acids, also some xenobiotic carboxylic acids undergo b-oxidation in peroxisomes (for review, see [51]). Most of the carboxylic acids are activated to the corresponding CoA ester outside the peroxisome by acyl-CoA synthetases localized in the peroxisomal membrane or in the endoplasmic reticulum [52]. Current evidence indicates that acyl-CoA esters are transported across the peroxisomal membrane via a family of ATPbinding-casette transporters (ABC transporters). To date, four peroxisomal ABC half-transporters have been identified, which have been recently discussed in detail in a mini-review by Kemp and Wanders [53]. ABCD1 is involved in the transport of very longchain acyl-CoAs into peroxisomes and mutations in this protein re-

sult in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy [54]. ABCD3 is proposed to be involved in transport of long-chain acyl-CoAs [55], but recently, unpublished data referred to in [56] stated that Abcd3-knockout mice were found to accumulate bile-acid precursors and branched-chain fatty acids, suggesting that this transporter may be involved in transfer of these CoA esters into the peroxisome. Inside the peroxisomal matrix, there is a dedicated set of enzymes that b-oxidize the imported CoA esters. The first step in peroxisomal b-oxidation is carried out by an acyl-CoA oxidase (ACOX), and rodents contain three acyl-CoA oxidase enzymes [57­59], which dehydrogenate straight-chain acyl-CoAs, branched-chain acyl-CoAs and the bile-acid intermediates trihydroxycoprostanoyl-CoA and dihydroxycoprostanoyl-CoA, respectively. Humans express only two ACOX enzymes catalyzing straight-chain and branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenation, respectively [60,61]. The second and third steps in peroxisomal b-oxidation are catalyzed by multifunctional enzymes MFP1 or MFP2 (L- or D-bifunctional proteins) [62­64]. The final step in peroxisomal b-oxidation involves a thiolytic cleavage of the acyl-CoA catalyzed by either 3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolases a or b, or SCPx [65­67], resulting in the release of a chain-shortened acyl-CoA and acetyl-CoA or propionyl-CoA, depending on the substrate initially oxidized. The 2 carbon acetyl-CoA is released during the b-oxidation of very long-chain acyl-CoAs, branched-chain acyl-CoAs and dicarboxylylCoAs, whereas propionyl-CoA is released during b-oxidation of branched-chain acyl-CoAs and bile acid-CoA intermediates. As stated above, the peroxisomal b-oxidation of substrates results in chain-shortening of carboxylic acids, with the concomitant release of acetyl-CoA or propionyl-CoA, and hence the peroxisome requires a system to remove fatty acids from the b-oxidation process. There are three possible routes for the removal of fatty acids, namely formation of carnitine esters, which can be transferred to mitochondria for further oxidation, conjugation to glycine/taurine

Fig. 3. Routes for excretion of fatty acids from peroxisomes. Very long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA), bile acid intermediates, methyl branched fatty acids and dicarboxylic acids enter the peroxisome, likely as the CoA ester, via ABC half transporters. ABCD1 transports VLCFAs into peroxisomes and ABCD3 may be involved in transport of bile acid-CoA intermediates and branched-chain CoA esters. It is not yet known which ABC protein is involved in transport of dicarboxylyl-CoA esters. These CoA esters then undergo boxidation in peroxisomes, involving a dehydrogenation (catalyzed by an acyl-CoA oxidase), hydration/dehydrogenation (catalyzed by a bifunctional enzyme) and a thiolytic cleavage (catalyzed by a thiolase). CoASH is required for the thiolase reaction, resulting in a chain-shortened CoA ester plus acetyl-CoA or propionyl-CoA, depending on the substrate. There are three potential pathways for these chain shortened products; esterification to carnitine catalyzed by carnitine acyltransferases (CRAT and CROT), hydrolysis to the free acid by acyl-CoA thioesterases (ACOTs) or to the acyl-40 -phosphopantetheine by nudix hydrolases (NUDT7 or NUDT19), or conjugation (amidation) to glycine or taurine by the bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase (BAAT), or to taurine by the acyl-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferases (ACNAT1 and ACNAT2). These products may then be transported to mitochondria for further oxidation or excreted directly in urine or bile.

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421

411

by acyltransferases (e.g. bile acid and fatty acid conjugation) for excretion into bile or blood, or alternatively hydrolysis to the free acid by ACOT enzymes for transport to mitochondria or excretion in urine. The involvement of ACOTs, carnitine acyltransferases and acyl-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferases in these routes is shown in Fig. 3 and will be discussed below. 3.1.1. Peroxisomes contain lipid-binding proteins that influence ACOT activity and b-oxidation Peroxisomes contain two lipid-binding proteins that potentially provide additional regulation to peroxisomal fatty acid metabolism. Almost 30 years ago, sterol carrier protein-2 (SCP2) was purified as a soluble sterol carrier, but was later shown to localize to peroxisomes via a PTS1 signal. Several findings since then have changed the view on the function of SCP2 in peroxisomal lipid metabolism, as reviewed in [68]. Subsequent characterization of the functions of this protein in various experimental systems suggest that SCP2 may act as an acyl-CoA binding protein that can interact with enzymes of the peroxisomal b-oxidation system. This could serve several purposes, for example delivery of acyl-CoA's to the degradation pathway, which may provide a mechanism for increased efficiency of fatty acid oxidation in peroxisomes and possibly also protect acyl-CoAs' from hydrolysis by ACOT's. Very recently Antonenkov et al. showed that in addition to it's well known cytosolic localization, the liver fatty acid binding protein (L-FABP) is also a bona fide peroxisomal protein [69]. Although it appears that only a small fraction of L-FABP is present in peroxisomes under normal (control) conditions, the amount is strongly increased by fibrate treatment. This study also demonstrated that addition of purified L-FABP to isolated peroxisomes stimulated boxidation of palmitoyl-CoA at higher substrate concentrations in vitro, presumably by preventing substrate inhibition. Similarly, ACOT activity was also stimulated by the addition of L-FABP, probably via a similar mechanism by preventing substrate inhibition. The presence in peroxisomes of lipid-binding proteins and the ACOT's point to regulatory functions for these proteins in peroxisomal lipid metabolism, but it is not yet known whether the lipid-binding proteins function to present substrates to b-oxidations enzymes or protect them from hydrolysis. 3.2. Acyl-CoA thioesterases and carnitine acyltransferases are differently expressed and may promote production of different metabolites in tissues Peroxisomes contain ACOTs and carnitine acyltransferases with similar acyl-CoA substrate specificities, which raises questions as to their roles in fatty acid metabolism. Carnitine acyltransferases are a group of enzymes that catalyze the reversible esterification of fatty acids to CoASH and carnitine. Peroxisomes contain two distinct carnitine acyltransferases, carnitine octanoyltransferase (CROT) and carnitine acetyltransferase (CRAT) [70,71], and it was generally believed that formation of carnitine esters was the terminal reaction in peroxisomes to produce shorter acyl chain metabolites that could be transported to mitochondria for further oxidation. CROT catalyzes the transfer of medium-chain (C6­C10) acyl-CoAs and methyl branched medium-chain acyl-CoAs, such as dimethylnonanoyl-CoA (DMN-CoA), to carnitine [72,73]. CRAT has been characterized as a short-chain carnitine acyltransferase, with highest activity with butyryl-CoA, followed by propionylCoA and acetyl-CoA [73]. CRAT purified from mouse liver has a Km of %20 lM with short-chain acyl-CoA's, whereas CROT has a Km of %3.4 lM with medium-chain acyl-CoAs (up to C12-CoA) and a higher Km towards longer chain acyl-CoAs [73]. The recent identification of ACOT's with distinct acyl-CoA substrate specificities raises significant uncertainties about which b-oxidation products are produced and exported from peroxi-

somes. Peroxisomes contain two acyl-CoA thioesterases (ACOT12 and ACOT5), which are specific for short- and medium-chain acyl-CoA's respectively. Mouse ACOT5 was identified as a medium-chain acyl-CoA thioesterase, preferentially hydrolyzing C8­C12 acyl-CoAs, with a Km value of %3 lM [28]. In addition to ACOT5, ACOT8 hydrolyzes short- and medium-chain acyl-CoAs, with Km-values of 3­30 lM depending on the substrate [39]. Peroxisomes contain the short-chain acyl-CoA thioesterase ACOT12 as described in Section 2.1.3, which hydrolyzes short-chain acylCoAs with a Km of 60­200 lm [44,45]. The presence of short and medium-chain acyl-CoA thioesterases and carnitine acyltransferases in peroxisomes suggests that these enzymes would compete for the same substrate but produce different metabolites (ACOTs producing the free acid and the carnitine acyltransferases producing carnitine esters). However, a recent study examining the mRNA expression of the acyltransferases (Crat and Crot) and acyl-CoA thioesterases (Acot5 and Acot12) shows that these mRNAs exhibit a very different tissue expression profile [30]. Therefore, depending on the tissue, either the free acid will be produced by thioesterases, or the carnitine ester will be produced by carnitine acyltransferases. Thus it appears that two complementary enzyme systems exist for the removal of acyl-CoA esters from peroxisomes in different tissues, rather than the enzymes acting competitively for the same substrate in a single tissue (Fig. 4). Consistent with this idea, peroxisomal b-oxidation in liver (studied in cultured hepatocytes) results in the production of free acetate [74] whereas in heart, free acetate does not appear to be a major metabolite of peroxisomal b-oxidation [75]. These findings can be explained by the different tissue expression of Crat and Acot12, since Acot12 is mainly expressed in liver, whereas Crat is expressed at very low levels in this tissue [30]. In contrast, in heart the expression of Crat dominates, likely resulting in carnitine ester production for transfer to mitochondria, and less acetate production. This aspect of carnitine acyltransferase versus acyl-CoA thioesterase routes for production of carnitine esters or free acids has also recently been addressed by Wanders and Komen, who suggested that in liver the thioesterase pathway is likely to dominate, whereas in human skin fibroblasts, production of carnitine esters is the most important route [76]. The relative importance of the free acid and carnitine ester pathways may depend on the physiological conditions regarding the degree of sequestration of CoASH, which will also regulate the activity of ACOT8 and ACOT12. However, a further obvious function for CRAT may also be to transfer butyryl-CoA (which cannot be b-oxidized in peroxisomes) [77] to carnitine for further transport to mitochondria. It is well established that peroxisomes also contain the medium-chain enzymes carnitine octanoyltransferase (CROT) and ACOT5, which would play similar roles to produce carnitine esters and free acids from medium-chain acyl-CoA's. Indeed CROT was recently demonstrated to transesterify DMN-CoA (formed during boxidation of branched-chain fatty acids) to DMN-carnitine, which can be transferred to the mitochondria for further oxidation [72]. The Crot mRNA is most highly expressed in liver and the proximal intestine, followed by kidney, with much lower expression in other tissues [30]. Again, the thioesterase (Acot5) mRNA shows a different pattern of tissue expression, being most highly expressed in white adipose tissue and brain. These data therefore suggest that medium-chain acyl-CoA's produced by peroxisomes in liver and intestine will be transferred to carnitine esters and presumably further on to mitochondria (Fig. 4). The importance of esterification to carnitine for transfer to mitochondria is not obvious in view of the fact that medium-chain fatty acids apparently enter mitochondria in a carnitine independent manner, suggesting that mediumchain fatty acids generated from the action of ACOT5 could also be transferred to mitochondria. However, the strikingly different tissue expression pattern of Acot5, being most highly expressed

412

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421

in white adipose tissue and brain, suggests more specific functions for this enzyme in these tissues. 3.2.1. Acyl-CoA thioesterases in regulation of coenzyme A (CoASH) levels in peroxisomes As discussed above, the substrates for b-oxidation most likely enter peroxisomes as the CoA ester via ABC half transporters, although this has not been proved for all substrates (for reviews see [53,56]). CoASH is also required for the final step of b-oxidation, the 3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase reaction, demonstrating a requirement for CoASH in peroxisomes. Little up to date data is available on the intraperoxisomal concentration of CoASH, however in the 1980s total peroxisomal CoASH levels were estimated to be approximately 700 lM, with un-esterified CoA levels estimated at 230 lM [78,79]. However, the ratio of esterified CoA to CoASH may vary under different physiological conditions such as fed and fasting states, and higher levels of slowly oxidized carboxylic acids etc. The activity of the ACOT enzymes results in the hydrolysis of acyl-CoAs, with the concomitant release of the free fatty acid and CoASH, suggesting a role for ACOT enzymes in the regulation of CoASH levels in peroxisomes. As mentioned above, the only two ACOT enzymes identified to be regulated by CoASH are the ACOT8, with an estimated IC50 of 10­15 lM [39], and ACOT12 (with an estimated IC50 of about 10 lM) [50], whereas none of the enzymes ACOT3, 4, 5 or 6 were inhibited by CoASH even at concentrations of 500 lM. Therefore it appears that ACOT8 and ACOT12 act as `coenzyme A sensors' in peroxisomes and may be inhibited under conditions of `low metabolic activity', assuming more unesterified CoASH under these conditions. However, during conditions when CoASH levels are low or become rate-limiting due to sequestration in peroxisomal b-oxidation (such as during fasting or possibly fibrate treatment), ACOT8 and ACOT12 would be activated, thus supplying CoASH required for the thiolase reaction. It should also be kept in mind that it is not clear if the peroxisomal content of unesterified CoASH is readily available since it was demonstrated that in isolated peroxisomes, unesterified CoASH appears to be bound to an 80 kDa protein [80]. This would imply that ACOT8 and ACOT12 may in fact be active under most conditions (i.e. not inhibited due to low levels of CoASH). A further twist in the regulation of CoASH levels in peroxisomes involves two recently identified nudix hydrolase enzymes active on CoASH and CoA derivatives. The first of these enzymes is the NUDT7 identified in mouse peroxisomes in 2001 by Gasmi and McLennan [81], which acts as a diphosphatase and cleaves CoASH and its derivatives (e.g. acetyl-CoA) with a Km of %240­430 lM, resulting in the production of 30 ,50 -ADP and 40 -phosphopantetheine. Nudt7 homologues have also been cloned from yeast and Caenorhabditis elegans. The yeast Nudt7p has a low Km (24 lM) for oxidized CoA (CoASSCoA), compared to the Km for CoASH (Km % 280 lM) [82], suggesting that in yeast it removes potentially toxic, or non-functional, oxidized CoA in peroxisomes. In C. elegans, the Km for CoASH is %220 lM and is similar to that of oxidized CoA at %320 lV, showing that this enzyme has no real preference for either reduced or oxidized CoA [83]. Similar to the C. elegans enzyme, the mouse NUDT7 does not have a preference for oxidized CoA in vitro as it hydrolyzes CoASH and oxidized CoA with a similar Km of around 230 lM [81]. Further investigation by our group suggests that NUDT7 mainly metabolizes CoASH esterified to longer chain fatty acids (Reilly et al., manuscript submitted). Recently, a further novel peroxisomal nudix hydrolase, RP2p (NUDT19), was identified by Ofman et al. in a proteomic analysis of mouse kidney peroxisomes [84]. This enzyme also functions as an esterified-CoA diphosphatase, with activity toward medium- and long-chain acylCoAs, branched-chain and bile acid-CoA esters, resulting in the production of 30 ,50 -ADP and acyl-40 -phosphopantetheine. Therefore, NUDT7 and NUDT19 may hydrolyze similar substrates, how-

ever Nudt7 is mainly expressed in liver whereas Nudt19 is most strongly expressed in kidney, but also expressed in several other tissues. The peroxisomal membrane forms a permeability barrier for larger cofactors such as CoASH [85] and therefore the activity of peroxisomal NUDT7 and NUDT19 would cleave CoASH into two smaller molecules (30 ,50 -ADP and 40 -phosphopantetheine) which could exit the peroxisome. Currently there is no information as to possible functions of 30 ,50 -ADP and 40 -phosphopantetheine in peroxisomes, but possibly 30 ,50 -ADP may exit peroxisomes via the adenine nucleotide transporter PMP34, (or ANT1 in yeast), which act in the transport of adenine nucleotides across the peroxisomal membrane [86,87]. Similarly, 40 -phosphopantetheine may be recycled for CoASH synthesis at the outer mitochondrial membrane, as the final two steps involve the transfer of an adenyl group from ATP to 40 -phosphopantetheine by phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase to form dephospho-CoA, followed by phosphorylation by dephospho-CoA kinase to obtain CoASH (for review see [88]). ADP is also an extremely potent inhibitor of ACOT12 activity [50], which suggests a role for nucleotides in the regulation of acetate formation in peroxisomes. However, the surprising finding that the NUDT7 and NUDT19 are more active on acyl-CoA's rather than with unesterified or oxidized CoA raises questions regarding the in vivo roles of these enzymes in peroxisomes, in particular in relation to the ACOT's. Hydrolysis of acyl-CoAs by ACOT enzymes will result in a free fatty acid, which can be re-esterified to CoASH or transported out of the peroxisome, and a CoASH molecule that can be re-used in peroxisomes. In contrast, cleavage of acyl-CoAs by nudix hydrolases will result in catabolism of the CoA moiety, producing a fatty acid with the 40 -phosphopantetheine attached (an acyl-40 -phosphopantetheine). A function for this acyl-40 -phosphopantetheine is not known. An important subject for future studies is obviously to determine whether ACOT enzymes are able to hydrolyze acyl-40 -phosphopantetheine molecules to release the free acid and 40 -phosphopantetheine. 3.2.2. Involvement of ACOT4 and ACOT8 in regulation of peroxisomal b-oxidation of dicarboxylic acids Dicarboxylic acids were first detected in urine in 1934 by Verkade and van der Lee [89]. Succinate (a four carbon dicarboxylic acid) is present in urine in considerable amounts under normal conditions [90]. In addition, longer chain dicarboxylic acids (DCA) like adipic acid (C6-DCA), suberic acid (C8-DCA) and sebacic acid (C10-DCA) are increased in urine during conditions of high b-oxidation activity such as fasting, fat-feeding and diabetes [90­93]. Dicarboxylic acids are formed by omega oxidation of monocarboxylic fatty acids. This occurs by an initial hydroxylation of the x-carbon, or the xÀ1 carbon, by microsomal CYP4A enzymes, followed by further oxidations by alcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenases, which finally results in formation of a dicarboxylic acid [94]. Under normal physiological conditions, x-oxidation is a minor pathway, accounting for about 5­10% of fatty acid oxidation, however during conditions such as starvation or diabetes, x-oxidation becomes more important [95]. There has been much debate as to whether b-oxidation of dicarboxylic fatty acids occurs in mitochondria [96] or peroxisomes [74,97­100]. However recent studies using human skin fibroblasts showed that the b-oxidation of C16 dicarboxylic acids occurs only in peroxisomes [101]. Dicarboxylic acids enter peroxisomes, likely as the CoA ester, and are then chain shortened by b-oxidation, involving the straight-chain acyl-CoA oxidase, the D- and L-specific bifunctional proteins and SCPx [101,102]. Medium- and long-chain dicarboxylic acids are formed from x-oxidation as described above, whereas short-chain dicarboxylic acids (such as adipic, suberic and sebacic acid) are formed from chain shortening of longer chain dicarboxylic acids by b-oxidation. The dicarboxylic acids oxidized in peroxisomes are believed

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421

413

Fig. 4. Schematic representation of the roles of ACOTs, carnitine acyltransferases and nudix hydrolases in peroxisomal b-oxidation. Very long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA) are transported into the peroxisome via the ABCD1 transporter and undergo b-oxidation to produce chain-shortened acyl-CoAs, with the concomitant release of acetyl-CoA. These very long-chain acyl-CoAs can be hydrolyzed to the free fatty acid and CoASH by ACOT3, or alternatively may be further b-oxidized to medium-chain acyl-CoAs (MCCoA). ACOT5 and CROT are both active on medium-chain acyl-CoAs, resulting in production of the free acid (MCFA) or carnitine ester (MC-carn), depending on the tissue involved [30]. These long-chain/medium-chain fatty acids or carnitine esters may be transported to the mitochondria for further oxidation. Long-chain dicarboxylic acids (LCDCA) are transported into the peroxisome, likely as the CoA ester through an as yet unidentified ABC transporter and undergo b-oxidation, resulting in medium-chain dicarboxylyl-CoAs (MC-DCA), which are substrates for ACOT8, or alternatively are further b-oxidized to a C4 succinyl-CoA. As succinyl-CoA is unlikely to be converted to a carnitine ester, it is hydrolyzed by the action of ACOT4, resulting in production of succinate, which is excreted in urine. The acetyl-CoA produced by b-oxidation can be a substrate for either the short-chain carnitine acetyltransferase (CRAT) or the short-chain acyl-CoA thioesterase (ACOT12), resulting in production of the carnitine ester or free acid depending on the tissue involved [30]. The peroxisomal acetate will presumably equilibrate with the cytosolic pool of acetate, whereas the acetylcarnitine will be transported to the mitochondria for further oxidation. The metabolism of CoASH in peroxisomes occurs by the action of Nudix hydrolases, NUDT7 and NUDT19, which hydrolyze CoASH to 30 ,50 -ADP and 40 -phosphopantetheine. Recent data also indicates that these enzymes hydrolyze bile acid-CoA esters, long-chain, medium-chain and short-chain acyl-CoAs to 30 ,50 -ADP and acyl-40 -phosphopantetheine, however the physiological significance of this activity is not yet fully understood. For simplicity, only the reaction of NUDT7 and NUDT19 with CoASH is shown. The substrates and the enzymes involved are colour-coded.

to originate from mitochondrially produced monocarboxylic acids [93,100,103], but recently also very long-chain and long-chain monocarboxylic fatty acids have been shown to be omega-oxidized to dicarboxylic acids [104,105]. In peroxisomes, the oxidation of C12 dicarboxylic acids results in chain shortening to adipic acid, suberic and sebacic acid [97]. Zellweger patients, who are deficient in peroxisomal b-oxidation, also excrete adipic acid, suberic and sebacic acid, however, they excrete increased amounts of suberic and sebacic acid in urine [106­108] suggesting there is a relative block in b-oxidation of suberic to adipic acid in these patients. It has been proposed that peroxisomes oxidize dicarboxylic acids down to adipic acid (C6-DCA), but it is unclear if this oxidation can proceed to succinic acid (C4-DCA), Treatment of rats with adipic acid showed that this dicarboxylic acid was not oxidized but was excreted as adipic acid [92], which may be due to two factors; one being that the activation of adipic acid to adipyl-CoA becomes rate-limiting as the dicarboxylyl-CoA synthetase does not appear to be active on short-chain substrates; or secondly that the b-oxidation enzymes may not handle dicarboxylic acids of six carbons, and therefore the adipic acid is not b-oxidized [109]. Characterization of peroxisomal ACOT's identified two acyl-CoA thioesterases that show activity towards dicarboxylic acids, namely ACOT4 and ACOT8. In mouse, ACOT4 is a specific succinyl-CoA thioesterase, with some low activity also towards glutaryl-CoA [27]. Although the human ACOT4 enzyme has a much broader substrate specificity than the mouse ACOT4, the highest activity is found with succinyl-CoA [31]. Acot4 mRNA is mainly expressed in kidney and liver in both mouse and human, which are the main organs of dicarboxylic acid formation. The identification

of these succinyl-CoA thioesterases suggests that the oxidation of dicarboxylic acids may continue to succinate, by hydrolysis of succinyl-CoA to succinate, which can then be excreted from peroxisomes into urine. Alternatively, based on the discussion above that b-oxidation of dicarboxylic acids may not proceed beyond adipic acid, the existence of such specific succinyl-CoA thioesterases in peroxisomes strongly suggests that succinyl-CoA is formed in peroxisomes, possibly by a hitherto unidentified pathway. One possibility is that the succinate formed during peroxisomal a-oxidation [110] may be activated to the CoA ester in peroxisomes, which may require hydrolysis for elimination. Succinyl-CoA is unlikely to be converted to a carnitine ester in peroxisomes, therefore elimination of succinyl-CoA would require the action of ACOT4. Interestingly, ACOT8 (the `general' peroxisomal acyl-CoA thioesterase) can also hydrolyze dicarboxylyl-CoAs to the free acid and CoASH, but the specificity appears to complement the activity of ACOT4 (Fig. 5) and mainly hydrolyzes longer chain dicarboxylic acids [27]. Given that ACOT8 is inhibited by CoASH, it is likely that the oxidation of dicarboxylic acids can proceed to produce shorter chain dicarboxylic acids during normal conditions. However, during conditions where b-oxidation rates are high and CoASH is sequestered for the thiolase reaction, such as during fasting, ACOT8 will be activated, thus producing longer chain dicarboxylic acids in peroxisomes. Taken together, these data suggest that ACOT4 and ACOT8 are involved in the hydrolysis of short-, medium- and long-chain dicarboxylyl-CoA esters, respectively, to release dicarboxylic acids for excretion in urine (for an overview see Fig. 4). It should be emphasized that a fraction of the dicarboxylic acids excreted in the urine in human are in fact conjugated to glycine, a

414

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421

Fig. 5. ACOT4 and ACOT8 both hydrolyze dicarboxylyl-CoA esters but with different specificities. Thioesterase activity of recombinantly expressed ACOT4 and ACOT8 were measured with short and medium-chain dicarboxylyl-CoAs at 25 lM. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. Figure reproduced with permission from J. Biol. Chem. [27].

reaction that may possibly be carried out by bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase (BAAT) or a mitochondrial/cytosolic acyltransferase. 3.2.3. ACOT6 in regulation of methyl branched fatty acid oxidation Phytol is formed from chlorophyll in the gut of ruminant animals and phytol is therefore ingested in the diet from dairy products. As mammals cannot utilize phytol directly, the metabolism of phytol requires conversion to phytanic acid (in the intestine or other tissues). Phytanic acid (3,7,11,15-tetramethylhexadecanoic acid) is a 3-methyl branched fatty acid and therefore cannot undergo b-oxidation directly. Therefore, phytanic acid is first activated to phytanoyl-CoA and subsequently metabolized to pristanic acid by a process known as a-oxidation (for review see [110]). Mutations in one of the genes involved in this process, phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase (PHYH), results in Refsum disease (for review on phytanic acid and human disease see [111]). This a-oxidation process occurs in peroxisomes by a dedicated set of enzymes, although it has been disputed if the final enzymatic step by a fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase also occurs in peroxisomes [112]. Recently however, alternative splicing of the fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase was shown to result in a dual localization in the endoplasmic reticulum and peroxisomes, indicating that all enzymes required for a-oxidation are indeed localized in peroxisomes [113]. The conversion of a 3-methyl branched fatty acid (phytanic acid) to a 2-methyl branched fatty acid (pristanic acid (2,6,10,14-tetramethylpentadecanoic acid)) results in a carboxylic acid that can then undergo b-oxidation. However, the b-oxidation of 2-methyl branched substrates is further complicated by the stereo-specificity of the substrate. Only 2S isomers of pristanic acid can undergo b-oxidation and therefore the 2R isomer needs to be converted to the 2S isomer, in a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme a-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR) [114,115]. As this enzyme contains both a mitochondrial targeting signal and a PTS1, the protein localizes in peroxisomes and mitochondria [116]. AMACR deficiency results in adult-onset sensory neuronal, motor-neuronal, and liver abnormalities [117,118]. The 2S isomer of pristanoyl-CoA undergoes b-oxidation in peroxisomes by the sequential reactions of branched-chain acyl-CoA oxidase (ACOX3), the D-bifunctional protein and SCPx. We recently identified an acyl-CoA thioesterase (ACOT6) that only hydrolyzes CoA esters of phytanic acid and pristanic acid,

and can therefore function as an auxiliary enzyme in the metabolism of alpha-methyl branched fatty acids [29]. This enzyme is localized in peroxisomes and has a Km of %24 lM for pristanoylCoA. The specific activity of the phytanoyl-CoA/pristanoyl-CoA thioesterase was very high in purified mouse liver peroxisomes, compared to the activity with myristoyl-CoA, and an anti-ACOT6 antibody immunoprecipitated essentially all of the peroxisomal phytanoyl/pristanoyl-CoA activity, but none of the myristoyl-CoA thioesterase activity, showing that ACOT6 is the main acyl-CoA thioesterase in peroxisomes that hydrolyzes these branched-chain CoA esters [29]. Surprisingly, Acot6 mRNA is most highly expressed in white adipose tissue, but it was shown to be strongly co-expressed with Acox3 in most tissues, the latter which is the presumed rate-limiting enzyme involved in the b-oxidation of pristanoyl-CoA. White adipose tissue is the main organ involved in the storage of pristanic acid, and in rat approx. 10% of ingested pristanic acid is found in white adipose tissue and liver one week after treatment [119,120]. The identification of an ACOT specific for branched-chain acyl-CoA esters in white adipose tissue suggested an unexpected role for ACOT6 in this tissue. As stated above, the 2R isomer of pristanoyl-CoA must be converted to the 2S isomer before it can be b-oxidized. Expression analysis showed that Amacr mRNA levels are very low in white adipose tissue, suggesting that conversion of the 2R isomer to the 2S isomer may be ratelimiting and thereby hamper b-oxidation of pristanic acid [29]. Strikingly, ACOT6 does not show stereo-specificity for the 2R and 2S isomers and can therefore hydrolyze both isomers of pristanoyl-CoA. The current hypothesis is therefore that the 2R isomer would be hydrolyzed by ACOT6 in white adipose tissue, due to inadequate activity of AMACR, to release the free acid and CoASH, and the 2R pristanic acid may exit the peroxisome to be re-activated to the CoA ester in the cytosol and esterified into triacylglycerols. Alternatively, the 2R isomer could enter the circulation to be transported back to the liver where it can be racemized by the AMACR to the 2S isomer, thus allowing its degradation by peroxisomal b-oxidation (Fig. 6). Pristanic acid undergoes three rounds of b-oxidation in peroxisomes, resulting in the production of 4,8-dimethylnonanoyl-CoA (DMN-CoA). This DMN-CoA can then be hydrolyzed to free dimethylnonanoic acid (DMN) by ACOT8 or ACOT5 (the latter being most highly expressed in white adipose tissue), since both enzymes show appreciable activity towards DMN-CoA [28,39]. However, it may be that ACOT8 is most significant in this

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421

415

Fig. 6. The role of ACOT6 in methyl branched acyl-CoA metabolism in peroxisomes. Phytanoyl-CoA enters peroxisomes, possibly through the ABCD3 transporter. The aoxidation of phytanoyl-CoA to pristanoyl-CoA results in conversion of a 3-methyl branched fatty acid to a 2-methyl branched fatty acid, which is then a substrate for boxidation. Pristanoyl-CoA undergoes 3 cycles of b-oxidation, resulting in the production of dimethylnonanoyl-CoA (DMN-CoA), which can either be esterified to carnitine by CROT, or alternatively hydrolyzed to the free acid by ACOT8 or ACOT5, and be further oxidized in mitochondria. Propionyl-CoA and acetyl-CoA are produced from the boxidation of methyl branched fatty acids, which will be substrates for CRAT or ACOT12. The peroxisomal acetate/propionate will presumably equilibrate with the cytosolic pool, whereas the acetylcarnitine/propionylcarnitine will be transported to the mitochondria for further oxidation. ACOT6 can hydrolyze pristanoyl-CoA and phytanoyl-CoA directly to the free acid, allowing for their exit from peroxisomes to cytosol, where they can be re-activated to the CoA ester for esterification into triglycerides (TAG). ACOT6 is active in white adipose tissue to hydrolyze the 2R isomer of pristanoyl-CoA to pristanic acid, which can then be exported to liver to be converted to the 2S isomer by the AMACR (see Section 3.2.3 for further details) and be b-oxidized. Pristanic and phytanic acid are ligands for the PPARa [166], thus ACOT6 may also function in ligand supply for this nuclear receptor, as discussed in [29].

hydrolysis as it has a Km of 5 lM for this substrate. Alternatively, DMN can be esterified to carnitine by CROT (in liver, intestine and kidney), and transferred to mitochondria for further degradation to 2,6-dimethylheptanoyl-CoA [72]. 3.2.4. Acyl-CoA thioesterases and synthesis of polyunsaturated fatty acids Docosahexanoic acid (DHA) (C22:6nÀ3) is the major nÀ3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) in adult mammalian brain and retina and is found in amino phospholipids of cell membranes. It is well established that DHA formation involves a combined reaction sequence of elongation and desaturation with a final step of b-oxidation in peroxisomes, in which C24:6nÀ3 is b-oxidized to C22:6nÀ3 and C24:5nÀ6 oxidized to C22:5nÀ6 (for review see [121]). Fibroblasts from Zellweger patients cannot produce DHA [122,123], confirming that the final step of DHA formation takes place in peroxisomes. The DHA is then incorporated into phospholipids in the endoplasmic reticulum after it's synthesis in peroxisomes. The enzymes involved in b-oxidation of C24:6nÀ3 to C22:6nÀ3 have been elucidated and involves the straight-chain acyl-CoA oxidase (ACOX1), the D-bifunctional protein and both the 3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase and SCPx [122]. Although, to date no specific acyl-CoA thioesterase enzyme has been identified in the metabolism of DHA in peroxisomes, acyl-CoA thioesterase activity towards C22:6nÀ3 and C24:6nÀ3 has been identified in purified mouse kidney peroxisomes and it was suggested that DHA could be transported to the endoplasmic reticulum as the free acid [124]. Given the wide substrate specificity of ACOT8 and its ubiquitous tissue expression, it is likely that this enzyme can hydrolyze DHA to the free acid in peroxisomes, and work is currently underway in our laboratory to elucidate which ACOT is involved in this process.

4. The acyltransferases involved in conjugation (amidation) of bile acids and fatty acids in peroxisomes 4.1. The acyl-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase gene cluster There is a further gene cluster related to the Type-I Acots (discussed in Section 2.1.1), which contains three distinct genes localized on chromosome 4 B3 in mouse (Fig. 7). These genes are named bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase (Baat) and acyl-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase 1 and 2 (Acnat1 and 2), which show approximately 40% sequence identity to the Acot3, 4, 5 and 6 at amino acid level. The Baat and the Acnats show about 55% sequence identity to each other, whereas Acnat1 and Acnat2 show 95% sequence identity to each other. All three of these gene products appear to be localized in peroxisomes, although there is still some confusion regarding the cellular localization of BAAT (see below). The corresponding gene ``cluster" in humans only contains two genes, one coding for BAAT, and an apparent ACNAT pseudogene, which contains in-frame stop codons and therefore would not code for a functional protein (Fig. 7).

4.1.1. Peroxisomes contain a bile-acid conjugating enzyme catalyzing the terminal step in bile-acid synthesis The conjugation (or amidation) of bile acids occurs in peroxisomes, resulting in the production of conjugated bile acids that are excreted into bile and stored in the gallbladder. This final step in the conversion of cholesterol to bile acids involves one round of b-oxidation of the side-chain of the C27 bile-acid precursors trihydroxycoprostanoyl-CoA and dihydroxycoprostanoyl-CoA to choloyl-CoA and chenodeoxycholoyl-CoA (the C24 bile acids),

416

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421

Fig. 7. The acyltransferase gene cluster in human and mouse. The human genome contains an acyltransferase gene cluster localized on chromosome 9q31.1, encoding for the bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase (BAAT) enzyme and a further acyl-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase (ACNAT) pseudogene. BAAT contains a variant of the peroxisomal targeting signal -SQL, whereas the ACNAT pseudogene contains -SKL. The ACNAT pseudogene contains in-frame stop codons that will not translate into a functional protein. In mouse, a related gene cluster on chromosome 4 B3 contains three acyltransferase genes Baat, Acnat1 and Acnat2. BAAT contains a variant of the peroxisomal targeting signal, ending -SQL, whereas ACNAT1 and ACNAT2 contain canonical peroxisomal targeting signals -SKL at their carboxyterminal ends.

respectively [125­129]. These C24 bile acids are then conjugated (or amidated) to glycine or taurine (depending on the species) by the enzyme bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase (BAAT) [130­134]. The intracellular localization of BAAT has been reported to be both cytosolic and peroxisomal. In the 1960s, bile acid conjugation activity was reported in the lysosomal fraction (or possibly the peroxisomal fraction) of human liver [135] and was later identified in the microsomal and peroxisomal fractions of rat liver homogenates [136]. Further studies showed that BAAT activity is distributed in microsomes, cytosol or peroxisomes in rat, mouse and human [132,136­141]. In view of the data showing BAAT activity in cytosol/microsomes and peroxisomes, it has been hypothesized that two pathways for amidation of bile acids exist, one pathway in peroxisomes for the amidation of the de-novo synthesized primary bile acids, cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid, and a second pathway in the cytosol for the re-amidation of deconjugated primary and secondary bile acids recycled back to the liver via the enterohepatic circulation. The human very long-chain acylCoA synthetase homolog 2 (VLCS), also known as BACS (bile acidCoA synthetase), was shown to activate the primary bile acids cholate [142] and chenodeoxycholate, and also the secondary bile acids deoxycholate and lithocholate [143] in the cytosol, also suggesting two pathways of bile acid metabolism, with the cytosolic pathway being responsible for reactivation/reconjugation of recycled bile acids. Recently, recombinantly expressed human BAAT has also been shown to conjugate fatty acids (mainly long-chain acyl-CoAs) to glycine and taurine [133] (Fig. 8). Mouse, rat and human BAAT proteins show approx 70% sequence identity to each other, which all contain a carboxyterminal serine, glutamine, leucine sequence (-SQL). This tripeptide is a variant of the consensus peroxisomal targeting signal of serine, lysine, leucine (-SKL), known to target proteins to peroxisomes [144]. Studies examining the cellular localization of BAAT using green fluorescent fusion proteins showed that this fusion protein was entirely cytosolic in human skin fibroblasts [133], which was confirmed in other studies [145]. However, in rat and human primary hepatocytes, BAAT was localized in peroxisomes [145], suggesting that targeting of

non-consensus PTS1-containing proteins may be more efficient in liver cells than in fibroblasts. In this study by Pellicoro, co-transfection of human BAAT and a peroxisomal marker DSRed-SKL in rat primary hepatocytes, resulted in a cytosolic localization of BAAT, suggesting that the peroxisomal import machinery becomes saturated with DSRed-SKL and therefore targeting of BAAT, which contains a non-consensus targeting signal of -SQL, is inefficient. As a result, in liver where BAAT is highly expressed, the protein is likely to be mainly peroxisomal and involved in the amidation of de-novo synthesized bile acids as discussed in a recent review on peroxisomes and bile acid biosynthesis [146]. However, it still cannot be excluded at this stage that BAAT has a dual localization in cytosol and peroxisomes, and that this dual localization may be affected by pharmacological treatment [137]. Thus, the mechanism for targeting of BAAT to peroxisomes is still not fully understood and needs further consideration. The catalytic triad of BAAT has been elucidated and involves a cysteine (in a SerXaaCysXaaGly motif) aspartic acid and histidine, similar to the Type-I ACOT enzymes, however the ACOTs contain an active site serine in place of the cysteine in BAAT [133,147]. Interestingly, the ACNATs also contain an active site serine, however this serine is localized in a SerXaaSerXaaGly motif and not in a GlyXaaSerXaaGly motif common to the ACOTs [148]. A mutation in the BAAT protein (and tight junction protein 2) in an Amish population resulted in familial hypercholanemia, which is characterized by elevated serum bile acid concentrations, itching and fat malabsorption [149]. 4.1.2. Peroxisomes contain two putative acyl-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferases that conjugate fatty acids and possibly other carboxylic acids Two further genes related to Baat have been identified in mouse (Fig. 7), however as stated earlier, the ACNAT gene in human is likely a pseudogene. These mouse genes encode two novel acylCoA:amino acid N-acyltransferases (ACNAT1 and ACNAT2) and one of these enzymes, ACNAT1, was recently characterized [148]. These two ACNAT proteins show approx 55% sequence identity to

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421

417

Fig. 8. Schematic representation of the roles of acyltransferases in peroxisomal lipid metabolism. The final step in the formation of the primary bile acids, choloyl-CoA and chenodeoxycholoyl-CoA involves one cycle of b-oxidation in peroxisomes, resulting in the formation of a C24 bile acid from a C27 bile acid trihydroxycoprostanoyl-CoA (THCA-CoA) or dihydroxycoprostanoyl-CoA (DHCA-CoA), with the concomitant release of propionyl-CoA. These C27 bile acids may enter the peroxisome via the ABCD3 transporter, although this has not yet been proved. The conjugation (amidation) to glycine or taurine is carried out by BAAT to produce a glyco- or tauro-conjugated bile acid, which is then excreted in bile. ACOT8 can also hydrolyze the CoA esters of choloyl-CoA and chenodeoxycholoyl-CoA, resulting in free bile acids cholic acid (CA) and chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), however the physiological function of this enzyme in bile acid synthesis is not yet clear. Very long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA) are transported into the peroxisome via the ABCD1 transporter and undergo b-oxidation, to produce chain-shortened acyl-CoAs, with the concomitant release of acetyl-CoA. These very long chain and long-chain acyl-CoAs are substrates for conjugation (amidation) to taurine by ACNAT1, resulting in the production of an N-acyltaurine. These N-acyltaurines can then be excreted in bile, or be transported in blood to other tissues. N-acyltaurines have also been shown to activate the transient receptor potential ion channels TRPV1 and TRPV4 [153]. Human BAAT has also been shown to conjugate long-chain and very long-chain acyl-CoAs to glycine and taurine [133], but it is not known if the mouse or rat BAAT have this activity. The propionyl-CoA or acetyl-CoA produced by b-oxidation can be substrates for either the short-chain carnitine acetyltransferase (CRAT) or the shortchain acyl-CoA thioesterase (ACOT12), resulting in production of the free acid or carnitine ester, depending on the tissue involved [30]. The peroxisomal acetate/propionate will presumably equilibrate with the cytosolic pool, whereas the acetylcarnitine/propionylcarnitine will be transported to the mitochondria for further oxidation.

BAAT, with 95% sequence identity to each other. ACNAT1 and ACNAT2 both contain a consensus peroxisomal targeting signal of -SKL at their carboxyterminals, which localize the proteins to peroxisomes [148] (and Reilly et al., unpublished results). Acnat1 mRNA is mainly expressed in liver and kidney in mouse, and characterization of recombinant ACNAT1 protein identified it as a peroxisomal acyltransferase involved in conjugation of mainly very long-chain and long-chain fatty acids (C16­C24) to taurine, with some very low activity with bile acids [148]. The identification of this taurine conjugating activity in peroxisomes suggests a possible novel pathway for metabolism/excretion of long-chain fatty acids as taurine conjugates (Fig. 8). Interestingly, the group of Cravatt recently identified taurine-conjugated fatty acids (N-acyltaurines) as a novel class of endogenous signaling lipids. These N-acyltaurines (NATs) were first detected by global metabolic profiling in the fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) knockout mouse model in brain, spinal cord, testes and liver [150,151]. The FAAH is an integral membrane protein that degrades endogenous signaling lipids [152], thereby regulating in vivo levels of signaling molecules. Notably, these taurine conjugates were mainly of C16­C26 in chain length, similar to the chain length specificity for ACNAT1. In wildtype FAAH animals, these NATs were detected at approx 20­ 50 pmol/g tissue, however, in the FAAH knockout mouse model, levels of these NATs rose to nmol/g levels. Taurine conjugates of unsaturated long-chain fatty acids such as arachidonoyltaurine (C20:4 taurine) were also detected in liver and kidney at concentrations of 20 pmol/g in liver and 157 pmol/g in kidney, respectively. Interestingly, arachidonoyltaurine was shown to activate transient receptor potential (TRP) channels, TRPV1 and TRPV4,

which are expressed in kidney, with an EC50 value of 28 lM and 21 lM respectively, suggesting a role for taurine conjugated fatty acids in cell signalling [153]. However, arachidonoyl-CoA is a poor substrate for ACNAT1, suggesting that there is one or more acyltransferases that can conjugate this fatty acid to taurine, possibly ACNAT2. However the substrate specificity of ACNAT2 has not yet been determined. The TRPV1 and TRPV4 calcium channels are proposed to play roles in regulation of blood pressure and osmotic sensation [154], however further physiological studies are warranted to elucidate the role of ACNAT1 (or ACNAT2) in these processes. The identification of N-acyltaurines (especially saturated N-acyltaurines) in brain raises the question if these molecules are formed in situ in brain or could be synthesized by ACNAT1 in liver and kidney, and be transported to the brain via the bloodstream. We have detected long-chain NATs in serum, which under normal conditions are detected at low levels, however during prolonged fasting, strongly elevated levels can be detected (Reilly et al., unpublished observation), suggesting that amidation of fatty acids may provide an important excretory pathway for fatty acids under some conditions. NATs are also substrates for FAAH, which can hydrolyze the amides to the free acid plus taurine, and thereby regulate their in vivo levels [151]. Searches of the literature showed that taurine and/or glycine conjugation of a number of physiological substrates and xenobiotic compounds, including a number of pharmaceutical drugs, involves partial b-oxidation followed by conjugation to taurine or glycine, and subsequent excretion in urine or bile. However, there are large species differences in the taurine conjugates identified, with

418

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421

taurine conjugates of cerivastatin metabolites identified in dog [155], taurine conjugated prostaglandins identified in rat [156] and an unusual taurine conjugate of ganglioside GM2 identified in Tay-Sachs brain [157]. These aspects should be interesting to explore in future studies in relation to species-specific expression and substrate specificities of these acyltransferases that may also have very important functions in drug metabolism. The substrate specificity of ACNAT2 has not yet been characterized, but as this enzyme is also peroxisomal and shows 95% sequence identity to ACNAT1, we speculate that this enzyme also functions as a taurine conjugator in peroxisomes, with the likely substrates being unsaturated fatty acids and possibly xenobiotics. As stated above, taurine conjugates of unsaturated fatty acids have been identified in brain, liver and kidney [150,153], however ACNAT1 only conjugates saturated fatty acids.

5. Regulation of peroxisomal acyl-CoA thioesterases and acyltransferases 5.1. Regulation of Acots and acyltransferases in peroxisomes Currently, there is little information available on regulation of peroxisomal ACOT enzymes, however all are targets of the PPARa. Fibrates belong to a group of compounds that act as ligands for the PPARa, and treatment of rodents with these compounds results in an increase in the number and size of peroxisomes, and in an increase in peroxisomal b-oxidation [6]. The enzymes of the straight-chain b-oxidation pathway are strongly upregulated via fibrate treatment, whereas the enzymes in branched chain oxidation are unaltered by such treatment [158]. In line with an increase in peroxisomal b-oxidation, Acot3, 4, 5 and 6 are all increased by fibrate treatment at mRNA and protein level [27­29]. This increase in transcription and translation is dependent on the PPARa, as the increase in Acot3, 4, 5 and 6 mRNA and protein was ablated in the PPARa knockout mouse model. Similarly, Acot8 is also increased at mRNA level by fibrates in a PPARa-dependent manner [39]. During fasting conditions, also known to result in increased PPARa activation and up-regulation of peroxisomal b-oxidation, only Acot3, Acot4, Acot5 and Acot8 are increased at the mRNA level [27,28,39]. At present there are no data available on quantitative changes in Acot12 mRNA in response to fibrate treatment, but ACOT12 activity is increased in the peroxisomal fraction (per gram of liver tissue) and in the cytosolic fraction, suggesting that Acot12 expression is indeed increased in response to fibrates [48]. Recently, a list of genes compiled from array data of PPARa wild-type and PPARa-null mice, showed that Acot12 is regulated by fasting and Wy-14,643 in mouse liver [159]. Ebisuno et al. also showed an increase of ACOT12 activity in early diabetic conditions, and by cholesterol and clofibrate feeding, but no change was observed in chronic diabetes [160]. In summary, the findings that the expression (mRNA and/or protein levels) of all peroxisomal ACOT's is increased in response to PPARa activation, suggests that these enzymes promote b-oxidation in peroxisomes. Furthermore, Acot3 mRNA was shown to be increased 13-fold in mouse liver following a chemical knockout of the pantothenate kinase (PanK), the rate limiting enzyme in CoA biosynthesis [161]. Interestingly, the cytosolic and mitochondrial Acot (Acot1 and Acot2 respectively) mRNA levels were also increased over 40-fold in the PanK knockout, suggesting that the thioesterases are indeed important enzymes in regulating hepatic CoASH levels. The mouse ACOT3 was also recently identified in a proteomic study of mitochondrial phosphoproteins, as a phosphorylated protein, with phosphorylation on serine 67 of ACOT3 (serine 56 in ACOT4, 5 and 6) [162]. Interestingly, this serine is conserved in all mouse peroxisomal ACOTs

but not in human ACOT4, suggesting a possible species-specific phosphorylation of mouse peroxisomal ACOT's. As Acnat1 and Acnat2 have only recently been identified and characterized, there is currently little information on their regulation, but Acnat1 does not appear to be regulated by fibrate treatment, fasting or bile acid treatment (unpublished observation). In contrast, Acnat2 mRNA is strongly increased by treatment of mice with fibrates and statins (Reilly et al. unpublished results). In mouse, Baat mRNA and activity has been shown to be downregulated by fibrate and Wy-14,643 treatment [137,141], but in the rat, treatment with clofibrate results in an increased activity of BAAT in peroxisomes in male mice, but the activity is decreased in female mice [137]. Baat mRNA is increased by cholestyramine (a bile acid binding resin) treatment in mouse liver [141], whereas in rat, BAAT activity is unchanged by cholestyramine treatment [137], showing a distinct species difference. Baat is regulated by the farnesoid X receptor (FXR) in the rat via an inverted repeat 1 (IR-1) element located in the first intron of the gene and Baat mRNA levels were increased in rats following treatment with a synthetic FXR ligand [163]. Baat expression is also regulated by the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF-4a) via a response element in the promoter and expression of the Baat mRNA is not detectable in the HNF-4a knockout mouse, resulting in markedly elevated levels of unconjugated bile acids in gallbladder in this knockout model [164]. Recently Baat mRNA expression was shown to be reduced in sepsis in rat via the retinoid X receptor-alpha [165]. Taken together, the profound regulation of the ACOTs and acyltransferase genes by various nuclear receptors support the notion that these enzymes have important regulatory functions in different metabolic pathways. 6. Concluding remarks and perspectives The identification of a family of acyl-CoA thioesterases/acyltransferases in peroxisomes has led to the identification of novel metabolic pathways for fatty acids in this organelle. It is hoped that future studies using knockout mouse models and knockdown studies will help to identify precise roles for these enzymes in peroxisomal lipid metabolism, which could lead to identification of patients with new and previously uncharacterized peroxisomal disorders. Acknowledgements This study was supported by the Swedish Research Council, the FP6 European Union Project ``Peroxisome" (LSHG-CT-2004512018), AFA sjukförsäkrings jubileumsstiftelse, Åke Wibergs stiftelse, Lars Hiertas Minne, Fredrik and Ingrid Thurings Stiftelse, Ruth and Richard Julins Stiftelse, and Stiftelsen Professor Nanna Svartz fond. References
[1] Rhodin J. Correlation of ultrastructural organization and function in normal and experimentally changed proximal convoluted tubule cells of the mouse kidney. Aktiebolaget Godvil 1954; Doctoral thesis, Karolinska Institutet. [2] De Duve C. Functions of microbodies (peroxisomes). J Cell Biol 1965;27:25A­6A. [3] De Duve C, Baudhuin P. Peroxisomes (microbodies and related particles). Physiol Rev 1966;46:323­57. [4] Goldfischer S, Moore CL, Johnson AB, Spiro AJ, Valsamis MP, Wisniewski HK, et al. Peroxisomal and mitochondrial defects in the cerebro-hepato-renal syndrome. Science 1973;182:62­4. [5] Hashimoto T. Peroxisomal beta-oxidation enzymes. Neurochem Res 1999;24:551­63. [6] Reddy JK, Mannaerts GP. Peroxisomal lipid metabolism. Annu Rev Nutr 1994;14:343­70. [7] Hiltunen JK, Qin Y-M. Beta-oxidation ­ strategies for the metabolism of a wide variety of acyl-CoA esters. Biochim Biophys Acta 2000;1484:117­28.

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421 [8] Wanders RJA, Waterham HR. Biochemistry of mammalian peroxisomes revisited. Annu Rev Biochem 2006;75:295­332. [9] Wanders RJA. Metabolic and molecular basis of peroxisomal disorders: a review. Am J Hum Genet 2004;126A:355­75. [10] Platta HW, Erdmann R. Peroxisomal dynamics. Trends Cell Biol 2007;17:474­84. [11] Weller S, Gould SJ, Valle D. Peroxisome biogenesis disorders. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2003;4:165­211. [12] Schrader M, Fahimi HD. The peroxisome: still a mysterious organelle. Histochem Cell Biol 2008. epub 15 Feb 2008. [13] Gould SJ, Collins CS. Opinion: peroxisomal-protein import: is it really that complex? Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2002;3:382­9. [14] Gergely J, Hele P, Ramakrishnan CV. Succinyl and acetyl coenzyme A deacylases. J Biol Chem 1952:323­35. [15] Hunt MC, Alexson SEH. The role acyl-CoA thioesterases play in mediating intracellular lipid metabolism. Prog Lipid Res 2002;41:99­130. [16] Hunt MC, Yamada J, Maltais LJ, Wright MW, Podesta EJ, Alexson SEH. A revised nomenclature for mammalian acyl-CoA thioesterases/hydrolases. J Lipid Res 2005;46:2029­32. [17] Berge RK, Flatmark T, Osmundsen H. Enhancement of long-chain acyl-CoA hydrolase activity in peroxisomes and mitochondria of rat liver by peroxisomal proliferators. Eur J Biochem 1984;141:637­44. [18] Berge RK, Skrede S, Farstad M. Effects of clofibrate on the intracellular localization of palmitoyl-CoA hydrolase and palmitoyl-L-carnitine hydrolase in rat liver. FEBS Lett 1981;124:43­7. [19] Svensson LT, Alexson SEH, Hiltunen JK. Very long chain and long chain acylCoA thioesterases in rat liver mitochondria. Identification, purification, characterization, and induction by peroxisome proliferators. J Biol Chem 1995;270:12177­83. [20] Miyazawa S, Furuta S, Hashimoto T. Induction of a novel long-chain acyl-CoA hydrolase in rat liver by administration of peroxisome proliferators. Eur J Biochem 1981;117:425­30. [21] Mandard S, Müller M, Kersten S. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a target genes. Cell Mol Life Sci 2004;61:393­416. [22] Wilcke M, Alexson SEH. Characterization of acyl-CoA thioesterase activity in isolated rat liver peroxisomes. Eur J Biochem 1994;222:803­11. [23] Alexson SEH, Osmundsen H, Berge RK. The presence of acyl-CoA hydrolase in rat brown-adipose-tissue peroxisomes. Biochem J 1989;262:41­6. [24] Svensson LT, Wilcke M, Alexson SEH. Peroxisome proliferators differentially regulate long-chain acyl-CoA thioesterases in rat liver. Eur J Biochem 1995;230:813­20. [25] Yamada J, Matsumoto I, Furihata T, Sakuma M, Suga T. Purification and properties of long-chain acyl-CoA hydrolases from the liver cytosol of rats treated with peroxisome proliferator. Arch Biochem Biophys 1994;308:118­25. [26] Hunt MC, Nousiainen SEB, Huttunen MK, Orii K, Svensson LT, Alexson SEH. Peroxisome proliferator-induced long chain acyl-CoA thioesterases comprise a highly conserved novel multi-gene family involved in lipid metabolism. J Biol Chem 1999;274:34317­26. [27] Westin MAK, Hunt MC, Alexson SEH. The identification of a succinyl-CoA thioesterase suggests a novel pathway for succinate production in peroxisomes. J Biol Chem 2005;280:38125­32. [28] Westin MAK, Alexson SEH, Hunt MC. Molecular cloning and characterization of two mouse peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARa)regulated peroxisomal acyl-CoA thioesterases. J Biol Chem 2004;279:21841­8. [29] Westin MAK, Hunt MC, Alexson SEH. Peroxisomes contain a specific phytanoyl-CoA/pristanoyl-CoA thioesterase acting as a novel auxiliary enzyme in alpha- and beta-oxidation of methyl-branched fatty acids in mouse. J Biol Chem 2007;282:26707­16. [30] Westin MAK, Hunt MC, Alexson SEH. Short- and medium-chain carnitine acyltransferases and acyl-CoA thioesterases in mouse provide complementary systems for transport of beta-oxidation products out of peroxisomes. Cell Mol Life Sci 2008;65:982­90. [31] Hunt MC, Rautanen A, Westin MAK, Svensson LT, Alexson SEH. Analysis of mouse and human acyl-CoA thioesterase (ACOT) gene clusters shows that convergent functional evolution results in a reduced number of peroxisomal ACOTs. FASEB J 2006;20:1855­64. [32] Huhtinen K, O'Byrne J, Lindquist PJG, Contreras JA, Alexson SEH. The peroxisome proliferator-induced cytosolic type I acyl-CoA thioesterase (CTE-I) is a serine­histidine­aspartic acid alpha/beta hydrolase. J Biol Chem 2002;277:3424­32. [33] Watanabe H, Shiratori T, Shoji H, Miyatake S, Okazaki Y, Ikuta K, et al. A novel acyl-CoA thioesterase enhances its enzymatic activity by direct binding with HIV Nef. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1997;238:234­9. [34] Liu LX, Margottin F, Le Gall S, Schwartz O, Selig L, Benarous R, et al. Binding of HIV-1 Nef to a novel thioesterase enzyme correlates with Nef-mediated CD4 down-regulation. J Biol Chem 1997;272:13779­85. [35] Cohen GB, Rangan VS, Chen BK, Smith S, Baltimore D. The human thioesterase II protein binds to a site on HIV-1 Nef critical for CD4 down-regulation. J Biol Chem 2000;275:23097­105. [36] Jones JM, Nau K, Geraghty MT, Erdmann R, Gould SJ. Identification of peroxisomal acyl-CoA thioesterases in yeast and human. J Biol Chem 1999;274:9216­23. [37] Maeda I, Delessert S, Hasegawa S, Seto Y, Zuber S, Poirier Y. The peroxisomal acyl-CoA thioesterase Pte1p from Saccharomyces cerevisiae is required for

419

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47] [48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52] [53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57] [58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

efficient degradation of short straight chain and branched chain fatty acids. J Biol Chem 2006;281:11729­35. Tilton GB, Shockey JM, Browse J. Biochemical and molecular characterization of ACH2, an Acyl-CoA thioesterase from Arabidopsis thaliana. J Biol Chem 2003;279:7487­94. Hunt MC, Solaas K, Kase BF, Alexson SEH. Characterization of an acyl-CoA thioesterase that functions as a major regulator of peroxisomal lipid metabolism. J Biol Chem 2002;277:1128­38. Ofman R, el Mrabet L, Dacremont G, Spijer D, Wanders RJA. Demonstration of dimethylnonanoyl-CoA thioesterase activity in rat liver peroxisomes followed by purification and molecular cloning of the thioesterase involved. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002;290:629­34. Ishizuka M, Toyama Y, Watanabe H, Fujiki Y, Takeuchi A, Yamasaki S, et al. Overexpression of human acyl-CoA thioesterase upregulates peroxisome biogenesis. Exp Cell Res 2004;297:127­41. Li J, Derewenda U, Dauter Z, Smith S, Derewenda ZS. Crystal structure of the Escherichia coli thioesterase II, a homolog of the human Nef binding enzyme. Nat Struct Biol 2000;7:555­9. Zhuang Z, Song F, Zhao H, Li L, Cao J, Eisenstein E, et al. Divergence of function in the hot dog fold enzyme superfamily: the bacterial thioesterase YciA. Biochemistry 2008;47:2789­96. Prass RL, Isohashi F, Utter MF. Purification and characterization of an extramitochondrial acetyl coenzyme A hydrolase from rat liver. J Biol Chem 1980;255:5215­23. Suematsu N, Okamoto K, Shibata K, Nakanishi Y, Isohashi F. Molecular cloning and functional expression of rat liver cytosolic acetyl-CoA hydrolase. Eur J Biochem 2001;268:2700­9. Suematsu N, Okamoto K, Isohashi F. Mouse cytosolic acetyl-CoA hydrolase, a novel candidate for a key enzyme involved in fat metabolism: cDNA cloning, sequencing and functional expression. Acta Biochim Pol 2002;49:937­45. Suematsu N, Isohashi F. Molecular cloning and functional expression of human cytosolic acetyl-CoA hydrolase. Acta Biochim Pol 2006;53:553­61. Nakanishi Y, Okamoto K, Isohashi F. Subcellular distribution of ATPstimulated and ADP-inhibited acetyl-CoA hydrolase in livers from control and clofibrate-treated rats: comparison of the cytosolic and peroxisomal enzyme. J Biochem (Tokyo) 1994;115:328­32. Wiese S, Gronemeyer T, Ofman R, Kunze M, Grou CP, Almeida JA, et al. Proteomic characterization of mouse kidney peroxisomes by tandem mass spectrometry and protein correlation profiling. Mol Cell Proteomics 2007;6:2045­57. Söling H-D, Rescher C. On the regulation of cold-labile cytosolic and of mitochondrial acetyl-CoA hydrolase in rat liver. Eur J Biochem 1985;147:111­7. Suga T. Drug metabolism in peroxisomes: involvement of peroxisomal betaoxidation system in the oxidative chain-shortening of xenobiotic acyl compounds. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet 2003;18:155­62. Watkins PA. Very-long-chain acyl-CoA synthetases. J Biol Chem 2008;283:1773­7. Kemp S, Wanders RJA. X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy: very long-chain fatty acid metabolism, ABC half-transporters and the complicated route to treatment. Mol Genet Metab 2007;90:268­76. Mosser J, Douar AM, Sarde CO, Kioschis P, Feil R, Moser H, et al. Putative Xlinked adrenoleukodystrophy gene shares unexpected homology with ABC transporters. Nature 1993;361:726­30. Imanaka T, Aihara K, Takano T, Yamashita A, Sato R, Suzuki Y, et al. Characterization of the 70-kDa peroxisomal membrane protein, an ATP binding cassette transporter. J Biol Chem 1999;274:11968­76. Visser WF, van Roermund CWT, Ijlst L, Waterham HR, Wanders RJA. Metabolite transport across the peroxisomal membrane. Biochem J 2007;401:365­75. Osumi T, Ozasa H, Hashimoto T. Molecular cloning of cDNA for rat acyl-CoA oxidase. J Biol Chem 1984;259:2031­4. Schepers L, Van Veldhoven PP, Casteels M, Eyssen HJ, Mannaerts GP. Presence of three acyl-CoA oxidases in rat liver peroxisomes. An inducible fatty acylCoA oxidase, a noninducible fatty acyl-CoA oxidase, and a noninducible trihydroxycoprostanoyl-CoA oxidase. J Biol Chem 1990;265:5242­6. Nohammer C, El-Shabrawi Y, Schauer S, Hiden M, Berger J, Forss-Petter S, et al. cDNA cloning and analysis of tissue-specific expression of mouse peroxisomal straight-chain acyl-CoA oxidase. Eur J Biochem 2000;267:1254­60. Baumgart E, Vanhooren JC, Fransen M, Marynen P, Puype M, Vanderkerckhove J, et al. Molecular characterization of the human peroxisomal branched-chain acyl-CoA oxidase: cDNA cloning, chromosomal assignment, tissue distribution, and evidence for the absence of the protein in Zellweger syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996;93:13748­53. Aoyama T, Tsushima K, Souri M, Kamijo T, Suzuki Y, Shimozawa N, et al. Molecular cloning and functional expression of a human peroxisomal acylcoenzyme A oxidase. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1994;198:1113­8. Jiang LL, Miyazawa S, Hashimoto T. Purification and properties of rat D-3hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratase: D-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratase/D-3hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase bifunctional protein. J Biochem 1996;120:633­41. Qin YM, Poutanen MH, Helander HM, Kvist AP, Silvari KM, Schmitz W, et al. Peroxisomal multifunctional enzyme of beta-oxidation metabolizing D-3hydroxyacyl-CoA esters in rat liver: molecular cloning, expression and characterization. Biochem J 1997;321:21­8.

420

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421 C16-dicarboxylic acids in unstarved, starved and diabetic rats. Biochim Biophys Acta 1982;710:477­84. Bergseth S, Hokland BM, Bremer J. Metabolism of dicarboxylic acids in vivo and in the perfused kidney of the rat. Biochim Biophys Acta 1988; 961:103­9. Mortensen PB. C6­C10-dicarboxylic acids in liver and kidney tissue in normal, diabetic ketotic and clofibrate-treated rats. Biochim Biophys Acta 1986;878:14­9. Sanders RJ, Ofman R, Valianpour F, Kemp S, Wanders RJA. Evidence for two enzymatic pathways for x-oxidation of docosanoic acid in rat liver microsomes. J Lipid Res 2005;46:1001­8. Björkhem I. On the mechanism of regulation of x-oxidation of fatty acids. J Biol Chem 1976;251:5259­66. Kølvraa S, Gregersen N. In vitro studies on the oxidation of medium-chain dicarboxylic acids in rat liver. Biochim Biophys Acta 1986;876:515­25. Vamecq J, Draye JP, Brison J. Rat liver metabolism of dicarboxylic acids. Am J Physiol 1989;256:G680­8. Vamecq J, Draye JP. Peroxisomal and mitochondrial beta-oxidation of monocarboxylyl-CoA, omega-hydroxymonocarboxylyl-CoA and dicarboxylyl-CoA esters in tissues from untreated and clofibrate-treated rats. J Biochem (Tokyo) 1989;106:216­22. Cerdan S, Künnecke B, Dölle A, Seelig J. In situ metabolism of 1,omega medium chain dicarboxylic acids in the liver of intact rats as detected by 13C and 1H NMR. J Biol Chem 1988;263:11664­74. Mortensen PB, Kølvraa S, Gregersen N, Rasmussen K. Cyanide-insensitive and clofibrate enhanced beta-oxidation of dodecanedioic acid in rat liver. An indication of peroxisomal beta-oxidation of N-dicarboxylic acids. Biochim Biophys Acta 1982;713:393­7. Ferdinandusse S, Denis S, van Roermund CW, Wanders RJA, Dacremont G. Identification of the peroxisomal b-oxidation enzymes involved in the degreadation of long-chain dicarboxylic acids. J Lipid Res 2004;45:1104­11. Dirkx R, Meyhi E, Asselberghs S, Reddy J, Baes M, Van Veldhoven PP. bOxidation in hepatocyte cultures from mice with peroxisomal gene knockouts. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2007;357:718­23. Gregersen N, Kølvraa S, Mortensen PB, Rasmussen K. C6­C10-dicarboxylic aciduria: biochemical considerations in relation to diagnosis of betaoxidation defects. Scand J Clin Lab Invest Suppl 1982;161:15­27. Sanders R-J, Ofman R, Dacremont G, Wanders RJA, Kemp S. Characterization of the human x-oxidation pathway for x-hydroxy-very-long-chain fatty acids. FASEB J 2008. doi:10.1096/fj.07-099150. epub 8 January 2008. Sanders R-J, Ofman R, Duran M, Kemp S, Wanders RJA. Omega-oxidation of very long-chain fatty acids in human liver microsomes. Implications for Xlinked adrenoleukodystrophy. J Biol Chem 2006;281:13180­7. Björkhem I, Blomstrand S, Hågå P, Kase BF, Palonek E, Pedersen JI, et al. Urinary excretion of dicarboxylic acids from patients with the Zellweger syndrome. Importance of peroxisomes in beta-oxidation of dicarboxylic acids. Biochem Biophys Acta 1984;795:15­9. Rocchiccioli F, Aubourg P, Bougnéres PF. Medium- and long-chain dicarboxylic aciduria in patients with Zellweger syndrome and neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy. Pediatr Res 1986;20:62­6. Korman SHHM, Gutman A. Characteristic urine organic acid profile in peroxisomal biogenesis disorders. J Inherit Metab Dis 2000;23:425­8. Vamecq J, de Hoffmann E, van Hoof F. The microsomal dicarboxylyl-CoA synthetase. Biochem J 1985;230:683­93. Jansen GA, Wanders RJA. Alpha-oxidation. Biochim Biophys Acta 2006;1763:1403­12. van den Brink DM, Wanders RJA. Phytanic acid: production from phytol, its breakdown and role in human disease. Cell Mol Life Sci 2006;63:1752­65. Verhoeven NM, Jakobs C, Carney G, Somers MP, Wanders RJA, Rizzo WB. Involvement of microsomal fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase in the alphaoxidation of phytanic acid. FEBS Lett 1998;429:225­8. Ashibe G, Hirai T, Higashi K, Sekimizu K, Motojima K. Dual subcellular localization in the endoplasmic reticulum and peroxisomes and a vital role in protecting against oxidative stress of fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase are achieved by alternative splicing. J Biol Chem 2007;282:20763­73. Schmitz W, Albers C, Fingerhut R, Conzelmann E. Purification and characterization of an alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase from human liver. Eur J Biochem 1995;231:815­22. Ferdinandusse S, Denis S, Ijlst L, Dacremont G, Waterham HR, Wanders RJA. Subcellular localization and physiological role of a-methylacyl-CoA racemase. J Lipid Res 2000;41:1890­6. Kotti TJ, Savolainen K, Helander HM, Yagi A, Novikov DK, Kalkkinen N, et al. In mouse alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase, the same gene product is simultaneously located in mitochondria and peroxisomes. J Biol Chem 2000;275:20887­95. Savolainen K, Kotti TJ, Schmitz W, Savolainen TI, Sormunen RT, Ilves M, et al. A mouse model for alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase deficiency: adjustment of bile acid synthesis and intolerance to dietary methyl-branched lipids. Hum Mol Genet 2004;13:955­65. Ferdinandusse S, Denis S, Clayton PT, Graham A, Rees JE, Allen JT, et al. Mutations in the gene encoding peroxisomal alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase cause adult-onset sensory motor neuropathy. Nat Genet 2000;24:188­91. Mize CE, Avigan J, Baxter JH, Fales HM, Steinberg D. Metabolism of phytol-U14C and phytanic acid-U-14C in the rat. J Lipid Res 1966;7:684­91.

[64] Palosaari PM, Hiltunen JK. Peroxisomal bifunctional protein from rat liver is a trifunctional enzyme possessing 2-enoyl-CoA hydratase, 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase, and delta 3, delta 2-enoyl-CoA isomerase activities. J Biol Chem 1990;265:2446­9. [65] Wanders RJA, Denis S, Wouters F, Wirtz KWA, Seedorf U. Sterol carrier protein X (SCPx) is a peroxisomal branched-chain b-ketothiolase specifically reacting with 3-oxo-pristanoyl-CoA: a new, unique role for SCPx in branched-chain fatty acid metabolism in peroxisomes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1997;236:565­9. [66] Seedorf U, Brysch P, Engel T, Schrage K, Assmann G. Sterol carrier protein X is peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl coenzyme A thiolase with intrinsic sterol carrier and lipid transfer activity. J Biol Chem 1994;269:21277­83. [67] Antonenkov VD, Van Veldhoven PP, Waelkens E, Mannaerts GP. Substrate specificities of 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase A and sterol carrier protein 2/3oxoacyl-CoA thiolase purified from normal rat liver peroxisomes. Sterol carrier protein 2/3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase is involved in the metabolism of 2methyl-branched fatty acids and bile acid intermediates. J Biol Chem 1997;272:26023­31. [68] Seedorf U, Ellinghaus P, Roch Nofer J. Sterol carrier protein-2. Biochim Biophys Acta 2000;1486:45­54. [69] Antonenkov VD, Sormunen RT, Ohlmeier S, Amery L, Fransen M, Mannaerts GP, et al. Localization of a portion of the liver isoform of fatty-acid-binding protein (L-FABP) to peroxisomes. Biochem J 2006;394:475­84. [70] Markwell MAK, McGroarty EJ, Bieber LL, Tolbert NE. The subcellular distribution of carnitine acyltransferases in mammalian liver and kidney. J Biol Chem 1973;248:3426­32. [71] Markwell MAK, Bieber LL, Tolbert NE. Differential increase of hepatic peroxisomal, mitochondrial and microsomal carnitine acyltransferases in clofibrate-fed rats. Biochem Pharm 1977;26:1697­702. [72] Ferdinandusse S, Mulders J, IJlst L, Denis S, Dacremont G, Waterham HR, et al. Molecular cloning and expression of human carnitine octanoyltransferase: evidence for its role in the peroxisomal b-oxidation of branched-chain fatty acids. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999;263:213­8. [73] Farrell SO, Fiol CJ, Reddy JK, Bieber LL. Properties of purified carnitine acyltransferases of mouse liver peroxisomes. J Biol Chem 1984;259:13089­95. [74] Leighton F, Bergseth S, Rørtveit T, Christiansen EN, Bremer J. Free acetate production by rat hepatocytes during peroxisomal fatty acid and dicarboxylic acid oxidation. J Biol Chem 1989;264:10347­50. [75] Bian F, Kasumov T, Thomas KR, Jobbins KA, David F, Minkler PE, et al. Peroxisomal and mitochondrial oxidation of fatty acids in the heart, assessed from the 13C labeling of malonyl-CoA and the acetyl moiety of citrate. J Biol Chem 2005;280:9265­71. [76] Wanders RJA, Komen JC. Peroxisomes, Refsum's disease and the alpha- and omega-oxidation of phytanic acid. Biochem Soc Trans 2007;35:865­9. [77] Lazarow PB. Rat liver peroxisomes catalyze the beta oxidation of fatty acids. J Biol Chem 1978;253:1522­8. [78] Horie S, Isobe M, Suga T. Changes in CoA pools in hepatic peroxisomes of the rat under various conditions. J Biochem 1986;99:1345­52. [79] Van Broekhoven A, Peeters M-C, Debeer LJ, Mannaerts GP. Subcellular distribution of coenzyme A: evidence for a separate coenzyme a pool in peroxisomes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1981;100:305­12. [80] Van Veldhoven PP, Mannaerts GP. Coenzyme A in purified peroxisomes is not freely soluble in the matrix but firmly bound to a matrix protein. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1986;139:1195­201. [81] Gasmi L, McLennan AG. The mouse Nudt7 gene encodes a peroxisomal nudix hydrolase specific for coenzyme A and its derivatives. Biochem J 2001;357:33­8. [82] Cartwright JL, Gasmi L, Spiller DG, McLennan AG. The Saccharomyces cerevisiae PCD1 gene encodes a peroxisomal nudix hydrolase active toward coenzyme A and its derivatives. J Biol Chem 2000;275:32925­30. [83] AbdelRaheim SR, McLennan AG. The Caenorhabditis elegans Y87G2A. 14 Nudix hydrolase is a peroxisomal coenzyme A diphosphatase. BMC Biochem 2002;3:1­8. [84] Ofman R, Speijer D, Leen R, Wanders RJA. Proteomic analysis of mouse kidney peroxisomes: identification of RP2p as a peroxisomal nudix hydrolase with acyl-CoA diphosphatase activity. Biochem J 2006;393:537­43. [85] Antonenkov VD, Sormunen RT, Hiltunen JK. The rat liver peroxisomal membrane forms a permeability barrier for cofactors but not for small metabolites in vitro. J Cell Sci 2004;117:5633­42. [86] Palmieri L, Rottensteiner H, Girzalsky W, Scarcia P, Palmieri F, Erdmann R. Identification and functional reconstitution of the yeast peroxisomal adenine nucleotide transporter. EMBO J 2001;20:5049­59. [87] Visser WF, van Roermund CW, Waterham HR, Wanders RJ. Identification of human PMP34 as a peroxisomal ATP transporter. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002;299:494­7. [88] Leonardi R, Zhang Y-M, Rock C, Jackowski S. Coenzyme A: back in action. Prog Lipid Res 2005;44:125­53. [89] Verkade PE, Van der Lee J. Researches on fat metabolism. II. Biochem J 1934;28:31­40. [90] Mortensen PB. The possible antiketogenic and gluconeogenic effect of the omega-oxidation of fatty acids in rats. Biochim Biophys Acta 1980;620:177­85. [91] Mortensen PB, Gregersen N. The biological origin of ketotic dicarboxylic aciduria. II. In vivo and in vitro investigations of the beta-oxidation of C8­

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95] [96] [97] [98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

[108] [109] [110] [111] [112]

[113]

[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]

M.C. Hunt, S.E.H. Alexson / Progress in Lipid Research 47 (2008) 405­421 [120] Le Bon AM, Cravedi JP, Tulliez JE. Disposition and metabolism of pristane in rat. Lipids 1988;23:424­9. [121] Kim HY. Novel metabolism of docosahexaenoic acid in neural cells. J Biol Chem 2007;282:18661­5. [122] Ferdinandusse S, Denis S, Mooijer PAW, Zhang Z, Reddy J, Spector AA, et al. Identification of the peroxisomal b-oxidation enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of docosahexaenoic acid. J Lipid Res 2001;42:1987­95. [123] Petroni A, Bertagnolio B, La Spada P, Blasevich M, Papini N, Govoni S, et al. The beta-oxidation of arachidonic acid and the synthesis of docosahexaenoic acid are selectively and consistently altered in skin fibroblasts from three Zellweger patients versus X-adrenoleukodystrophy, Alzheimer and control subjects. Neurosci Lett 1998;250:145­8. [124] Ferdinandusse S, Denis S, Dacremont G, Wanders RJA. Studies on the metabolic fate of nÀ3 polyunsaturated fatty acids. J Lipid Res 2003;44:1992­7. [125] Kase BF, Björkhem I, Pedersen JI. Formation of cholic acid from 3a, 7a, 12atrihydroxy-5b-cholestanoic acid by rat liver peroxisomes. J Lipid Res 1983;24:1560­7. [126] Prydz K, Kase BF, Björkhem I, Pedersen JI. Formation of chenodeoxycholic acid from 3alpha,7alpha-dihydroxy-5beta-cholestanoic acid by rat liver peroxisomes. J Lipid Res 1986;27:622­8. [127] Kase BF, Pedersen JI, Wathne KO, Gustafsson J, Björkhem I. Importance of peroxisomes in the formation of chenodeoxycholic acid in human liver. Metabolism of 3 alpha,7 alpha-dihydroxy-5 beta-cholestanoic acid in Zellweger syndrome. Pediatr Res 1991;29:64­9. [128] Kase BF, Pedersen JI, Strandvik B, Björkhem I. Defective peroxisomal cleavage of the C27-steroid side chain in the cerebro-hepato-renal syndrome of Zellweger. J Clin Invest 1985;75:427­35. [129] Pedersen JI, Gustafsson J. Conversion of 3 alpha, 7 alpha, 12 alpha-trihydroxy5 beta-cholestanoic acid into cholic acid by rat liver peroxisomes. FEBS Lett 1980;121:345­8. [130] Falany CN, Fortinberry H, Leiter EH, Barnes S. Cloning, expression, and chromosomal localization of moue liver bile acid-CoA:amino acid Nacyltransferase. J Lipid Res 1997;38:1139­48. [131] Falany CN, Johnson MR, Barnes S, Diasio RB. Glycine and taurine conjugation of bile acids by a single enzyme. Molecular cloning and expression of human liver bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase. J Biol Chem 1994;269:19375­9. [132] He D, Barnes S, Falany CN. Rat liver bile acid CoA:amino acid Nacyltransferase: expression, characterization, and peroxisomal localization. J Lipid Res 2003;44:2242­9. [133] O'Byrne J, Hunt MC, Rai DK, Saeki M, Alexson SEH. The human bile acidCoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase functions in conjugation of fatty acids to glycine. J Biol Chem 2003;278:34237­344. [134] Killenberg PG, Jordan JT. Purification and characterization of bile acidCoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase from rat liver. J Biol Chem 1978;253:1005­10. [135] Scherstén T, Björntorp P, Ekdahl P-H, Björkerud S. The synthesis of taurocholic and glycocholic acids by preparations of human liver II. An analysis of the stimulating effect of the L fraction. Biochim Biophys Acta 1967;141:155­63. [136] Kase BF, Björkhem I. Peroxisomal bile acid-CoA:amino-acid N-acyltransferase in rat liver. J Biol Chem 1989;264:9220­3. [137] Styles NA, Falany JL, Barnes S, Falany CN. Quantification and regulation of the subcellular distribution of bile acid coenzyme A:amino acid N-acyltransferase activity in rat liver. J Lipid Res 2007;48:1305­15. [138] Kwakye JB, Johnson MR, Barnes S, Grizzle WE, Diasio RB. Identification of bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase in rat kidney. Biochem J 1991;280:821­4. [139] Solaas K, Ulvestad A, Söreide O, Kase BF. Subcellular organization of bile acid amidation in human liver: a key issue in regulating the biosynthesis of bile salts. J Lipid Res 2000;41:1154­62. [140] Solaas K, Sletta RJ, Søreide O, Kase BF. Presence of choloyl- and chenodeoxycholoyl-coenzyme A thioesterase activity in human liver. Scand J Clin Invest 2000;60:91­102. [141] Solaas K, Kase BF, Pham V, Bamberg K, Hunt MC, Alexson SEH. Differential regulation of cytosolic and peroxisomal bile acid amidation in mouse liver: PPAR alpha activation favors formation of unconjugated bile acids. J Lipid Res 2004;45:1051­60. [142] Steinberg SJ, Mihalik SJGKD, Cuebas DA, Watkins PA. The human liverspecific homolog of very long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase is cholate:CoA ligase. J Biol Chem 2000;275:15605­8. [143] Mihalik SJ, Steinberg SJ, Pei Z, Park J, Kim DG, Heinzer AK, et al. Participation of two members of the very long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase family in bile acid synthesis and recycling. J Biol Chem 2002;277:24771­9. [144] Lametschwandtner G, Brocard C, Fransen M, Van Veldhoven P, Berger J, Hartig A. The difference in recognition of terminal tripeptides as peroxisomal

421

[145]

[146] [147]

[148]

[149]

[150]

[151]

[152] [153]

[154]

[155]

[156]

[157]

[158]

[159]

[160]

[161]

[162]

[163]

[164]

[165]

[166]

[167]

targeting signal 1 between yeast and human is due to different affinities of their receptor Pex5p to the cognate signal and to residues adjacent to it. J Biol Chem 1998;273:33635­43. Pellicoro A, van den Heuvel FA, Geuken M, Moshage H, Jansen PL, Faber KN. Human and rat bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase are liver-specific peroxisomal enzymes: implications for intracellular bile salt transport. Hepatology 2007;45:340­8. Ferdinandusse S, Houten SM. Peroxisomes and bile acid biosynthesis. Biochim Biophys Acta 2006;1763:1427­40. Sfakianos MK, Wilson L, Sakalian M, Falany CN, Barnes S. Conserved residues in the putative catalytic triad of human bile acid coenzyme A:amino acid Nacyltransferase. J Biol Chem 2002;277:47270­5. Reilly S-J, O'Shea EM, Andersson U, O'Byrne J, Alexson SEH, Hunt MC. A peroxisomal acyltransferase in mouse identifies a novel pathway for taurine conjugation of fatty acids. FASEB J 2007;21:99­107. Carlton VE, Harris BZ, Puffenberger EG, Batta AK, Knisely AS, Robinson DL, et al. Complex inheritance of familial hypercholanemia with associated mutations in TJP2 and BAAT. Nat Genet 2003;34:91­6. Saghatelian A, Trauger SA, Want EJ, Hawkins EG, Siuzdak G, Cravatt BF. Assignment of endogenous substrates to enzymes by global metabolite profiling. Biochemistry 2004;43:14332­9. Saghatelian A, Cravatt BF. Discovery metabolite profiling ­ forging functional connections between the proteome and metabolome. Life Sciences 2005;77:1759­66. McKinney MK, Cravatt BF. Structure and function of fatty acid amide hydrolase. Annu Rev Biochem 2005;2005:411­32. Saghatelian A, McKinney MK, Bandell M, Patapoutian A, Cravatt BF. A FAAHregulated class of N-acyl taurines that activates TRP Ion Channels. Biochemistry 2006;45:9007­15. Cohen DM. The transient receptor potential vanilloid-responsive 1 and 4 cation channels: role in neuronal osmosensing and renal physiology. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 2007;16:451­8. Boberg M, Angerbauer R, Kanhai WK, Karl W, Kern A, Radtke M, et al. Biotransformation of cerivastatin in mice, rats and dogs in vivo. Drug Metab Dispos 1998;26:640­52. Hankin JA, Wheelan P, Murphy RC. Identification of novel metabolites of prostaglandin E2 formed by isolated rat hepatocytes. Arch Biochem Biophys 1997;340:317­30. Li YT, Maskos K, Chou CW, Cole RB, Li SC. Presence of an unusual GM2 derivative, taurine-conjugated GM2, in Tay-Sachs brain. J Biol Chem 2003;278:35286­91. Van Veldhoven PP, Vanhove G, Asselberghs S, Eyssen HJ, Mannaerts GP. Substrate specificities of rat liver peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidases: palmitoylCoA oxidase (inducible acyl-CoA oxidase), pristanoyl-CoA oxidase (noninducible acyl-CoA oxidase), and trihydroxycoprostanoyl-CoA oxidase. J Biol Chem 1992;267:20065­74. Rakhshandehroo M, Sanderson LM, Matilainen M, Stienstra R, Carlberg C, de Groot PJ, et al. Comprehensive Analysis of PPAR-Dependent Regulation of Hepatic Lipid Metabolism by Expression Profiling. PPAR Res 2007;26839:1­13. Ebisuno S, Isohashi F, Nakanishi Y, Sakamoto Y. Acetyl-CoA hydrolase: relation between activity and cholesterol metabolism in rat. Am J Physiol 1988;255:R724­30. Zhang Y-M, Chohnan S, Virga KG, Stevens RD, Ilkayeva OR, Wenner BR, et al. Chemical knockout of pantothenate kinase reveals the metabolic and genetic program responsible for hepatic coenzyme A homeostasis. Chem Biol 2007;14:291­302. Lee J, Xu Y, Chen Y, Sprung R, Chan Kim S, Shanhai X, et al. Mitochondrial phosphoproteome revealed by an improved IMAC method and MS/MS/MS. Mol Cell Proteomics 2007;6:669­76. Pircher PC, Kitto JL, Petrowski ML, Tangirala RK, Bischoff ED, Schulman JG, et al. Farnexoid X receptor regulates bile acid-amino acid conjugation. J Biol Chem 2003;278:27703­11. Inoue Y, Ai-Ming Y, Inoue J, Gonzalez F. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a is a central regulator of bile acid conjugation. J Biol Chem 2004;279: 2480­9. Chen YH, Hong IC, Kuo KK, Hsu HK, Hsu C. Role of retinoid-X receptor-alpha in the suppression of rat bile acid coenzyme A-amino acid N-acyltransferase in liver during sepsis. Shock 2007;28:65­70. Zomer AWM, van der Burg B, Jansen GA, Wanders RJA, Poll-The BT, van der Saag PT. Pristanic acid and phytanic acid: naturally occurring ligands for the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a. J Lipid Res 2000;41:1801­7. Isohashi F, Nakanishi Y, Matsunaga T, Sakamoto Y. A cold-labile acetylcoenzyme-A hydrolase from the supernatant fraction of rat liver. Reactivation and reconstitution of the active species from the inactive monomer. Eur J Biochem 1984;142:177­81.

