Structure, Vol. 12, 909­913, June, 2004, 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI 10.1016/j.str.2004.05.001

Previews

More Insights into Structural Plasticity of Actin Binding Proteins

In this issue of Structure, polymorphism of an actin binding protein is revealed in the structure of the fimbrin core (Klein et al., 2004), consistent with previous observations suggesting that proteins built from calponin-homology domains have an ability to bind to F-actin in multiple modes. Actin is one of the most abundant proteins found in eukaryotic cells. Not surprisingly, there are an extraordinary number of actin binding proteins. These actin binding proteins function in such diverse activities as muscle contraction, the polymerization and depolymerization of actin filaments (F-actin), which is crucial for cell motility, and organizing actin filaments into higher order structures. Among the proteins that crosslink actin filaments to form bundles and networks, it was observed that a highly modular architecture exists (Matsudaira, 1991). An actin binding domain (ABD) was characterized within a large class of actin-crosslinking proteins, including fimbrin, dystrophin, utrophin, spectrin, and -actinin, that contains tandem calponin homology (CH) domains. Remarkably, the single CH domain present in the eponymous protein, calponin, has been shown to be neither necessary nor sufficient for the binding of calponin to F-actin (Gimona and Mital, 1998). This suggests that the simplest models for actin binding involving primitive actin binding modules (CH domains) are likely to be wrong. This may also explain why there are many conflicting and puzzling observations about the interactions between CH domains and F-actin. A crystal structure of the actin binding core of fimbrin (Klein et al., 2004) makes an advance in our understanding of how these proteins might interact with F-actin by revealing a significant degree of polymorphism within this rather compact structure. Fimbrin contains two ABDs (ABD1 and ABD2), with each containing two CH domains (CH1 and CH2 in ABD1, and CH3 and CH4 in ABD2). The two ABDs provide the crosslinking function of fimbrin: each ABD is expected to bind to a different actin filament. Exactly how tandem CH domains might interact with actin has been the source of some speculation, and direct observations have generated conflicting interpretations. The first ABD within fimbrin has previously been solved by X-ray crystallography (Goldsmith et al., 1997), and the two CH domains formed a compact globular structure. An electron microscopic (EM) reconstruction of an N-terminal fragment of fimbrin containing this ABD was interpreted as showing that the fragment bound to F-actin in this compact globular form (Hanein et al., 1998). The tandem CH domains within utrophin, however, crystallized as an antiparallel dimer of two ABDs, with each molecule having an extended dumbbell shape (Keep et al., 1999). Kendrick-Jones and col-

leagues speculated that utrophin might bind to F-actin in this extended conformation seen in their crystal, rather than in the compact form seen in the earlier fimbrin crystal structure. In fact, the extended conformation was required to expose sites on utrophin previously indicated to be involved in actin binding. An EM reconstruction of the utrophin ABD complexed with F-actin was interpreted as showing this extended conformation for the CH domains (Moores et al., 2000). Subsequently, some of the same authors generated a new reconstruction and proposed that the utrophin ABD bound to F-actin in a compact, closed conformation (SutherlandSmith et al., 2003). A single-particle-based approach to image analysis, in contrast to helical methods that average over potentially heterogeneous actin filaments, suggested that the tandem CH domains within utrophin bind to F-actin in two different modes (one with one CH domain per actin subunit, the other with two CH domains per actin), and that both modes involve an extended conformation (Galkin et al., 2002). It was argued that this underlying polymorphism in binding could account for the previous results indicating a compact mode of binding (Galkin et al., 2003). An EM study of -actinin suggested that at one end of the molecule the two CH domains were in a compact, closed conformation, while at the other end they were in an open, extended state (Liu et al., 2004). More crystal structures have provided additional support for plasticity within these tandem CH domains. A crystal structure for the dystrophin ABD also revealed an antiparallel dimer and a similar extended conformation of CH domains as seen in the utrophin crystal structure, but flexibility within the arrangement of these CH domains was quite clear (Norwood et al., 2000). There was a rotation of 72 of one pair of CH1 and CH2 domains with respect to the other pair when compared with the utrophin ABD crystal structure. A crystallographic and calorimetric study of the plectin ABD concluded that while the two CH domains are in a closed conformation in the crystal, binding to F-actin induces an open conformation that is inhibited by an engineered interdomain disulfide bond (Garcia-Alvarez et al., 2003). The latest crystal structure (Klein et al., 2004), containing two ABDs, makes several contributions to our knowledge about tandem CH domains. One lesson to emerge from this crystal study is that the CH domains are quite flexible, as previously suggested. Since there are two copies of the fimbrin core per asymmetric unit in the crystal, a superposition can be made between these two molecules (Figure 1) which reveals that CH1 within ABD1 undergoes a rotation of 50 between these two molecules. Surprisingly, a number of mutations that have been implicated in F-actin binding involve residues that are largely buried within or between CH1 and CH2 in ABD1. The authors conclude that the conformational changes that are needed to explain the genetic data are consistent with the structural plasticity seen within the two molecules in the crystal asymmetric unit. This new study reinforces the concept that crystal

Structure 910

binding proteins, accounting for the multiple modes of binding that may be adopted, and understanding how the potential structural polymorphism is controlled within the cellular complexes. Edward H. Egelman Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics University of Virginia Health Sciences Center Jordan Hall Box 800733 Charlottesville, Virginia 22908
Selected Reading Galkin, V.E., Orlova, A., VanLoock, M.S., and Egelman, E.H. (2003). J. Mol. Biol. 331, 967­972. Galkin, V.E., Orlova, A., VanLoock, M.S., Rybakova, I.N., Ervasti, J.M., and Egelman, E.H. (2002). J. Cell Biol. 157, 243­251. Garcia-Alvarez, B., Bobkov, A., Sonnenberg, A., and de Pereda, J.M. (2003). Structure 11, 615­625. Gimona, M., and Mital, R. (1998). J. Cell Sci. 111, 1813­1821. Figure 1. Structural Plasticity of the CH Domains The structural plasticity of the CH domains is suggested in a comparison between the two molecules of the fimbrin actin binding core found in the asymmetric crystal unit (Klein et al., 2004). Each actin binding domain (ABD) contains two CH domains. The arrangement of CH3 and CH4 in ABD2 is relatively fixed between the two copies of the molecule, but the large rotation ( 50 ) of CH2 in this superposition shows the flexibility of the domain-domain contacts in ABD1. Image courtesy of Michael Klein. Goldsmith, S.C., Pokala, N., Shen, W., Fedorov, A.A., Matsudaira, P., and Almo, S.C. (1997). Nat. Struct. Biol. 4, 708­712. Hanein, D., Volkmann, N., Goldsmith, S., Michon, A.M., Lehman, W., Craig, R., DeRosier, D., Almo, S., and Matsudaira, P. (1998). Nat. Struct. Biol. 5, 787­792. Keep, N.H., Winder, S.J., Moores, C.A., Walke, S., Norwood, F.L., and Kendrick-Jones, J. (1999). Struct. Fold. Des. 7, 1539­1546. Klein, M.G., Shi, W., Ramagopal, U., Tseng, Y., Wirtz, D., Kovar, D.R., Staiger, C.J., and Almo, S.C. (2004). Structure 12, this issue, 993­1013. Liu, J., Taylor, D.W., and Taylor, K.A. (2004). J. Mol. Biol. 338, 115­125. Matsudaira, P. (1991). Trends Biochem. Sci. 16, 87­92. Moores, C.A., Keep, N.H., and Kendrick-Jones, J. (2000). J. Mol. Biol. 297, 465­480. Norwood, F.L., Sutherland-Smith, A.J., Keep, N.H., and KendrickJones, J. (2000). Struct. Fold. Des. 8, 481­491. Sutherland-Smith, A.J., Moores, C.A., Norwood, F.L., Hatch, V., Craig, R., Kendrick-Jones, J., and Lehman, W. (2003). J. Mol. Biol. 329, 15­33.

structures of flexible tandem CH domains may not directly show the conformation of these ABDs when complexed with F-actin, but that these high-resolution structures are essential for making sense of the biochemical and genetic data about residues in both actin and actin binding proteins that are important for interactions. The key tasks now involve generating higher resolution reconstructions of F-actin decorated with these actin

Structure, Vol. 12, June, 2004, 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI 10.1016/j.str.2004.05.003

Protein-Protein Interfaces Are Special
In this issue of Structure, characteristic features that distinguish protein-protein interfaces from noninterface protein surface (Halperin et al., 2004) provide insights into fundamental properties of protein recognition and contribute to improvement of docking methodologies. Studies of protein-protein interactions are an important direction in computational structural biology. The increasing availability of crystal structures of protein com-

plexes has allowed characterization of the interfaces between the proteins. Databases of cocrystallized protein-protein complexes are used to study the interface properties and derive relevant principles. Such currently established principles involve: (i) importance of steric complementarity, hydrophobicity, as well as electrostatic and hydrogen bonding complementarity, (ii) similarity of residue-residue and atom-atom preferences in protein-protein interfaces and protein cores, (iii) existence of "hot spots" (side chains at the interface that play a significant role in the binding), and (iv) evolutionary conservation of the interface residues. The paper from Nussinov's group (Halperin et al., 2004), which appears in this issue, describes a systematic study of protein-protein interfaces based on a com-

