Molecular Immunology, Vol. 22, No. 4, pp. 463-475, 1985 Printed in Great Britain

0161-5890185S3.00+ 0.00 Q 1985 Pergamon Press Ltd

BINDING OF N-FORMYLATED CHEMOTACTIC PEPTIDES IN CRYSTALS OF THE Meg LIGHT CHAIN DIMER: SIMILARITIES WITH NEUTROPHIL RECEPTORS*
ALLEN B. EDMUNDSON

and

KATHRYN

R. ELY

Department

of Biology,

University

of Utah,

Salt Lake City, UT 84112, U.S.A.

(Received 11 October 1984; accepted 6 November 1984)
Abstract-X-ray crystallographic techniques were used to study the modes of binding of N-formylated chemotactic peptides to the Meg light chain (Bence-Jones) dimer. By difference Fourier analyses at 2.7-A resolution four N-formylated tripeptides were found to occupy similar sites in the main binding cavity of the dimer. In all cases the N-formyl group appeared to form a hydrogen bond with a phenolic hydroxyl group of a tyrosine residue (No. 38, monomer 1) at the base of the cavity. N-formylation was necessary, since di-, tri- and tetrapeptides with free a-amino groups failed to bind. Although methionine in ligand

position 1 was optimal for binding, it could be replaced with norleucine. Position 2 was less critical, providing the side chain was bulky and hydrophobic (e.g. leucine, methionine or phenylalanine). An
aromatic residue like phenylalanine was most favorable in position 3. These bound ligands were site-filling and wedge-shaped, with their side chains swept back toward the entrance of the cavity to conform to the space available for binding. In the binding site side chains and polypeptide segments of the hypervariable loops also moved in ways improving the complementarity between protein and ligand. The stereochemical requirements for binding were markedly similar to those found in interactions of neutrophil receptors with the same series of tripeptides. An N-formylated dipeptide, N-f-Met-TV, was bound with equal occupancies in two overlapping subsites. In the deeper site the N-formyl group and methionine side chain were situated in positions comparable to those in the N-formyl tripeptides, but the peptide bond between methionine and tryptophan was in the cis configuration. In the outer site the corresponding peptide bond was in the energetically more favourable tram configuration.

INTRODUCTION

The plasma membranes of human and rabbit neutrophils contain specific receptors for N-formylated chemotactic peptides (Schiffmann et al., 1975a, 6) The most potent synthetic peptides, as well as naturally occurring chemoattractants, tend to be very hydrophobic (Showell et al., 1976). It is believed that hydrophobic interactions are primarily responsible for the marked stereospecificity and affinity shown by these chemoattractants for their receptors. N-f-Met-Leu-Phet is a well-characterized example of a high-affinity chemoattractant, but other Nformylated di-, tri- and tetrapeptides have also been successfully used as ligands (Showell et al., 1976; Williams et al., 1977; Niedel et al., 1979a,6; Snyderman and Goetzl, 1981; Becker et al., 1981). Nformylation was necessary for optimal activity and was included in peptide syntheses to simulate the chemistry at the amino ends of proteins produced by bacteria like Escherichia coli. Methionine in position 1 was optimal for binding to a receptor, but it could

*This investigation was supported by Grant CA19616, awarded by the National Cancer Institute, Department of Health and Human Services. TAbbreviations: N-f, terminal cc-amino group formylated; Met, methionine; Leu, leucine; Phe, phenylalanine; Nle, norleucine; Tyr, tyrosine; Trp, tryptophan; t-BOC, tertbutyloxycarbonyl group; V, variable.

be replaced by norleucine, which has an unbranched side chain of approximately the same size and shape. Residue 2 in a tripeptide sequence could be aliphatic or aromatic, but phenylalanine was more effective in position 3 than large aliphatic residues. On the basis of the combined information Freer et al. (1982) proposed a model for the receptor on rabbit neutrophils. An antibody directed against N-f-Met-Leu-Phe showed binding properties similar to those of the neutrophil receptor (Marasco et al., 1982). Freer ef al. (1982) suggested that the antibody combining site and the receptor could have comparable structures, an idea that parallels our thoughts. Bacterial protein antigens, with N-f-Met residues in amino-terminal positions. were probably among the earliest foreign substances recognized by components of the immune system. We reasoned that vestiges of this recognition function would be present in many binding sites of contemporary immunoglobulins and their fragments. The availability of a crystallographic model system has allowed us to explore the three-dimensional aspects of the binding of chemotactic agents. A wide variety of hydrophobic ligands can be bound in crystals of an immunoglobulin light chain (Bence-Jones) dimer from the patient Meg (Edmundson et al., 1974, 1984; Firca et al., 1978; Ely et al., 1978). The location, occupancy and structure of each ligand can be determined by

464

ALLEN B. EDMUND~ON and KATHRYN R. ELY

difference Fourier analysis of crystallographic data for the native and liganded forms of the protein. In the present article we discuss the binding of synthetic chemotactic peptides in the main cavity of the Meg dimer. Use of this dimer offers many advantages for the study of such binding interactions. The complete amino acid sequence of the protein has been determined previously (Fett and Deutsch, 1974). The crystal lattice is permeated by large solvent channels, one of which can deliver ligands directly to the entrance of the main binding cavity of a protein dimer (Ely et al., 1978). Ligands as large as dimers of 6-carboxytetramethylrhodamine can enter this cavity and bind with strong affinities (Edmundson et al., 1984).
MATERIALS AND METHODS

D$iision of ligands into crystals Trigonal crystals of the Meg dimer were grown in 1.9 M ammonium sulfate buffered with 0.19 M phosphate, pH 6.2. The crystals were stored at 12°C and handled as described previously (Edmundson et al., 1984). Potential candidates for binding were dissolved in crystallizing media and added to suspensions of crystals. Synthetic chemotactic peptides were generally soluble in these media at concns (0.5-2.0 mM) optimal for binding. After soaking periods ranging from days to weeks, the crystals were subjected to X-ray analysis. The soaking periods were adjusted to give the best balance between specific binding and overt destruction or cracking of the crystals. With some ligands the physical damage to crystals was progressive at a given concn. The damage was associated with disruption of crystal lattice forces and/or conformational changes in the constituent protein molecules. Additives which did not bind specifically to the proteins usually did not harm the crystals. Detection of bound ligands Diffraction data were collected at 10°C with a Syntex-Nicolet P2, diffractometer in which the crystal to detector distance was 62 cm. Nickelfiltered, copper-K, irradiation was used, and the X-ray tube was operated at 40 kV and 25 mA. The presence of a ligand was initially detected by difference Fourier analysis at low resolution (6.5 A). In the difference maps bound ligands appeared as peaks of electron density in appropriate positions within the main cavity of the Bence-Jones dimer. Map features were considered significant if the peak heights were 23.5 o(p).* For compounds meeting
*An SD, o(p), was calculated & with the equation:

this criterion, the X-ray analysis was extended to 2.7-A resolution. The protein phase angles used to compute 6.5-A difference maps were obtained by the multiple isomorphous replacement method (Edmundson et al., 1972; Schiffer et al., 1973). For 2.7-A maps the phase angles were calculated with atomic coordinates from a high-resolution model which had been subjected to crystallographic refinement techniques (Edmundson et al., 1975; Diamond, 1966, 1971; Hendrickson and Konnert, 1981; Schiffer M., personal communication). In the 2.7-A maps contours of electron density above a specified level [usually 2 2.5 rr(p)] were converted into three-dimensional "cage" density and displayed on an Evans and Sutherland computer graphics system (Picture System II). Graphics programs for a "Protein Modeling System" were written and implemented by R. J. Athay. The cage density for the ligand and a skeletal atomic model of the main binding cavity were simultaneously displayed on the graphics screen. A skeletal model of the ligand was interactively fitted into the cage density with the aid of joysticks for rotation and translation. To understand spatial relationships more completely, van der Waal's surfaces of ligands and binding site constituents were calculated with Connolly's (1983) SURFCALG program. These surfaces were displayed as a series of dots together with the appropriate skeletal models. With the surface dot representations as guides, the fitting of ligands to cage density was improved by eliminating steric overlaps with binding site components.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

General requirements for binding Four synthetic peptides expected to show differential binding were chosen for initial trials at low resolution: (1) N-f-Met-Leu-Phe, (2) N-f-NleLeu-Phe, (3) t-BOC-Met-Leu-Phe and (4) Met-LeuPhe. The concns of ligands were kept at the lowest practical levels (0.5 mM). Care was taken to maintain nearly identical conditions (e.g. crystal sizes, supernatant vols, storing temps and soaking periods). At 0.5 mM concn and 10°C ligand uptake by the crystals reached maximum levels in about 2 weeks. The 6.5-A difference maps indicated that the binding cavity of the Bence-Jones dimer clearly discriminated among the four ligands. N-formyl peptides 1 and 2 were greatly preferred over the t-BOC derivative 3, while tripeptide 4 with a free a-amino group was bound only to a small extent. With peptide 1 assigned an occupancy of 1.0, the relative occupancies of the other peptides were 0.75 (2) 0.05 (3) and 0.17 (4). In repeated tests with the norleucyl peptide, the occupancies never equalled those of the methionyl derivative. These results were gradually extended to include other N-formylated chemotactic peptides. Peptides with free a-amino groups were used as controls. For

= : (P - P)%N - I), ,= I where pi is the electron density value at the ith grid point on the map, fi is the overall average density value, and N is the total number of grid points.

Binding of chemotactic peptides example, N-f-Met-Phe-Met, N-f-Met-Met-Met and N-f-Met-Trp bound with relative occupancies of 1.0, 0.88 and 0.92. N-f-Met-Ala and N-f-Met-Leu-PheLys failed to bind in measurable quantities. An N-formylated eosinophilotactic tetrapeptide, N-f-Val-Gly-Ser-Glu (Goetzl et al., 1981), showed slight binding activity (relative occupancy = 0.17). However, a non-formylated peptide with a similar sequence, Ala-Gly-Ser-Glu, did not bind. In an earlier study (Edmundson et al., 1974), we found that four test dipeptides, each with at least one hydrophobic side chain, showed no detectable affinity for the Bence-Jones dimer. The following nonformylated dipeptides, with sequences identical to those in chemotactic peptides, failed to bind in the present survey: Met-Leu, Leu-Phe, Phe-Leu and PheMet. In summary, di-, tri- and tetrapeptides with free a-amino groups were not suitable for binding. Nformylation was necessary and an N-f-tripeptide was of optimum size. An N-f-dipeptide could be bound if the second amino acid side chain was large (e.g. tryptophan). N-f-tetrapeptides were too long for accommodation within the binding cavity. High-resolution binding studies For correlation with the binding results, the main binding cavity of the Meg dimer is depicted in Fig. 1 [drawing by K. R. Ely in Edmundson et al. (1974)]. This cavity can be described as a truncated cone, 15 A in diameter at the entrance and 17 A deep (if the vols of side chains are ignored). Aromatic residues are the predominant constitutents of the cavity lining. There are three negatively charged side chains, all located on the outer rim of the cavity. However, electrostatic

465

interactions between protein and ligand have been found to be minimal in the ammonium sulfate crystallizing solutions. In the 2.3-A electron density map of the dimer (Edmundson et al., 1975) there were no indications of ordered sulfate ions inside the binding cavity. The binding pattern of N-f-Met-Leu-Phe will be discussed as a representative of the series of studies at 2.7-A resolution. Pertinent regions of the difference Fourier map for this peptide are presented in Fig. 2 as three-dimensional "cage" electron density. Also shown is a skeletal atomic model of the ligand fitted to the cage density. The van der Waal's surface dot representations of the ligand and the binding cavity of the Meg Bence-Jones dimer are co-displayed in Fig. 3. The shape and general conformation of the peptide appeared to be highly dependent on the available space and surface topography of the binding site. Conversely, the binding site constituents participated in conformational adjustments that improved the complementarity with the ligand. As a consequence of these interactions the bound tripeptide was not in a fully extended conformation. Instead, it was wedgeshaped, with its side chains swept back toward the entrance of the cavity (see Fig. 4). In Fig. 5 a top cutaway view of the binding site containing N-f-MetPhe-Met illustrates that this wedge shape was also characteristic of other chemotactic peptides in the series. These photographs convey the general impression that most available space in the cavity was occupied, and it seems fair to classify the N-f-tripeptides as site-filling ligands. However, close examinations of the difference maps and surface dot representations revealed two small unoccupied pockets between the cavity walls and hydrophobic side chains I and 2 of the ligands. These pockets contained sets of electron density of the size associated with single water molecules. We concluded that these putative water molecules were trapped in the pockets during the binding of the peptide ligands. Structure of bound N-f-Met -Leu-Phe The N-formyl group of the ligand was equidistant from two tyrosine residues on the floor of the cavity (see Fig. 1). In the difference map continuous electron density extending from the N-formyl group to the phenolic hydroxyl group of one of these tyrosine residues (No. 38, monomer 1) provided strong evidence for specific hydrogen bonding between ligand and protein. The N-formyl group reached the bottom of the cavity through a narrow passage between the two phenylalanyl 99 side chains (see Fig. 1). Van der Waal's surface calculations indicated that the two aromatic side chains impinged on the N-formyl group, thereby holding it in place. In all four N-f-tripeptides the methionyl (or norleucyl) side chain in position 1 occupied a distinctive pocket in the binding cavity. The column of electron

Fig. 1. Perspective drawing of the binding cavity of the Meg Bence-Jones dimer. The cavity is 15 A across at the entrance and 17 A deep. Amino acid sequence numbers (Fett and Deutsch, 1974)of the side chains of monomer 2 of the dimer are underlined. Covalent bonds between the G( fi carbon and atoms are represented by dotted lines.

466

ALLEN

B.

EDMUNDSON

and KATHRYN ELY R.

Fig. 2. Photo~aph of a computer graphics display of "cage" electron density corres~nd~ng to the chemotactic peptide, N-f-Met-Leu-Phe, as it bound to the Meg Bence-Jones dimer. The superimposed skeletal model of the peptide was fitted to the cage density by interactive computer graphics, The N-formyl group is on the far left and the phenylalanine side chain is on the upper right. Note the extra electron density to the left of the N-formyl group. This density extends to the phenolic hydroxyl group of tyrosine 38, monomer 1 (Fig. l), and is evidence for a specific and relatively linear hydrogen bond between protein and ligand. Additional electron density above the methionyl side chain represents part of the phenolic ring of tyrosine 93, monomer 2, which has moved to a position of more intimate contact with the ligand.

representing this side chain extended along the cavity wall of monomer 2 until it became continuous with heavy electron density corresponding to tyrosine 93. This side chain had moved from its usual position (see Figs 1 and 2) to come into van der Waal's contact with the S-methyl group of methionine. The subsite for the side chain in position 2 was more spacious and permissive of ligand movement than subsite 1. It was therefore not surprising to find variations in the modes of binding of residue 2. The density tips of the leucyl and methionyl side chains in pasition 2 of tripeptides 1, 2 and 4 were not represented

the binding cavity. The u-carboxyl group was represented by well ordered electron density but was not in a position conducive to interactions with binding site constituents. The phenylalanyl side chain in position 3 was also clearly defined, but it was located just outside the rim of the binding cavity in a hydrophobic pocket between two ciosely packed protein molecules in the crystal lattice. The phenyl ring was in van der Waal's contact with constituents of the rim. Although the potential interactions were more favorable for an aromatic side

by strong electron density in the difference maps. This observation indicated that the distal atoms of the side chains were relatively free to assume more than one orientation in the subsite. However, it should be emphasized that accommodation of these atoms was enhanced by the displacement of the polypeptide backbone and the side chains of tyrosine 51 and glutamic acid 52 of monomer 2. In contrast, the phenylalanyl side chain in N-fMet-Phe-Met was clearly defined by electron density and was packed in more closely to the ligand polypeptide backbone than leucine 2 or methionine 2 in the other tripeptides. This difference in orientation of side chain 2 was accompanied by an overall conformational change in the ligand, mainly in the torsional relationship of residues 2 and 3. Both the peptide backbone and the free a-carboxyl group of each tripeptide lay within the boundaries of

/ N-f
/

Fig. 4. Skeletal model of a prototype tripeptide to illustrate the overall wedge shape assumed during binding to the Meg dimer. The N-formyl and a-carboxyl groups are Iabeied iv-f and a-COO- and the three side chains are represented by numbers (1: methionine; 2: leucine; and 3: phenylalanine).

Fig. 3. Van der Waal's surface dot representation (Connolly, 1983) of the binding of N-f-Met-Leu-Phe (green dots) in the binding cavity of the Meg dimer (blue dots). Front view. Together with skeletal models, the surface dots were displayed on the color system at the NIH graphics resource at the University of California at San Francisco. The support of Judith McClarin, Robert Langridge and Thomas Ferrin is gratefully acknowledged.

467

Fig. 5. Top, cutaway view of van der Waal's surface dots depicting the binding of N-f-Met-Phe-Met (red dots) in the cavity of the Meg dimer (blue dots). Note that the peptide assumes a wedge shape conforming closely to the surface contours of the cavity.

468

Binding of chemotactic peptides

469

Fig. 6. Skeletal models of four N-formylated tripeptides displayed in the conformations which they adopted in binding to the Meg dimer. Each peptide was independently fitted to the electron density in a difference Fourier map at 2.7-A resolution. Note the marked similarities in the conformations. The sequences of the peptides were N-f-Met-Leu-Phe, N-f-Met-Phe-Met, N-f-Nle-Leu-Phe. N-f-Met-Met-Met and

chain in position

3, COOH-terminal methionines in tripeptides 3 and 4 were also readily accommodated in the subsite. Neither phenylalanine nor methionine filled the available space in the pocket, but it is clear that a fourth residue would interfere with crystal packing interactions. These spatial restrictions explain why N-f-Met-Leu-Phe-Lys failed to bind. The differences cited above were relatively minor, and the overriding impressions were the similarities in the modes of binding of the four N-f-tripeptides. After each ligand was fitted independently to the electron density in its appropriate difference Fourier map, the four models were codisplayed in the same orientation as in Fig. 2. A photograph of the composite display, which emphasizes the similarities, is shown in Fig. 6.
Distortions of peptide bond geometry

particularly prominent, as were the sets of electron density for the N-formyl group and methionyl side chain. With these groups held in position, the peptide bond involving the carbonyl group was successively moved into the electron density in cis and tram configurations. Neither configuration resulted in fully satisfactory fits to the electron density. There appeared to be torsional strain in this region of the ligand, and it is possible that the peptide bond had partial cis character.
Binding of N-f -Met - Trp

All peptide bonds in both the ligand and in the protein were initially restrained to the tram configuration. With models having standard bond distances and angles, however, it was not possible to place all components of the tripeptide ligands into optimal positions within appropriate sets of electron density. For example, the electron density for the carbonyl group of methionine or norleucine 1 was

In the difference map there was about 1.5 times as much continuous electron density as necessary to represent one molecule of bound ligand. The combined density occupied approximately the same space as an N-f-tripeptide. We concluded that there were two overlapping subsites equally likely to be occupied (see Fig. 7). Electron density representing the deeply situated ligand was easily divisible into the familiar shapes of the N-for-my1 group and the methionyl side chain. However, the characteristic electron density for the indole ring of tryptophan was situated in a position previously assigned to the peptide backbone of an N-f-tripeptide. The electron density for the carbonyl group of methionine 1 was clearly outlined

470

ALLEN B. EDMUNDK~N and KATHRYN R. ELY

Fig. 7. Binding of N-f-Met-Trp in the Meg dimer. The cage electron density in the 2.1-A difference Fourier map was too extensive for a single ligand molecule, but was appropriate for two molecules binding in different subsites. Upper panel: cage density co-displayed with model of peptide in deeper subsite. Lower panel: cage density plus ligand model in outer subsite.

in the difference map. The N-f-dipeptide could be fitted to the density only if the peptide bond between methionine and tryptophan was in the cis configuration (see Fig. 8). There was no difficulty in fitting a second ligand molecule in an outer subsite, with the peptide bond

in the expected trans configuration. The electron density for the indole ring of tryptophan was partitularly prominent in the pocket between two protein molecules (see Fig. 9). Placement of this ring guided us to the fitting of the methionyl side chain into discrete electron density within the binding

Fig. 9. Binding of the indoie ring (red) of N-f-Met-Trp in the pocket between the crystal lattice. The remainder of the ligand is bound inside the cavity represented by blue dots.

two protein molecules in of the protein molecule

471

Fig. 8. Binding of N-f-Met-Trp in the deeper subsite of the Meg dimer. Upper panel: cage density co-displayed with the model of the fitted peptide. The peptide bond between methionine and tryptophan was built in the energetically favorable frun~ configuration. In this configuration the carbonyl group (arrow) was outside the electron density envelope. Therefore, this configuration was unlikely. Lower panel: in this case the peptide bond was constructed in the cis con~guration and the earbonyl group {arrow) could be placed in the electron density with confidence. 473

474

ALLEN B. EDMUNDSON and KATHRYN R. ELY

cavity. It extended between tyrosine 34, monomer 2, and tyrosine 93, monomer 1. Electron density for the N-formyl group overlapped that of tryptophan 2 of the deep-seated ligand. With symmetry operations used in conjunction with the computer graphics system, it was possible to determine the identities of constituents from the second protein molecule lining the binding pocket for tryptophan or phenylalanine rings. The most important residue appeared to be tyrosine 144, monomer 2, which was in a position sufficiently close to shield the aromatic rings of the ligands.
Conformational changes in the binding site

Conformational changes within the binding cavity involved both aromatic side chains and polypeptide segments. For example, tyrosine 38, monomer 1, moved in such a way as to increase the linearity of the hydrogen bond with the N-formyl group. Tyrosine 93, monomer 2, shifted to maximize the contacts with methionine 1. Significant expansion of the available space was effected by movements of loops of the first and second "hypervariable" regions of monomer 2 (three hypervariable loops contribute to the walls of the binding cavity shown in Fig. 1). In the first hypervariable region, for instance, both the side and main chain of tyrosine 34 (monomer 2) rotated outwardly, although there seemed to be no direct structural encroachment by the ligand. On the opposite wall of the cavity, the polypeptide chain of tyrosine 34, monomer 1, was also displaced to generate more space for binding. The second hypervariable loop (e.g. tyrosine 51 and glutamic acid 52, monomer 2) was subjected to direct pressure to expand by leucine or methionine side chains in position 2 of the ligands.
Comparison with neutrophil receptors

A list of marked similarities can be compiled for the binding properties of the Meg dimer and a receptor for chemotactic peptides. The binding interactions in both are predominantly hydrophobic in character. N-formylation of the ligand is necessary in both cases, presumably because this group forms a specific and relatively linear hydrogen bond with a constituent of the binding site. Methionine in position 1 of the ligand is optimal for binding in both systems, although aliphatic residues like norleucine are also tolerated. The identity of the residue in position 2 is less critical, with ample space in both binding sites for branched or unbranched aliphatic side chains and for aromatic residues with phenyl rings. In the dimer, a larger residue like tryptophan can be accommodated, but the indole ring has to be moved out of the pocket normally occupied by side chain 2. The side chain of residue 3 is important in both systems and an aromatic group is most favourable for binding. The maximum permissible length of a peptide ligand is determined by the tight crystal packing of the Meg dimer, whereas the receptor is under no such

restriction. However, N-f-tripeptides are site-filling in a relatively large cavity of the immunoglobulin-type, and we suspect that the recognition site in the receptor has approximately the same size. In previous crystal binding studies we found that the affinity is highly dependent on the number of contacts between protein and ligand (Edmundson et al., 1984). Virtually irreversible complexes can be produced if the ligands are site-filling (e.g. dimer of 6-carboxytetramethylrhodamine bound to the Meg dimer). It seems likely that the high-affinity neutrophil receptors participate in interactions at least as intricate as those observed with the Bence-Jones dimer. To our knowledge there is no previous evidence for cis-trans isomerization of a peptide ligand during the binding to either a receptor or an immunoglobulin. Even in the Bence-Jones dimer complete conversion to the energetically less favorable cis configuration was possible only with a dipeptide (N-f-Met-Trp). Additional interactions occurring with a tripeptide partially hindered this conversion. Nevertheless, the alteration of peptide bond geometry can now be considered a distinct possibility for the enhancement of protein-ligand interactions. Using NMR techniques, Becker et al. (1979) found that N-f-Met-Leu-Phe in dimethylsulfoxide adopted a conformation similar to that of an anti-parallel p-pleated sheet. Recent conformational analyses of N-f-Met-Phe, its butyl ester, and its Nz-methyl derivative with NMR spectroscopy also indicated pleated sheet structures in solution (Eggleston et al., 1984). Comparable structures were obtained in X-ray analyses of crystals of this peptide and its derivatives. In binding to the Meg dimer, the N-formylated peptides deviated substantially from extended and semi-rigid, B-pleated sheet structures. Both protein and ligand conformations were adjusted to improve the lock and key effect. We surmise that similar adjustments can occur in the receptor-ligand system.
Acknowledgements-We thank our colleague James Herron for implementing the SURFCALCC program and for general aid and advice, Maurine Vaughan for preparing the manuscript for publication, and Brad Nelson and Barbara Staker for photography and graphics applications. REFERENCES Becker E. L., Bleich H. E., Day A. R., Freer R. J., Glasel J. A., Latina M. and Visintainer J. (1979) Nuclear magnetic resonance conformational studies on the chemotactic tripeptide formyl-t_-methionyl-L-leucyl-Lphenylalanine. A small /J sheet. Eiochemisrr~~ 18, 4654668. Becker E. L., Naccache P. H., Showell H. J. and Walenga R. W. (1981) Early events in neutrophil activation: receptor stimulation, ionic fluxes, and arachidonic acid metabolism. In Lymphokines (Edited by Pick E. and Landy M.), Vol. 4, pp. 297-334. Academic Press. New York. Connolly M. L. (1983) Solvent-accessible surfaces of proteins and nucleic acids. Science 221, 709-713. Diamond R. (1966) A mathematical model-building procedure for proteins. Acta crystallogr. A21, 2533266.

Binding of chemotactic peptides Diamond R. (1971) A real space refinement procedure for proteins. A& crystullogr. A27, 436-452. _ Edmundson A. B.. Elv K. R.. Abola E. E.. Schiffer M. and Fanagiotopoulos N. (1975) Rotational'allomerism and divergent evolution of domains in immunoglobulin light chains. Biochemistry 14, 3953-3961. Edmundson A. B., Ely K. R., Girling R. L., Abola E. E., Schiffer M., Westholm F. A., Fausch M. D. and Deutsch H. F. (1974) Binding of 2,4-dinitrophenyl compounds and other small molecules to a crystalline R-tvpe Bence-Jones dimer. ~~oc~~~~rry 13, 3816-3827. __ Edmundson A. 8.. Elv K. R. and Herron J. N. (1984) A search for site-filling ligands in the Meg BenceJones dimer: crystal binding studies of fluorescent compounds. Molec. Zmmun. 21, 561-576. Edmundson A. B., Schiffer M., Ely K. R. and Wood M. K. (1972) Structure of a l-type Bence-Jones protein at 4-A resolution. Biochemistry 11, 1822-1827. Eggleston D. S., Jeffs P. W., Chodosh D. F. and Heald S. L. (1984) Conformational influences of N*-methylation in chemotactic peptides. Absfracts of American Crystallogra~hie Association, Annual Meeting, Lexington, Kentucky, PB4, 36. Ely K. R., Firca J. R., Williams K. J., Abola E. E., Fenton J. M., Schiffer M., Panagiotopoulos N. C. and Edmundson A. B. (1978) Crystal properties as indicators of confo~ational changes during ligand binding or interconversion of Meg light chain isomers. Biochemistry 17, 158-167. Fett J. W. and Deutsch H. F. (1974) Primary structure of the Meg Iz chain. 5~oehemistry 13, 41024114. Firca J. R., Ely K. R., Kremser P., Westholm F. A., Dorrington K. J. and Edmundson A. B. (1978) Inter. , converSion of conformational isomers of light chains in the Meg immunoglobulins. Biochemistry 17, 148-158. Freer R. J., Day A. R., Muthukumaraswamy N., Pinon I)., Wu A., Showell II. J. and Becker E. L. (1982) Formyl peptide chemoattractants: a model of the receptor on rabbit neutrophils. Biochemistry 21, 257-263. Goetzl E. J., Foster D. W. and Goldman D. W. (1981)

475

St~ct~al eh~acteristics of human neutrophil receptors for chemotactic N-formyi-methionyl peptides. Fedn Proc. 40, 365. Hendrickson W. A. and Konnert J. H. (1981) Stereochemically restrained crystallographic least-squares refinement of m~rornol~~e structures. In Biomoleeuiar Structure, Conformation, Function & Evolution (Edited by Srinivasan R., Subramanian E. and Yathindra N.), Vol. 1, pp. 43-57. Pergamon Press, New York. Marasco W. A. et al., as quoted in Freer et al. (1982). NiedeI J. E., Kahane I. and Cuatrecasas P. (1979a) Receptor-mediated intemahzation of fluorescent chemotactic peptide by human neutrophils. Science 205, 1412-1414. Niedel J., Wilkinson S. and Cuatrecasas P. (19796) Re~ptor-mediate uptake and degradation of Ichemotactic peptide by human neutrophils. $. biol. Chem. 254, 10700-10706. Schiffer M., Girling R. L., Ely K. R. and Edmundson A. B. (1973) Structure of a I-type Bence-Jones protein at 3.5-A resolution. Bjochemistry 12, 4620-463 1. SchiIIman E., Corcoran B. A. and Wahl S. M. (1975a) N-formylmethionyl peptides as chemoattractants for leucocytes. Proc. natn. Acad. Sci., U.S.A. 72, 1059-1062. Schiffmann E., ShowelI II. J., Corcoran B. A., Ward P. A., Smith E. and Becker E. L. (197%) The isolation and partial characterization of neutrophil chemotactic factors from Escherichia co& J. Zmmun. 114, 1831-1837. Showell H. J., Freer R. J., Zigmond S. H., Schiffmann E., Aswanikumar S., Corcoran B. A. and Becker E. L. (1976) The structur&activity relations of synthetic peptides as chemotactic factors and inducers of lysosomal enzyme secretion for neutrophils. J. exp. Med. 143, 1156-l 169. Snyderman R. and Goetzl E. J. (1981) Molecular and cellular mechanisms of leukocyte chemotaxis. Science 213, 830-837. Williams L. T., Snyde~an R., Pike M. C. and Lefkowitz R. J. (1977) Specific receptor sites for chemotactic peptides on human polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Proc. natn. Acad. Sci., U.S.A. 74, 1204-1208.

