wsa-3

l 3 INDUCTION OF INTERLEUKIN 1 (IL-l) RECEPTOR EXPRESSION BY GLUCOCORTICOID HORMONE AND PROSTAGLANDINS. T. Akahoshi Department of Internal Medicine, Kitasato University, Sagamihara, Japan The in vitro effects of glucocorticoid hormone (GC) and prostaglandins(PG) on IL-l receptor (IL-1R) expression of human peripheral blood mononuclear
In physiologic and cells (PBMC) and aermal fibroblasts were investigated. pharmacological concentration ranges, GC increased the specific binding of

1251-labeled human recombinant IL-la in the time and dose dependent manner. Scatchard plot analysis indicated that GC increased the number of IL-1R
from 100 to 2000 per cells without a major changes 10-loM). In the subpopulation of PBMC, GC induced GC, PGEl and PGE2 each lymphocytes predominantly. The number of IL-1R of 1251-IL-la to fibroblasts. in affinity(Kd; 2.6X IL-1R expression on B increased the binding

increased from 1600 on control cells to 5400 on PGE2 treated cells, to 5700 on GC treated cells, and to 11000 on cells treated in the combination with CC and PGE2 without changes in binding affinity. IL-1 is well known to stimulate the production of GC and PG. These aata suggest that IL-1 up-regulate IL-1R expression through the endogenous production of glucocorticoid hormone and prostaglandins.

WS8-4

l 4

Labs.ofCellularTachnology,Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co.,Ltd.,Tokushima,Japen Tb investigate the regulation IL1 induction of from hm peripheral mononuclear cells (PMNC), stimulatedPMNCbyLPS,PH?+orrecombinantcytokines wz invitro a&measured IL-lalpha and beta in the culturedsupematantsby anELISA system.WhenPMNCwere separated into adherent-m3nooytes r0n-adherent and cells,LPS stimulated both fractions of cells but PHA stimulated non-adherent cells to induceIL-1 more effectively than rronocytes. These resultsseen& to show that IL-1 induction frcan PMNC derivedfrcm two cell types,i.e. monocytesand non-adherent cells includino cells and B cells. T Sowe next studiedwhat sort of cells endwhatkinds of cytokineswere involvedin inducingIL-1 frQn non-adherent cells.Among the severalkinds of cytokines, It2 was a most @zent cytokineto induce IL-1 frun E-rosette negativecells. SAC activated E rosetteneoativecells ware more effectively stimulated IL-2 to induceIL-l.All by these resultsshowedthat IL1 induction fran PMNC derivedfran two cell types,i.e. nonocytesard activated cells. IL-1 induction B fran activated cells were mediatedby B IL-2 suggested augumentcycle of T cell-Bcell interactions inrnune an in systems.

WS8-5

`=
HUMAN INTERLEUKIN-16 AND ITS MUTEINS

RECOMBINANT

Y.Kikumoto, T.Kamogashira, Y.-M.Hong, S.Nakai, Y.Masui and Y.Hirai Laboratories of Cellular Technology, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokushima, Japan It has been revealed by the use of recombinant interleukin-l(IL-1) that IL-l mediates a wide variety of biological responses including immune and inflammatory responses. A problem is remained whether the multiple biological functions are dae to
a single functional domain or to multiple domains within the molecule. One approach to resolve the above question is to identify the essential amino acid resid;le(s) and the minimal structure(s) responsible for the functions of IL-l. By site specific mutagenesis using IL-16 expression system, we produced its muteins in S.coli and purified them to homogeneity by a combination of cation exchange high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and gel filtration HPLC and then assayed their ability of growth inhibitory activity against human melanomaA3?5.S1 cells. The results are as follows: 1) the muteins which have similar activity to that of IL-18 are IAlaBl, [AlaE,Ala711, [Ser71], [Ala711 and [l-lSOlIL-16. 21 less active muteins are [Gly41, iLeu931 and l4-1531IL-18. 3) much less active muteins are [desArg981, [7-1531 and [l-14BlIL-16. These data suggest that: 1) both cysteine residues at 8th and 71st position are not essential for the functions of IL-16. 2) almostentire sequence matilre of IL-16 is required for its biological activities. 3) one of the key amino acid residues in the functions of IL-16 is 4th or 98th Arg, or 93rd Lys.

