1406

Discussion
The main finding in this study was the very low level of plasma 25(OH)D3 in the long-stay patients compared with the younger group. Though the samples from the geriatric and the younger groups of subjects were obtained at different times of the year, inspection of published data 10 on seasonal variation of plasma 25(OH)D3 indicates that the general nature of our finding is unlikely to have been affected by this factor. Immediate access to a comparable group of active non-house-bound and non-inpatient older people was not available, though such a study is in progress. The range of plasma 25(OH)D3 in the younger group was comparable to values reported in other similar groups.'," The geriatric patients were taking a variety of drugs such as analgesics, tranquillisers, and antirheumatic drugs. No one known to be taking a strong hepatic enzyme inducer was included in the study. Weak
enzyme

in serum 25(OH)D3 levels. Whether or not utilisation of absorbed vitamin D is impaired in the elderly, the possibility of poor absorption of the dietary vitamin in this group makes the question of the efficiency of u.v.L. as a stimulus to vitamin-D synthesis on ageing skin of importance. With increasing age, the risks of becoming house-bound and of having a poor diet increase. Finding a cheap, efficient, and acceptable way of ensuring adequate vitamin-D stores for such patients is, therefore, a worth-while exercise. Further studies of the absorption of oral vitamin D and the response to u.v.L. at a level comparable to average outdoor daytime exposure in Britain are in
progress.

inducers, however, such as phenylbutazone and dichlorophenazone (two patients only), might alter vitamin-D status proportionately more in depleted
subjects. The greatly reduced levels of plasma 25(OH)Da in the long-stay patients would usually be taken to reflect vitamin-D depletion, though this cannot necessarily be equated with osteomalacia; routine bone biopsy was not felt to be justified in these patients. The dietary survey shows that none of these patients
had for
a

Upjohn Ltd. (Dr J. C. Babcock) for a for use as a standard in the assay of 25(OH)D3; to Miss I. D. Cotgrove for routine biochemistry; and to Miss R. R. Begg, Miss C. Waters, and Miss L. M. Theen for the dietetic survey. Requests for reprints should be addressed to D. C., Hackney and St. Bartholomew's Hospital, London E9, or to R. D. C., Unit of Metabolism and Endocrinology, London Hospital, London El.
are

We

grateful

to

gift

of

25(OH)D3

REFERENCES 1. Baker, A. Z. Geront. Clin. 1962, 4, 100. 2. Exton-Smith, A. N., Stanton, B. R. Report of an Investigation into the Dietary of Elderly Women Living Alone. King Edward's Hospital Fund for London, 1965. 3. Nutrition Survey of the Elderly: report by the Panel on Nutrition of the Elderly. H.M. Stationery Office, 1972. 4. Macleod, C. C., Judge, T. G., Caird, F. I. Age and Ageing, 1974, 3, 209. 5. Corless, D., Gupta, S. P. ibid. p. 73. 6. Haddad, J. G., Chyu, K. J. J. clin. Endocr. 1971, 33, 992. 7. Edelstein, S., Charman, M., Lawson, D. E. M., Kodicek, E. Clin. Sci. molec. Med. 1974, 46, 231. 8. Dent, C. E., Harper, C. M. Lancet, 1962, i, 559. 9. Berry, E. M., Gupta, M. M., Turner, S. J., Burns, R. R. Br. med. J. 1973, iv, 640. 10. Stamp, T. C. B., Round, J. M. Nature, 1974, 247, 563. 11. McLaughlin, M., Raggatt, P. R., Fairney, A., Brown, D. J., Lester, E., Wills, M. R. Lancet, 1974, i, 536. 12. Hodkinson, H. M., McPherson, C. K. Age and Ageing, 1973, 2, 28. 13. Stamp, T. C. B. Nutrition, 1973, 27, 97. 14. Siegel, S. Non-Parametric Statistics for the Behavioural Sciences. New York, 1956.

vitamin-D intake from diet of

as

much

as

(100 i.u.) per day. In only one patient was plasma-calcium, after correction for plasmaalbumin, below the lower limit of normal. However, the plasma alkaline phosphatase levels were higher than those reported on apparently normal women under 55 years of age by Dent and Harper.s The distribution of plasma alkaline phosphatase was also higher than in a group of 162 female geriatric patients over the age of 60 in whom clinical diagnoses of diseases associated (or possibly associated) with raised serum alkaline phosphatase had been excluded'2 Some of the higher values of plasma alkaline phosphatase
observed in the present series may have been due to similar undetected disorders (e.g., Paget's disease), but it seems likely that osteomalacia may have accounted for some of the elevated levels. The present group of geriatric patients, whilst almost certainly taking inadequate amounts of vitamin D, may well have had other causes for vitamin-D depletion since low levels of plasma 25(OH)D3 were found even after low but usually adequate oral doses of vitamin D; it has been suggested elsewhere that larger doses of oral vitamin D are needed to cure osteomalacia in the elderly 13 Possible contributory mechanisms are abnormalities in conversion of cholecalciferol to 25(OH)D3 in the liver, metabolism of 25(OH)D3 to its active metabolite by the kidney, or impaired absorption of oral vitamin D in the elderly.
The majority of these geriatric patients were totally without ultraviolet light (u.v.L.) irradiation, since normal window-glass screens out virtually all the u.v.L. of wavelengths needed to induce cholecalciferol synthesis (250-300 nm.) and no u.v.L. was produced by the ward lighting. Patients occasionally out of doors were found to have a small but significant increase

25 &micro;g. the value

Hypothesis
A BIOLOGICAL ROLE FOR THE

MAJOR

HISTOCOMPATIBILITY ANTIGENS
P. C. DOHERTY

R. M. ZINKERNAGEL

Department of Microbiology, John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian National University, Canberra, A.C.T. 2601, Australia
A central function of the major histoSum ary compatibility (H) antigens may be to signal changes in self to the immune system. Virusinduced modification of strong transplantation antigens apparently results in recognition by thymusderived lymphocytes (T cells), with subsequent clonal expansion and immune elimination of cells bearing non-self determinants. The extreme genetic polymorphism found in the major H antigen systems of higher vertebrates may reflect evolutionary pressure exerted by this immunological surveillance mechanism.
INTRODUCTION

THE present

hypothesis

is derived from experimen-

1407

tal evidence that immune T cells in three of the most prevalent naturally occurring virus diseases of mice2 lymphocytic choriomeningitis1 (L.C.M.), ectromelia (mouse pox), and paramyxovirus3 (Sendai) infection -are apparently sensitised to altered self antigens. Genetic mapping studies have established that the self components involved are specified at, or near to, either of the two loci coding for the major histocompatibility (H) antigens.2-5 Monitoring of H antigen structural integrity by recirculating thymusderived lymphocytes may thus be an essential feature of immunological surveillance.6 Furthermore, existence of such a mechanism provides a biological basis for the evolution of strong transplantation antigen systems, a physiological role for which has been

activity in vivo.17,18 Furthermore, evidence from other laboratories indicates that the T cell response to Rous sarcoma virus in chickens,19 and to trinitrophenyl (T.N.P.)-modified mouse lymphocytes,2o,21 is similarly restricted. There are several possible explanations for this phenomenon. Any argument based on inhibition due to presence of alloantigens 22 (different H-2 antigens) has been eliminated by cell-mixture experiments and by the use of various parent-Flcombinations both in.vitro and in vivo.s&middot;1' This leaves two major alternatives, which we have designated intimacy or altered

serf. 23
The intimacy model may be summarised as follows : the H-2 gene complex codes for a physiological self-recognition mechanism,24-26 which operates in addition to immunologically specific recognition of viral antigen by the T cell receptor. This dual interaction hypothesis implies that the host need generate T cells of only one broad specificity reactive to virus. The H-2 compatibility requirement would thus reflect operation of the physiological self-recognition system. There are two immediately apparent problems with this idea. First, the fact that compatibility at either H-2K or H-2D is sufficient for lysis of virus-infected cells to occur implies that there must be two separate physiological interaction mechanisms, coded for at H-2K or H-2D. Second, it does not explain sensitisation to alloantigens, the cell-mediated immune response to which is essentially similar to that resulting from infection of syngeneic (self) cells with virus. Obviously, allogeneic cells must lack this selfrecognition system. The altered self concept is simpler, requiring that

conspicuously lacking.7
THE

H-2

GENE COMPLEX

majority of this discussion is concerned with our evidence is derived solely from mouse experiments. However, H-2 and HL-A are comparable systems,8 and the argument may apply generally to higher vertebrates. Before proceeding further it is necessary to briefly review the nature of H-2.9,10 The major transplantation antigens of mice are coded for by the H-2 gene complex, situated on chromosome 17 (linkage group IX). The complex is generally inherited as a single unit, and is divided conventionally into four regions: K, I, S, and D. Individual H-2 types are described by the use of small letters-e.g., H-2k (i.e., H-2Kk-Dk). Genes specifying the major H antigens are sited at H-2K and H-2D, which behave as single loci with multiple alleles and are equivalent to the LA and FOUR loci of man. The products of these two regions are apparently independent on the cell surface, as they do not co-cap when exposed to highly specific antisera.11 Components of both H-2 and HL-A antigens recognised by antibody are polypeptides, thought to be organised in a two-unit structure similar to the constant region domains of immunoglobulins.12,13 Serologically determined H-2 private specificities (strong transplantation antigens) are associated only with a single H-2 type, whereas H-2 public specificities may be shared between a number of H-2 types. The I region in mice is concerned with regulation of some antibody responses requiring T cell help,14 and S is associated with a serum-protein which is a useful marker for defining genetic recombination events.
H-2,
as

The

single (per clone) immunologically specific T cell receptor recognises virus-induced changes of syngeneic H antigens-i.e., different T cell clones from H-2KKa

Dk L.C.M.-infected mice are sensitised to altered self antigens coded for by H-2Kk or H-2Dk, and do not
include specificities reactive to virus-induced changes in self coded for by H-2Kdor H-2Ddas these antigens are not encountered during immunisation.
INTIMACY OR ALTERED SELF

REQUIREMENT

FOR

H-'2 COMPATIBILITY

Experiments aimed at differentiating between these possibilities have been based on two distinct protocols: (1) competitive inhibition of cytotoxicity in vitro by addition of cold ", unlabelled target cells, and (2) further multiplication of immune T cells transferred to irradiated, virus-infected recipients.
two
"

Specific cell-mediated lysis of 5lCr-labelled fibroblasts, macrophages, or tumour cells occurs only if
immune donors of T cells and virus-infected targets are compatible at either H-2K or H-2D. Successful interaction apparently reflects mutuality of serologically defined H-2 private antigenic specificities, though this may simply be a marker for closely linked genes coding for differences not recognised by circulatory antibody. Identity at the I-S region is neither sufficient nor necessary for lysis to occur. Differences at the M locus, which is involved in mixed lymphocyte reactions and is sited on another mouse chromosome,16 are also irrelevant. Less detailed animal

These experiments have been described elsewhere,s,21,27 and will not be discussed here. The overall conclusion from both approaches is that different clones of sensitised T cells recognise self components specified at, or near to, H-2K or H-2D. The intimacy model can be accommodated with these findings in either of two ways:

experiments have shown that the

bility requirement applies

same H-2 compatialso to T cell effector

(1) Clones of T cells express only one of the postulated physiological interaction structures coded for at H-2K or H-2D, and in heterozygotes there is superimposed allelic exclusion at these two loci. This complex form of genetic exclusion is, to our knowledge, extremely unlikely. (2) The self components involved in mutual interaction form an integral part of both the T cell receptor and of the antigen, and this receptor complex is clonally expressed. This second possibility is operationally iden-

1408
tical with the altered selfconcept: structures coded for at H-2K or H-2D must form at least part of the antigen recognised by the T cell. Reactivity to alloantigens, which may be regarded as slightly different from self, may be similarly divided with respect to these two regions 28

agents and express high concentrations of H-2. In
the brain, however, where implanted skin allografts do not elicit an immune response:6 expression of H-2 antigens is minimal.45
THE BASIS OF H-ANTIGEN POLYMORPHISM

Virus-induced modification of self may reflect

some

complex antigens (e.g., neoantigens physically exposed during virus budding or products of derepressed host genes 29).
At this stage we do not understand the biochemical nature of alteration in self, nor is such knowledge central to the present argument.
ALTERED SELF AND IMMUNOLOGICAL

of viral and H antigens, expression of H that are not normally seen on the cell surface

extreme

SURVEILLANCE

The central implication of the altered selfconcept is that cell-mediated immunity to virally or chemically modified cells and to allogeneic cells 30 is of the same order. Reactivity to xenoantigens (major Hfrom a different species) may also be accomantigens modated within this model, though differences from self will obviously be greater and the T cell response is concurrently much weaker.31,32 Monitoring of H antigen structural integrity by recirculating T cells may thus be an essential feature of immunological surveillance, with specific recognition leading to clonal expansion and elimination of cells bearing major H antigens seen as not-self. Selective pressure exerted by this immunological surveillance mechanism may have been of great importance in the development of the immune system in general, perhaps along the lines

antigen systems of mice and men show genetic polymorphism equalled, in vertebrates, that associated with the immunoglobulins.8, 11,11 only by No generally acceptable reason has been advanced for this profound variability, maintenance of which is best explained by there being selective advantage for heterozygosity in the absence of overall evolutionary pressure favouring any particular H antigen type.4' We wish to propose two separate lines of explanation for this extreme variability in H antigens. Both are based on the realisation that different T cell sped.. ficities are associated with self antigens coded for at each of the two major H antigen loci, and may be
The major H summarised
as

follows:

(1) The range of T cell responsiveness is, on a purely mechanistic basis, greater in individual Fl than in homozygous mice.

suggested by Jerne.33 Reactivity associated with strong transplantation antigens may not be characteristic of all classes of T cell response. It would obviously be disadvantageous for surveillance T cells to kill all macrophages and B cells (antibody-forming cell precursors) expressing non-self antigenic determinants. This may tend to happen in conditions such as L.C.M., where the virus infects many cells in lymphoid tissue 34 and cell-mediated immunity is, at least initially, more prominent than the humoral response.35,36 In the main, however, interaction between T cells and B cells may reflect the evolution of a functionally separate class of helper T cells,37 programmed to recognise antigen-induced modification of structures (Ia) coded for by genes in the I region.38-40 High concentrations
of la are found on B cells and macrophages.41 Modification of Ia may thus lead to T cell helper activity and to a more effective antibody response, whereas changes in H antigen structure result in immune elimination mediated by surveillance T cells.. Regulation 42 of the overall immune response may reflect complex interactions between these two systems.2,21,40 Evolutionary success of an immunological surveillance mechanism associated with a particular set of H antigens may, in turn, have led to strong expression of these antigens. Major H antigen systems such as H-2 and HL-A are recognised only in higher vertebrates and have not been defined in life forms more primitive than amphibia,43 though they may also exist in the bony fishes 44 Also, the tissue distribution of major H antigens may reflect the extent of surveillance T cell activity. Macrophages and lymphoid cells are particularly exposed to infectious

pathogens (or oncogenic processes) may not immunogenic modification of self associated with a particular H allele, and existence of multiple polymorphism thus minimises the risk of there being general unresponsiveness throughout the population. This latter possibility has been suggested independently by Shearer and his colleagues.21 Both arguments may also be used to explain the evolutionary advantage of there being two, rather than
cause an

(2)

Some

one, H

antigen loci. Homozygous L.c.M.-immune mice apparently possess T cells of two broad specificities, sensitised to modification of H antigens coded for at H-2K or H-2D. Heterozygotes would thus generate T cells of four specificities, associated with H-2K and H-2D of each parental haplotype. The range of T cell responsiveness is thus effectively doubled in the Fl.
Does this result in enhanced T cell effector function in mice heterozygous at the H-2 gene complex? Analysis of data from in-vitro cytotoxic assays reveals that L.c.M.-immune FlT cells lyse virusinfected targets of one parental H-2 type almost as effectively (by various estimates from 70% to 100%) as do fully syngeneic parent-strain effector lymphocytes.5 The total response in the Fl associated with both parental H-2 types, which should be equally expressed on the cell surface, could thus be from 140% to 200% of that occurring in parental homoEvidence from in-vivo experiments also zygotes. indicates that T cell-mediated immunopathology is more severe in heterozygous mice infected with L.C.M. virus.49 The acute pathological process characteristic of L.C.M.23 is, however, atypical of T cell responses in general. In most virus diseases cell-mediated immunity operates to eliminate infected cells, and consequently to protect the host.50 Enhancement of T cell reactivity in the Fl would, therefore, generally be of selective advantage and would tend to maintain an overall balanced polymorphism in H antigen types. Superimposed on this mechanistic argument for selective advantage of heterozygotes is the concept, emerging from current experiments, that viruses may

1409
not

induce

immunogenic modifications of all H anti-

gen

In L.C.M. infection the T cell response associated with H-2D appears stronger than that at H-2K. The same may be true for the response to some oncogenic viruses, where resistance is related to H-2D.' Reactivity to L.c.M. virus associated with H-2Kd may, at least in one mouse strain, be particularly weak, whereas in ectromelia H-2Dk is associated with a minimal response.2 This raises the possibility that the correlation between susceptibility to a particular infectious disease or oncogenic process and HL-A or H-2 type may reflect absence of an immunogenic modification in major H antigens, rather than operation of controlling immune response (Ir)

types.2,38

Reviews of Books
Rapid Virus Diagnosis
Application of Immunofluorescence. P. S. GARDNER, M.D., and J. McQun.UN, B.sc, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne. London: Butterworths. 1974. Pp. 255.
E6.

genes 14
occur

Overall selection against a particular H-2 type might if only one disease process were prevalent. Most animal populations are, however, subject to a great variety of infections. Maintenance of as wide a variety of HL-A or H-2 types would thus be of general advantage, minimising the chance that a particular virus would fail to produce an immunogenic H-antigen modification throughout the population. Again, the net result would tend towards a balanced poly-

morphism.
REFERENCES

Zinkernagel, R. M., Doherty, P. C. Nature, 1974, 248, 701. Blanden, R. V., Doherty, P. C., Dunlop, M. B. C., Gardner, I., Zinkernagel, R. M., David, C. S. ibid. 1975, 254, 269. 3. Doherty, P. C., Zinkernagel, R. M. Unpublished. 4. Doherty, P. C., Zinkernagel, R. M. J. exp. Med. 1975, 141, 502. 5. Zinkernagel, R. M., Doherty, P. C. ibid. (in the press). 6. Burnet, F. M. Immunological Surveillance. Sydney, 1970. 7. Snell, G. D. Immunogenetics, 1975, 1, 1. 8. Amos, D. B., et al. Fedn Proc. 1972, 31, 1087. 9. Klein, J., Shreffler, D. C. Transplant. Rev. 1971, 6, 3. 10. Shreffler, D. C., David, C. S. Adv. Immun. 1974 (in the press). 11. Neauport-Sautes, C., Lilly, F., Silvestre, D., Kourilsky, F. M. J. exp. Med. 1973, 137, 511. 12. Tanigaki, N., Pressman, D. Transplant. Rev. 1974, 21, 15. 13. Strominger, J. L., Cressell, P., Grey, H., Humphreys, R. E., Mann, D., McCune, J., Parham, P., Robb, R., Sanderson, A. R., Springer, T. A., Terhorst, C., Turner, M. J. ibid. p. 126. 14. Green, I. Immunogenetics, 1975, 1, 4. 15. Gardner, I., Bowern, N. A., Blanden, R. V. Eur. J. Immun. (in the press). 16. Festenstein, H. Transplant. Rev. 1973, 15, 62. 17. Doherty, P. C., Zinkernagel, R. M. J. Immun. 1975, 114, 30. 18. Blanden, R. V., Bowern, N. A., Pang, T. B., Gardner, I., Parish, C. R. Aust. J. exp. Biol. med. Sci. (in the press). 19. Wainberg, M. A., Markson, Y., Weiss, D. W., Doljanski, F. Proc. natn. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1974, 71, 3565. 20. Shearer, G. M. Eur. J. Immun. 1974, 4, 257. 21. Shearer, G. M., Rehn, G. R., Garbarino, C. A. J. exp. Med. (in the press). 22. Hellstrom, K. E., M&ouml;ller, G. Progr. Allergy, 1965, 9, 158. 23. Doherty, P. C., Zinkernagel, R. M. Transplant. Rev. 1974, 19, 89. 24. Katz, D. H., Hamaoka, T., Dorf, M. E., Benacerraf, B. Proc. natn. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1974, 70, 2624. 25. Shevach, E. M., Green, I., Paul, W. E. J. exp. Med. 1974, 139, 679. 26. Rosenthal, A. S., Shevach, E. M. ibid. 1973, 138, 1194. 27. Zinkernagel, R. M., Doherty, P. C. Nature, 1974, 251, 547. 28. Brondz, B. D., Egorov, I. K., Drizlikh, G. I. J. exp. Med. 1975, 141, 11. 29. Martin, W. J. Cell Immun. 1975, 15, 1. 30. Cerottini, J.-C., Brunner, K. T. Adv. Immun. 1974, 19, 67. 31. Lindahl, K. F., Bach, F. H. Nature, 1975, 254, 607. 32. Wekerle, H., Eshhar, Z., Lonai, P., Feldman, M. Proc. natn. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1975, 72, 1147. 33. Jerne, N. K. Eur. J. Immun. 1971, 1, 1. 34. Mims, C. A., Tosolini, F. A. Br. J. exp. Path. 1969, 50, 584. 35. Hotchin, J. Monogr. Virol. 1971, 3, 1. 36. Lehmann-Grube, F. Virol. Monogr. 1971, 10, 1. 37. Wernet, D., Lilly, F. J. exp. Med. 1975, 141, 573. 38. Kantor, H., Boyse, B. A. ibid. (in the press). 39. Erb, P., Feldman, M. ibid. (in the press). 40. Zinkernagel, R. M., Doherty, P. C., Blanden, R. V. Unpublished.
1. 2.

THE diagnostic virology laboratory is now firmly entrenched in major clinical pathology departments. There are, indeed, few investigations more important than the laboratory confirmation of smallpox or rubella in early pregnancy and the detection of hepatitis-B antigen in renal-dialysis candidates. Yet virology laboratories are rightly criticised for their slowness in getting results to clinical colleagues, and this criticism has prompted a search for more rapid diagnostic methods. Electron microscopy, immune precipitation, and immunofluorescence are front runners in this field, and this book deals exclusively with immunofluorescence. The procedure requires comparatively inexpensive apparatus and, by virological standards, is simple. It is, however, bedevilled with irritating but serious problems such as non-specific fluorescence. An authoritative text is therefore to be welcomed. This book is written by two people who have done much to pioneer immunofluorescence in diagnostic virology. It deals with the principles of fluorescence microscopy, the basic techniques of preparing reagents and staining, and applications to the diagnosis of infections caused by the major families of viruses. The appraisals of the relative value of immunofluorescence are usually sensible, but sometimes the authors are a little overenthusiastic. For example, most workers would regard ultracentrifugation or gel filtration as more satisfactory for the detection of specific rubella IgM antibodies. This is an excellent book written by two experienced workers who are anxious to pass on their skill to others. It will encourage those who have fought shy of introducing immunofluorescence to their laboratory, and prompt those who have already taken the first steps to extend their repertoire. This volume will be essential for all diagnostic virology laboratories and for bacteriology laboratories preparing to take on virological investigation.

The Electrocardiology of Coronary Artery Disease
LEO SCHAMROTH, M.D., D.SC., F.R.C.P.E., Witwatersrand. Oxford: Blackwell. 1975.

University of Pp. 344. E14.

A MAJOR new text on electrocardiography by Professor Schamroth is an important event, and on this occasion he has confined his analysis, at least in intention, to aspects of ischaemic heart-disease. As is to be expected from one known to be a careful thinker and explicit teacher, this book is didactic and deductive, in the best senses of the

41.

H&auml;mmerling, G. J., Mauve, G., Goldberg, E., McDevitt, Immunogenetics, 1975, 1, 428.

H. O.

42. Bretscher, P. A. Cell. Immun. 1973, 6, 1. 43. Du Pasquier, L., Chardonnens, X., Miggiano, V. C. Immunogenetics, 1975, 1, 482. 44. Hildemann, W. H. in Transplantation Antigens: Markers of Biological Individuality (edited by B. D. Kahan and R. M. Reisfeld); p. 3. New York, 1972. 45. Edidin, M. ibid. p. 95. 46. Medawar, P. B. Br. J. exp. Path. 1948, 19, 58. 47. Bodmer, W. F. Nature, 1972, 237, 139. 48. Burnet, F. M. ibid. 1973, 245, 139. 49. Doherty, P. C., Zinkernagel, R. M. Unpublished. 50. Blanden, R. V. Transplant. Rev. 1974, 19, 56. 51. M&uuml;hlbock, O., Dux, A. J. natn. Cancer Inst. 1974, 53, 993. 52. Chesebro, B., Wehrly, K., Stimpfling, J. J. exp. Med. 1974, 140, 1457. 53. Vladutiu, A. O., Rose, N. R. Immunogenetics, 1974, 1, 305.

