Mechanisms controlling steroid receptor binding to sp&fic DNA sequences
Dean P. Edwards, Angelo M. DeMarzo, Sergio A. Oiiate, Candace A. Beck, Patricia A. Estes, and Steven K. Nordeen
Department of Pathology, Colorado, USA University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver,

Mammalian progesterone receptors activated by hormone binding in nuclei of intact cells exhibit substantially higher binding activity for specific DNA sequences than receptors bound with hormone and activated in cell-free cytosol. Differences in DNA-binding activity occur despite the fact that both activated receptor forms sediment at 4S on sucrose gradients and are apparently dissociated from the heat shock protein 90. This suggests that hormone-induced release of heat shock protein 90 from receptors is necessary, but not suf$cientfor maximal activation ofDNA binding. This report is a review of studies from our laboratories that have examined the role of receptor interaction with other nuclear protein factor(s), and receptor dimerization in solution, as additional regulatory steps involved in the process of receptor activation and binding to spectj5c gene sequences. (Steroids 56:271-278, 1991)

Keywords: steroids; breast cancer

progesterone

receptors;

hormone-response

elements;

DNA binding; receptor

dimerization;

Introduction
Steroid receptors are hormone-dependent transcriptional activators that bind to hormone response elements (HREs) of target genes.`,' The process of receptor "activation" and subsequent binding to HREs is not well understood. One step in receptor activation is thought to be the release of a physically associated repressor molecule, heat shock protein 90 (hsp 90), in response to hormone binding. Several different classes of steroid receptors have been found to be complexed with hsp 90 in their unactivated 8-10s oligomeric state.3-7 Receptor activation either in vitro or in intact cells results in a loss of association with hsp 90 and conversion from the 8-10s non-DNA-binding form to a 4s DNA-binding form. `s9Based on studies with chick oviduct progesterone receptor (PR)" and human PR,"-r3 activation has been suggested to be a multistep process involving not only hsp 90 release, but other hormone-induced alterations in the receptor molecule that are required for maximal activation. This report is an overview of previously published

studies from our laboratories on mechanisms, other than hsp 90 release, involved in controlling steroid receptor binding to specific gene sequences. This includes receptor interaction with other nuclear protein(s) and receptor dimerization in the absence of DNA. As an experimental system, studies have been performed with PR in T47D human breast cancer cells using the progesterone response element (PRE) of mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) as the target DNA.

Experimental
Materials

[3H]R5020 (promegestone; 17a-[3H]methyl-21-methyl19-norpregna-4,9-dien-3,20-one; 87 Ci/mmol) and unlabeled R5020 were obtained from DuPont New England Nuclear (Boston, MA, USA). [32P]cy-dATP and [32P]adCTP (3,000 Ci/mmol) were from ICN Radiochemicals (Irvine, CA, USA) and [35S]protein A was obtained from Amersham Corporation (Arlington Heights, IL, USA).
Monoclonal antibodies

Address reprint requests to Dean P. Edwards, Ph.D., Department of Pathology (B216), University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 4200 East 9th Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

Mouse monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) designated AB52 and B-30 (both IgG,s) were prepared against purified
Steroids, 1991, vol. 56, May

0 1991 Butterworth-Heinemann

271

Papers
human PRs as described.14 AB-52 recognizes both the A (94 kd) and B forms (120 kd) of PR (designated PRA and PR-B), and B-30 recognizes PR-B only. SDS, 0.125 M Tris-base, pH 6.8, 20% glycerol, 0.02% bromphenol blue, and 10% P-mercaptoethanol). Electrophoresis and Western immunoblotting of extracted PR were carried out as describedI using ["Slprotein A and autoradiography of dried nitrocellulose as the detection method.

Cell culture
T47D human breast cancer cells were cultured as described.`4115 To activate PR in intact cells (in vivo), cell cultures were incubated for 1 hour at 37 C with 20 nM of the synthetic progestin R5020. Cells were harvested by a lo-minute incubation at 37 C in Earle's balanced salt solution with 1 mM EDTA and washed by centrifugation in Earle's balanced salt solution.

DNA binding assays
Gel-mobility shift assays were performed as described.15 Approximately 0.06 pmol (based on steroidbinding assay) of PR in cytosol or nuclear extracts was incubated for 20 minutes at room temperature with 0.1 ng of "P end-labeled, double-stranded synthetic oligonucleotide (5'-gate-TTTGGTTACAAACTGTTCTTAAAACGAG-3 base paired with 3'-AAACCAATGTTTGACAAGAATTTTGCTCctag-5') that corresponds to the most distal (base pairs - 189 to - 162 from the transcription start site) progesterone/glucocorticoid response element of MMTV. This will be referred to as PRE. The DNA binding buffers and conditions for gel electrophoresis have been described. Is An alternate DNA binding assay was performed by immune isolation of PR-DNA complexes with the receptor-specific MAb AB-52. A 149 base pair 32P endlabeled DraUHinfI fragment of MMTV (termed DHf) containing both the distal and proximal PRE units (base pairs - 198 to - 71 from the transcription start site) was incubated for 2 hours at 0 C with PR in either cytosol or nuclear extracts. Receptor-DNA complexes were then immune isolated with the AB-52 Mab using protein A sepharose as immunoabsorbent.`?

Buffers and progesterone

receptor preparations

All buffers used for cellular extraction of PR were derived from TEG (10 mM Tris-base adjusted with HCl to pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, and 10% glycerol). Cells were homogenized in TEDG (TEG plus 1 mM dithiothreitol) on ice with a cell to buffer ratio of 1 : 2 (v/v). A mixture of protease inhibitors was included in the homogenization buffer.14 Cytosolic PR from non-hormone-treated cells were prepared as a 105,000 x g supernatant of crude homogenates. To stabilize the unactivated 8- 1OS cytosol receptor complex, 20 mM sodium molybdate was included in homogenization buffers. To prepare activated PR in cell-free cytosol, sodium molybdate was omitted and cytosols were incubated with 20 nM R5020 for 4 hours at 4 C followed by exposure to 0.5 M NaCl for 1 hour at 4 C. Nuclear PR, activated by the addition of R5020 to intact cells, was prepared as a 0.5 M NaCl extract of isolated nuclei.`j The sedimentation rates on sucrose density gradients for each of these PR forms have been published.`5 Activated receptors were dialyzed against TEDG buffer to reduce salt concentration prior to immune isolation and DNA-binding assays. The number of receptor steroid-binding sites in cytosol and nuclear extracts was determined by use of dextran-coated charcoal.14

Results Hormone dependence of progesterone binding to specijk DNA sites receptor

Immune isolation of human progesterone receptor
Protein A Sepharose was precoated noncovalently with receptor-specific MAbs (AB-52 or B-30) for use as an immunoabsorbent. Precoating was accomplished by incubation of protein A sepharose for 4 hours at 4 C with rabbit anti-mouse IgG (Cappel), followed by washing of beads and then incubation for another 16 hours at 4 C with receptor-specific MAbs at a concentration of 10 pg/lOO ,ul of protein A Sepharose suspension. Aliquots of cytosol or nuclear PR were incubated with MAbcoated beads on an end over end rotator for 4 hours at 4 C. Resins were then washed three times by centrifugation in TEG (plus or minus 0.3 M NaCl), followed by transfer to a clean microcentrifuge tube and one additional wash.

SDS-gel electrophoresis and Western irnmunoblotting
Immobilized PR complexes were eluted directly from protein A Sepharose with a 2 x SDS sample buffer (2% 272
Steroids, 1991, vol. 56, May

A fundamental issue with respect to steroid receptor activation that remains unclear is whether hormone does in fact promote binding of all classes of steroid receptors to their specific DNA sites. The activity of a gene regulatory protein can be controlled either at the level of DNA binding or through modification of the protein already bound to specific DNA sites. Studies from several different laboratories have suggested that either mode of regulation may occur with steroid receptors.`2.`"-22 Discrepancies in results may reflect differences in methodology or, more likely, are due to receptor classes or receptors from different tissues or species exhibiting different behavior with respect to interaction with hsp 90. To examine the question of the hormone dependence of human PR binding to a specific PRE, we compared different forms of native human PR for their DNA binding activity in a gel-mobility shift assay. Receptor forms included (1) unoccupied 8- 10s cytosolic PR, prepared from non-hormone-treated T47D cells; (2) cytosohc 4s PR, activated by cell-free binding of R5020 followed by treatment with 0.5 M salt; and (3) 4s nuclear PR, activated by binding of R5020 in intact cells prior to their extraction from nuclei with 0.5 M salt.

Steroid receptor-DNA

binding: Edwards et al.

binding to specific gene sequences is highly dependent on hormone, thus supposing a model for receptor activation in which hormone functions to increase the affinity of PR for specific DNA sites.`2,`3,1s The substantially higher DNA-binding activity of activated nuclear PR, over that of salt-activated cytosol PR-hormone complexes, was of great interest because hsp 90 has been dissociated from both receptor forms. l3 This suggests that hsp 90 dissociation from receptors is necessary but not sufficient for maximal activation of receptor DNA-binding function. We therefore investigated the role of receptor interaction with other nuclear proteins and PR dimerization as additional factors that might account for the higher DNA-binding activity of nuclear PR activated by hormone binding in intact cells. Nuclear protein(s) enhance progesterone receptor binding to DNA
- Free DNA

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

6

9

10

Figure 1 Binding of different receptor forms to an end-labeled PRE oligonucleotide by gel-mobility shift assay is shown in lanes 1 to 3. The different PR forms indicated were prepared as described in Experimental. Lines indicate positions of free DNA and PR-DNA complexes. A nonspecific protein-DNA complex is present in the middle of the gel. The addition of receptor-specific MAbs (AB-52. E-30) and an unrelated MAb. C-IaG. is shown in lanes 4 to 6. Competition with excess u&be&d PRE-DNA or two unrelated oligonucleotides is shown in lanes 7 to 9 (CAMP response element, CRE,40 and FPllz4). (Reproduced with permission. See ref. 13)

When a 32P-labeled oligonucleotide derived from the PRE of MMTV was incubated with cytosol or nuclear extracts and the resultant PR-DNA complexes separated from free DNA by nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, the unoccupied 8-10s cytosol PR failed to show any binding to the PRE-oligonucleotide (Figure 1, lane 1). Activated cytosolic PR-R5020 complexes bound with low but detectable activity resulted in reduced mobility of some [32P]PRE (Figure 1, lane 2). Activated nuclear PR-R5020 complexes, however, displayed a substantially higher level of DNA binding (Figure 1, lane 3). In multiple experiments, activated nuclear PR was found to exhibit a range of five- to seven-fold higher DNA-binding activity than PR activated in cell-free cytosol. The specificity of receptor-DNA complex is shown in the other lanes of Figure 1 (lanes 4 through 10). The presence of PR in the upshifted 32P-DNA complex is demonstrated by the further mobility shift produced by the addition of receptor-specific MAbs (AB-52 and B-30). Specificity of PR for PRE-DNA over that of nonspecific DNA is shown by the effective competition obtained with excess untabeled PRE-DNA and the lack of competition obtained with unrelated oligonucleotides (Figure 1, lanes 7 through 9). Based on these results, we conclude that human PR

We reasoned that an activated receptor in cytosol may bind less well to DNA than an activated receptor in nuclear extracts if there is a factor(s) in nuclei that facilitates PR-DNA interactions. To test this possibility, we performed mixing experiments by adding nuclear extracts lacking PR to an activated cytosol PR preparation. The addition of varying amounts of nuclear extract resulted in a dose-dependent increase in the amount of the end-labeled MMTV-DNA bound to the cytosol PR, as assessed by immune isolation of receptor-[32P]DNA complexes (Figure 2). Enhanced DNA binding occurred with a constant amount of DNA and cytosol PR, indicating that a factor(s) is present that acts with receptors in a cooperative manner to facilitate DNA binding. At best, however, a three-fold increase in DNA binding of cytosol PR was obtained by the addition of nuclear proteins. Thus, other cellular factors present in nuclei appear to account only in part for the higher DNA-binding activity of nuciear PR over that of cytosol PR. We have begun to characterize

t49bp

Dtn -

Figure2 Enhanced binding of cytosol PR to MM~-DNA by the addition of nuclear proteins. End-labeled MMTV-DNA bound to activated nuclear PR (lane 1) or activated cytosolic PR (lane 2) was detected by immune isolation of PR-DNA complexes as described in Experimental. `* Immune isolated end-labeled MMTV-DNA (149 basic pair DHf fragment) was then analyzed by gel electrophoresis and autoradiography. Varying aliquots of nuclear extracts prepared from T47D cells depleted of PR by immunoabsorption with AB-52 MAb were either assayed alone for binding to MMTV-DNA (even-numbered lanes) or after mixing with activated cytosol PR (odd-numbered lanes). (Adapted with permission. See ref. 12)

Steroids,

1991, vol. 56, May

273

Papers
the nuclear factor(s) responsible for enhanced DNA binding of receptors. The activity was found in nonhormone responsive (MDA-231) as well as hormoneresponsive (T47D) cells, suggesting it may be ubiquitous. The activity is both heat and trypsin sensitive and fractionates by differential dialysis in the size range of 50,000 to 75,000 molecular weight, suggesting it is associated with a protein(s).
m (A) PR-R5020 :

Progesterone

receptor binds to DNA as a dimer

A commonly used technique to determine whether a protein binds to DNA as adimer is to perform gel-mobility shift assays with protein size variants of two different lengths. If the protein binds as a dimer, three mobility protein-DNA complexes are expected: the fastest and slowest complexes, representing homodimers of the long and short versions ofthe protein, and the intermediate complex, a heterodimer composed of one long and one short subunit." This technique has been used to demonstrate that both estrogen receptors and glucocorticoid receptors bind as dimers to their cognate hormone We response elements. `h.2h.77 have been able to exploit the fact that PRs in T47D cells are naturally expressed as two different-sized proteins, termed PR-A and PRB," to demonstrate by gel-mobility shift that PR also binds to specific DNA sites as a dimer.`" The A form of human PR (94 kd) has been shown to be a truncated form of PR-B (I 20 kdf , missing N-terminal sequences, but containing DNA- and steroid-binding domains identical to PR-B." Although the mechanism whereby PR-A originates is in question,Zg-3' it appears to be a true cellular product. The functional roles of PR-A and PR-B are not completely understood, but they have been reported to exhibit different target gene specificities." As illustrated in Figures 1 and 3 (far right lane), three distinct PR-DNA complexes are obtained when gel-mobility shift assays are performed with cell extracts containing both the A and B forms of human PR. This is consistent with PR complexing to PRE-DNA as dimers composed of the possible subunit combinations between PR-A and PR-B (AA homodimers, AB heterodimers, and BB homodimers). In further support of this, the intermediate mobility complex is more abundant than the other two, which is consistent with the formation of AA, AB, and BB dimers in the ratios of 1 : 2: I, predicted by binomial distribution (Figures I and 3). Moreover, the addition of an MAb reactive with both A and B forms of PR (AB-52) produced a further shift in the mobility of all three DNA complexes, indicating the presence of both PR-A and PR-B. The addition of a PR-B-specific MAb, B-30, produced a further shift of only the two upper complexes, indicating that no PR-B is present in the fastest mobility complex (Figure 2, lanes 4 and 5). Also, when gel-shift assays were performed with nuclear extracts that contained PR-A alone (by depletion of PRB with the B-30 MAb), only the fastest mobility DNA complex was evident (Figure 3). This complex was further shifted by the addition of the AB-52 MAb, but not by the B-30 MAb, indicating that it in fact contains PR-A exclusively (Figure 3). 274 Steroids, 1991, vol. 56, May

- BB - AB -AA

- n.s.

Figure 3 Gel-mobility shift assays performed with nuclear extracts containing PR-A alone (lanes 1 to 4) or with nuclear extracts containing both PR-A and PR-B (lane 5). Nuclear extracts obtained from hormone-treated l-470 ceils were depleted of PR-B by passage over an affinity resin coupled with the PR-B-specific MAb, B-30. Note that free DNA has been run off the gel. ns., Nonspecific. (Reproduced with permission. See ref. 15)

receptor

di~eriz~ti~~n in the ubsence of DNA

Although gel-mobility shift experiments illustrate that PRs are complexed to specific DNA as dimers, they do not address the question of whether PR dimerization occurs in solution in the absence of DNA. To explore this question, we have again taken advantage of the fact that PRs are expressed in approximately equal amounts in T47D cells as two different-sized proteins. If receptor dimerization between the A and B forms of PR was to occur in the absence of DNA, then immune isolation of crude ceil extracts with the PR-B-specific MAb (B-30) should result in coisolation of PR-A. To examine this, an immune coisolation assay was developed that involves first pe~orming immune isolations with the B-30 MAb. The isolated receptor complexes were than analyzed by Western blot with the AB-52 MAb (A and B specific) for the presence of both PR-A and PR-B. This assay was applied to the same three native PR forms analyzed in Figure 1 for DNA-binding activity. As shown in Figure 4, little or no PR-A was found to associate with PR-B in the unoccupied 8-10s cytosol PR complex. However, significant amounts of PR-A coisolated with PR-B when the immune coisola-

Steroid receptor-DNA

binding:

Edwards

et al.

Figure 4 Immune coisolation assay to detect PR-A. PR-B oligomers in the absence of DNA. The native forms of PR indicated were `mmune isolated (using protein A Sepharose as an immunoabsorbant) with the PR-B-specific MAb, B-30 (+) or a controlunrelated MAb f-1. lmmunobilized PR complexes were then extracted from protein A Sepharose and analyzed for the presence of both PRLA and PR-B by Western blot with the PR-Ai and PR-B-soecific MAb AB-52. The ratio of PR-A to PR-B in each isolated complex was estimated by direct scanning (Bioscan, Inc.) of the counts of [35S]protein A bound to PR bands and is expressed as the amount of PR-A as a percent relative to PR-B. (Adapted with permission. See ref. 13)

tion assay was performed with either activated cytosol PR or activated nuclear PR (Figure 4). These experiments, therefore, provide direct evidence that activated PRs are capable of forming stable PR-A - PR-B oligomers in the absence of DNA. Results of the immune coisolation assays also revealed a positive correlation between the ability of different PR forms to oligomerize in solution and their ability to bind to DNA (compare Figures 1 and 4). Unoccupied 810s cytosol PR failed to bind to PRE-DNA and to oligomerize in solution. Progesterone receptor activated in cell-free cytosol displayed some capability of forming A-B oligomers and exhibited low DNA-binding activity, while nuclear PR activated in whole cells prior to extraction exhibited an even higher extent of A-B oligomerization and the highest amount of DNA binding. This supports the hypothesis that dimerization in solution may be an important regulatory step required for receptor recognition of specific DNA sites.
Factors controlling dimerization progesterone receptors of

PR dimerization in the absence of DNA. By preparing cytosol receptors that contained varying amounts of associated hsp 90, we found an inverse relationship between the amount of hsp 90 associated with PR and the extent of PR-A * PR-B oligomerization that occurred in solution (Figure 5). This suggested that hsp 90 may indirectly repress DNA-binding function of receptors by blocking dimerization. Despite the apparent role of hsp 90 in negatively modulating PR dimerization, activated nuclear PRs were found to be capable of more efficient oligomerization than activated cytosol PRs, yet both PR forms have essentially released all hsp 90 (Figure 5, right). This indicates that additional factors may control dimerization. Human PR is a phosphoprotein that exhibits basal phosphorylation in the absence of hormone and has been shown to undergo increased phosphorylation on binding hormone in intact cells.33s34A distinctive feature of hormone-dependent phosphorylation of PR in T47D cells is an increase in apparent molecular weight of both PR-A and PR-B proteins on SDS-gels.28,33s34 We have observed a positive correlation between hormone-induced phosphorylation of PR and the ability of PR to oligomerize in solution. Only nuclear PRs activated by hormone binding in intact cells have undergone hormone-dependent phosphorylation. Activated cytosol PR-hormone complexes, which show a lower ability to oligomerize, are not posttranslationally modified in this manner, as evidenced by their failure to exhibit an upward shift in apparent molecular weight on SDS-PAGE (Figure 6). We have also observed that the higher phosphorylated form of PR-A (designated PR-A,), which predominates in the presence of hormone, forms an association with PR-B in the immune coisolation assay that is more stable to salt dissociation than that formed with the underphosphorylated form of PR-A (designated PR-A,) (Figure 7). These results

B-30

Immune Isolation

+Mo

120 kDa B-

24 kDa A-

AC-55

Using this convenient immune coisolation assay, we have begun to explore the factors that may control

Figure 5 Dissociation of hsp 90 from receptors is correlated with formation of PR oligomers in the absence of DNA. Different native forms of PR indicated were immune isolated with the B30 MAb, as in Figure 4. The isolated PR complexes were then analyzed by Western blotting with either AB-52 for detection of associated PR-A or with an MAb (AC-88) specific for hsp 90 for detection of associated hsp 90. (Reproduced with permission. See ref. 13)

Steroids,

1991, vol. 56, May

275

Papers

120k B94k /

lgG -

u"~

Figure 6 Nuclear PR activated by hormone binding in intact cells undergoes an apparent increase in molecular weight on SDS-polyacrylamide gels. The different native forms of PR indicated were immune isolated from cytosol or nuclear extracts with the PR-A- and PR-B-specific MAb, AB-52. Immobilized PR complexes were extracted from protein A Sepharose and analyzed by Western immunoblotting with AB-52. (Adapted with permission. See ref. 13)

and with studies from another laboratory working with human PR." The studies described in this report suggest that two additional regulatory steps may be involved in the activation of PRs: receptor interaction with other nuclear proteins and receptor dimerization. Studies from several laboratories have described the presence of a nuclear protein(s) that enhances the binding of steroid receptors to specific DNA sites. This was first described for estrogen receptor binding to the estrogen response element (ERE) of the vitellogenin gene. Two nonhistone chromosomal proteins (NHPI and NHPII) have been identified and purified; these proteins bind to EREs and also enhance receptor binding to EREs.j' Two studies with in vitro synthesized thyroid receptor have also shown that binding to thyroid response elements is highly dependent on other nuclear protein(s).3",37 Cavanaugh and Simons" have also identified a small molecular weight factor that increases the binding of glucocorticoid receptors to DNA-cellulose but not to nuclei. Interaction of glucocorticoid receptor with this factor was proposed to be a regulatory step in the process of receptor activation, occurring subsequent to hsp 90 dissociation and prior to DNA binding. Whether the nuclear proteins responsible for the enhanced binding of cytosol PR to DNA are the same as those described with estrogen, thyroid, or glucocorticoid receptors is not known. Accessory proteins of the nature described in these studies may play an important physiologic role, both in facilitating receptor DNA binding and in mediating receptor-dependent gene transcription. Several studies have demonstrated that steroid receptors both dimerize in solution in the absence of DNA and exist as dimers when complexed to their cognate DNA sites. This has been shown for estrogen receptors,`",`" glucocorticoid receptors,`7,39 and PRs.`~~" Whether receptor dimerization represents an

suggest that hormone-dependent phosphorylation may contribute to the stabilization of PR dimers in solution.

Discussion
The process of activation of steroid receptors and subsequent binding to specific gene sequences is emerging as a more complex mechanism than perhaps anticipated. Ligand-promoted release of the inhibitory molecule, hsp 90, is thought to be an important step required for activation of receptor DNA-binding function. However, substantial differences have been detected in the DNA-binding activities of two different forms of activated PR (cytosol and nuclear) despite the fact that hsp 90 has been dissociated from both (Figures 1 and 5). This suggests that hsp 90 dissociation from receptors is necessary, but not sufficient for maxima1 DNA-binding function. This also suggests that hormone binding in intact cells induces modifications in receptor required for maxima1 activation that are not mimicked in cellfree cytosol. Similar results and conclusions regarding hsp 90 have been obtained with chick oviduct PR'O 276
Steroids, 1991, vol. 56, May

NaCl (mM)

t AB-52 ' 0 "

Activated Nuclear PR
0 B-30 60 150

I 300 '

120 kDa B -

94kDAA

;=

Figure 7 Effects of salt on dissociation of PR-A. PR-B oligomers. Nuclear PRs activated by hormone binding in intact cells were immune isolated with AB-52 (as a control for total cellular PR) or B-30, as in Figure 5, except that PR complexes immobilized to protein A Sepharose were washed with TEG containing the NaCl concentrations indicated. After washing of resins, receptorswere extracted and analyzed by Western blot assay with AB-52 for the presence of both PR-B and PR-A. (Reproduced with permission. See ref. 13)

Steroid receptor-DNA
Steroid

binding:

Edwards

et al.

Monomer Unactivated COmpkX (8-10s) Figure 8 Proposed multistep

+ hsp 70

model for the process of receptor activation and binding to specific DNA sites.

intermediate regulatory step in receptor activation, required for recognition of specific DNA sites, has not been fully explored for all classes of steroid receptors. Nor have the factors that control dimerization been examined to any great extent. The recent report by Fawell et a1.26 has provided one of the only studies as yet to directly address the question of whether steroid receptor dimerization in solution is a requirement for recognition of specific DNA sites. By deletion and site-directed mutagenesis, these investigators have identified a conserved region of heptad repeat hydrophobic residues in the steroidbinding domain that is responsible for mediating dimerization of the estrogen receptor in the absence of DNA. They also reported a direct correlation between the ability of estrogen receptor mutants to form dimers in solution and their ability to bind to estrogen response elements. These results support the hypothesis that estrogen receptor dimerization controls DNA-binding function. Our biochemical analyses revealing a positive correlation between the ability of different PR forms to oligomerize in solution and their ability to bind to specific DNA sites (Figures 1,4, and 5) are also consistent with a model in which dimerization controls receptor binding to DNA elements exhibiting a dyad symmetric character, With respect to factors that control dimerization, we have observed that dissociation of hsp 90 from receptors correlates with the ability of PR to oligomerize in solution, suggesting that hsp 90 may negatively regulate receptor dimerization (Figure 5 and ref. 13). This raises the possibility that hsp 90 may indirectly inhibit receptor DNA binding by blocking dimerization instead of masking the DNA-binding domain, as generally presumed. Our studies have also suggested the possibility that hormone-dependent phosphorylation may impart stability to PR dimers in solution (Figure 7 and ref. 13). There is precedent for phosphorylation regulating dimerization of a gene regulatory protein. This has been shown for the CAMP-dependent response element binding protein, CREB .40 An interesting aspect of proteins that use dimerization to control DNA-binding function is the possibility to form heterodimers as a mechanism to expand diversity of functional activities with a limited number of regulatory proteins. This phenomenon has now been described for several gene regulatory proteins, includ-

ing studies suggesting that thyroid receptors and retinoic acid receptors may be capable of forming functional heterodimers.23 The present findings that PRA and PR-B are capable of oligomerizing raises the possibility that PR may be capable of forming both homodimers (AA or BB) and heterodimers (AB) as a mechanism to create novel receptor molecules, each with different functional activities. We propose a working hypothesis that hormonal activation of steroid receptors is a multistep process. As depicted in Figure 8, receptors in the absence of hormone are bound with hsp 90, and perhaps with other proteins, to form an 8-10s unactivated oligomeric complex. Heat shock protein 90 represses DNA-binding activity, rendering receptors unavailable for gene transcription until needed. Hormone binding is predicted to induce release of hsp 90; this is followed by dimerization of PR polypeptides to form a 6S dimeric molecule as an intermediate step prior to DNA binding. Although necessary, release of hsp 90 from receptors is not sufficient to promote maximal activation of DNA-binding function. Hormone-dependent phosphorylation is proposed to regulate dimer stability in the absence of DNA. Other nuclear protein(s) (Figure 8, shaded circle) may also facilitate binding of PRs to their cognate HREs.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by PHS grants CA41386 and CA46938. We thank Dr. David 0. Toft (Mayo Clinic) for providing the AC-88 MAb to hsp 90.

References
1. 2. 3. Evans RM (1988). The steroid and thyroid hormone receptor superfamily. Science 240~889-895. Beat0 M 6989). Gene regulation by steroid hormones. Cell J6:335-344. Pratt WB, Sanchez ER, Bresnick EH, Meshinchi S, Scherrer LC, Dalman FC, Welsh MJ (1989). Interaction of the glucocorticoid receptor witH the M, 90,000 heat shock protein: an evolving model of liaand-mediated receptor transformation and t&location. C&er Res 49:2222sz2229s. Schuh S, Yonemoto W, Bruaae J. Bauer VJ. Riehl RM. Sullivan WP; Taft DO (1985). A 9C$OO-dalton binding protein common to both steroid receptors and the Rous sarcoma virus transforming protein, pp60v-s'c..I Biol Chem 260:14292-142%.

4.

Steroids,

1991, vol. 56, May

277

Papers
5.

6.

7.

8.

Sanchez ER, Toft DO, Schlesinger MJ, Pratt WB (1985). Evidence that the 90.kDa phosphoprotein associated with the untransformed glucocorticoid receptor is a murine heat shock protein. J Bio[ Chem 260:12398-12401. Kost SL, Smith DF, Sullivan WP, Welch WJ, Toft DO (1989). Binding of heat shock proteins to the avian progesterone receptor. Mol Cell Biol9:3829-3838. Sanchez ER, Meshinchi S, Schlesinger M, Pratt WB (1987). Demonstration that the 90 kilodalton heat shock protein is bound to the glucocorticoid receptor in its 9S nondeoxynucleic acid binding form. Mel Endocrinol 1:908-912. Sanchez ER, Meshinchi S, Tienrungroj W, Schlesinger MJ, Toft DO, Pratt WB (1987). Relationship of the 90-kDa murine heat shock protein to the untransformed and transformed states of the L cell glucocorticoid receptor. J Biol Chem
262:6986-6991.

23.

24.

25. 26. 27.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

Mendel DB, Bodwell JF, Gametchu B, Harrison RW. Munck A (1986). Molybdate-stabilized nonactivated glucocorticoid receptor complexes contain a 90 kDa non-steroid binding phosphoprotein that is lost on activation. J Biol Chem 261:3758-3768. Denner LA, Weigel NL, Schrader WT, O'Malley BW (1989). Hormone-dependent regulation of chicken progesterone receptor deoxyribonucleic acid binding and phosphorylation. Endocrinology 125:3051-3058. Bagchi MK, Tsai SY, Tsai M-J, O'Malley BW (1990). Identification of a functional intermediate in receptor activation in progesterone-dependent cell-free transcription. Nature 345:547-550. Edwards DP, Kiihnel B, Estes PA, Nordeen SK (1989). Human progesterone receptor binding to mouse mammary tumor virus DNA: dependence on hormone and non-receptor nuclear factor(s). Mol EndocrinoL 3:381-391. DeMarzo AM, Beck CA, Otiate SA, Edwards DP (1991). Evidence for dimerization of mammalian progesterone receptors in the absence of DNA: possible modulation of dimerization by the 90 kDa heat shock protein. Proc Nail Acad Sci USA
88~72-76

28. 29.

30.

31.

32.

14.

Estes PA, Suba EJ, Lawler-Heavner J, Elashry-Stowers D, Wei LL. Sullivan WP. Toft DO. Horwitz KB. Edwards DP (1987). Immunological'analysis of progesterone receptors in human breast cancer I: purification of transformed receptors and production of monoclonal antibodies. Biochemistry
26:6250-6262.

33.

roglobin gene: effects of hormone, anti-hormone and receptoi phosphorylation. EMBO J 5:3235-3241. Glass CK, Lipkin SM. Devary OV, Rosenfeld MG (1989). Positive and negative regulation of a gene transcription by a retinoic-acid-thyroid hormone receptor heterodimer. Cell 59:697-708. Gutierrez-Hartmann A, Siddiqui S, Loukin S (1987). Selective transcription and DNase I protection of the rat prolactin gene by GH, pituitary cell-free extracts. Proc Nafl Acad Sci USA 84:5211-5215. Hope IA, Struhl K (1987). A eukaryotic transcription activator protein, binds as a dimer to target DNA. EMBOJ6:2781-2784. Fawell SE, Lees JA. White R, Parker MG (1990). Characterization and colocalization of steroid binding and dimerization activities in the mouse estrogen receptor. Cell 60:953-962. Tsai SY, Carlstedt-Duke J, Weigel NL, Dahlman K, Gustafsson J-A, Tsai M-J, O'Malley BW (1988). Molecular interactions of steroid hormone receptor with its enhancer element: evidence for receptor dimer formation. Cell 55:361-369. Horwitz KB, Francis MD, Wei LL (1985). Hormone-dependent covalent modification and processing of human progesterone receptors in the nucleus. DNA 41451-460. Kastner P, Krust A, Turcotte B, Stropp U, Tora L, Gronemeyer H, Chambon P (1990). Two distinct estrogen-regulated promoters generate transcripts encoding the two functionally different human progesterone receptor forms A and B. EMBO J 9:1603-1614. Carson MA, Tsai M-J, Conneely OM, Maxwell BL, Clark JH, Dobson ADW, Elbrecht A, Toft DO, Schrader WT, O'Malley BW (1987). Structure-function properties of the chicken progesterone receptor A synthesized from complementary deoxyribonucleic acid. Mel Endocrinol 1:791-801. Conneely OM, Maxwell BL, Toft DO, Schrader WT, O'Malley BW (1987). The A and B forms of the chicken progesterone receptor arise by alternate initiation of translation of a unique mRNA. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 149:493-501. Tora L. Gronemeyer H. Turcotte B. Gaub M-P, Chambon P (1988). The N-terminal region of the chicken progesterone receptor specifies target gene activation. Nature 333:185-188. Sheridan PL, Krett NL, Gordon JA, Horwitz KB (1988). Human progesterone receptor transformation and nuclear downregulation are independent of phosphorylation. MO/ Endocrino/ 2:1329-1342.

34.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20. 21.

El-Ashry D, Onate S, Nordeen SK, Edwards DP (1989). Human progesterone receptor complexed with the antagonist RU 486 binds to a hormone response element in a structurally altered form. Mel Endocrine/3:1545-1558. Kumar V, Chambon P (1988). The estrogen receptor binds tightly to its responsive element as a ligand-induced homodimer. Cell 55:145-156. Bagchi MK, Elliston JF, Tsai SY, Edwards DP, Tsai M-J. O'Malley BW (1988). Steroid hormone-dependent interaction of human progesterone receptor with its target enhancer element. Mo~Endocrinol2:122~-1229. Denis M, Poellinger L, Wikstrom A-C, Gustafsson J-A. Requirement of hormone for thermal conversion of the glucocorticoid receptor to a DNA binding state. Nature 333:686-688. Curtis SW. Korach KS (1990). Estrogen recentor interaction with estrogen-responsive DNA sequ&ces in ktro: effects of ligand binding on receptor-DNA complexes. Mel Endocrinol 4~276-286. Lees JA, Fawell SE, Parker MG (1989). Identification of two transactivation domains in the mouse estrogen receptor. Nucleic Acids Res 17:5477-5488.

35.

Sheridan PL. Francis MD, Horwitz KB (1989). Synthesis of human progesterone receptors in T47D cells. Nascent A- and B-receptors are active without a phosphorylation-dependent post-translational maturation step. J Biol Chem 264: 7054-7058. Feavers IM, Jiricny J, Moncharmont B, Saluz HP, Jost JP (1987). Interaction of two nonhistone proteins with the estradiol response element of the avian vitellogenin gene modulates the binding of estradiol-receptor complex. Proc Nat1 Acad Sci
USA 84~7453-7457.

36.

37.

Burnside J, Darling DS, Chin WW (1990). A nuclear factor that enhances binding of thyroid hormone receptors to thyroid hormone response elements. J Biol Chem 265:2500-2504. Murray MB, Towle HC (1989). Identification of nuclear factors that enhance binding of the thyroid hormone receptor to a thyroid hormone response element. Mol Endocrinol
3:1434-1442.

38.

22.

Schauer M, Chalepakis G, Willmann T, Beato M (1989). Binding of hormone accelerates the kinetics of glucocorticoid and Nat1 Acad Sci progesterone receptor binding to DNA. USA 86:1123-l 127. Bailly A, Le Page C, Rauch M, Milgrom E (1986). Sequencespecific DNA binding of the progesterone receptor to the ute-

39.

Cavanaugh AH, Simons SS, Jr. (1990). Glucocorticoid receptor binding to calf thymus DNA. 1. Identification and characterization of a macromolecular factor involved in receptorsteroid complex binding to DNA. Biochemistry 29:989-996. Wrange G, Eriksson P, Perlmann T (1989). The purified activated glucocorticoid receptor is a homodimer. J Biol Chem
264~5253-5259.

40.

Yamamoto KK, Gonzalez GA, Biggs WH III, Montminy MR (1987). Phosphorylation-induced binding and transcriptional efficacy of nuclear factor CREB. Nature 328:175-178.

278

Steroids,

1991, vol. 56, May

