Int. J. Radiation Oncology Rio/. Phys., Vol. Printed in the U.S.A. All rights reserved.

I I, pp. 1621-1627 Copyright

0360~3016/85 $03.00 + .oO 0 1985 Pergamon Press Ltd.

??Original Contdbution

FAST

NEUTRON RADIOTHERAPY FOR LOCALLY ADVANCED PROSTATE CANCER: RESULTS OF AN RTOG RANDOMIZED STUDY

GEORGE E. LARAMORE, PH.D., M.D.,' JOHN M. KRALL, PH.D.,* FRANK J. THOMAS, M.D.,3 THOMAS W. GRIFFIN, M.D.,' MOSHE H. MAOR, M.D.,4 AND FRANK R. HENDRICKSON, M.D.5 ` Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Washington Hospital, Seattle, WA 98 195; 2Statistical Unit, Radiation Therapy Oncology Group, 925 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107; 3Department of Radiation Therapy, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44106; 4Department of Radiation Therapy, M. D. Anderson Hospital, Houston, TX 77030; and
` Neutron Therapy Department, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, IL 605 11 and Department Radiology, Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke' Medical Center, Chicago, IL 606 12 s of Therapeutic

Between June 1977 and April 1983, the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) sponsored a Phase III randomized study investigating fast neutron radiation therapy in the treatment of patients with locally advanced (Stage C and D1) adenocarcinoma of the prostate gland. Patients were randomized to receive either conventional photon radiation therapy or fast neutron irradiation used in a mixed-beam treatment schedule (neutron/photon). A total of 91 analyzable patients were entered in the study; 78 of them were treated without major protocol deviations. The two treatment groups were balanced in regard to all major prognostic variables. Actuarial curves for "overall" survival "determinantal" survival and local/regional control are presented both for the entire group of 91 patients &d the 78 patients treated within protocol guidelines. The overall local/regional tumor recurrence rate is ` for the mixed-beam treated group of patients and is 22% for the photon (X ray) treated 7% group of patients. The difference is statistically significant at the p = 0.05 level. For the entire group of 91 evaluable patients, the S-year "overall" survival rate is 62% for the mixed-beam-treated group and 35% for the photon-treated group. This difference is also statistically significant (p < 0.05). However, this statistical significance is lost when the smaller number of patients treated strictly within protocol guidelines is considered. The significance is regained (p < 0.02) when one looks at "determinantal" survival, which uses active cancer at time of death as the failure endpoint. This study demonstrates that a regional treatment modality, in this case mixed-beam irradiation, can influence both local/regional tumor control and survival in patients with locallyadvanced adenocarcinoma of the prostate gland. Neutron radiotherapy, Mixed-beam, Prostate cancer.

Prostate cancer is the second most common malignancy in males in the United States (excluding nonmelanoma skin cancer). In 1984, ,the American Cancer Society estimated that there would be 76,000 new cases of prostate cancer and 25,OlOO deaths due to the disease.18 Its clinical course is dependent on its stage and grade at the time of presentation and can be quite variable. Early Stage' A, lesions often are given no treatment at all. More advanced AZ, B,, and B2 lesions are usually treated either with radical surgery or photon radiation therapy, with representaitive series of each treatment method showing about the same 5 and 10 year survival Supported by the National Cancer Institute under core grant
CA-23 113 and individual facility grants CA- 1244 1, CA- 17465, CA- 1808 1 and CA- 19720. Reprint requests to: G. E. Laramore, Ph.D., M.D., Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Washington Hospital RC-08, Seattle, WA 98195. 1621

rates. Patients presenting with distant metastases are generally treated palliatively with radiation therapy and/ or hormonal therapy. An area of current controversy is the treatment of patients presenting with Stage C and D, disease-either tumor extending through the capsule of the gland, invading into adjacent structures or accompanied by positive pelvic lymph nodes. Standard photon radiation therapy has been recommended as the treatment of choice, but thus far it has not been definitively proven that any local/regional treatment is capable of altering the survival of patients with these stages of disease. In this work, we will show that improved local/regional control of Stage C and Di disease as achieved with
Acknowledgement-We would like to thank Professor M. A. Bagshaw for suggesting the analysis that led to the determinantal survival curves shown in Figure 3. Accepted for publication 17 April 1985.

1622

Radiation Oncology 0 Biology 0 Physics

September 1985, Volume II, Number 9

mixed-beam irradiation does lead to improved patient survival. This report describes the results of a Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) study, which compares megavoltage photon radiation therapy with fast neutrons used in a mixed-beam (neutron/photon) treatment schedule for locally advanced (Stages C and Dr) prostate cancer. Both local/regional tumor control and survival were markedly improved with the mixed-beam method of treatment. Fast neutron radiation therapy has been predicted to be advantageous in the treatment of prostate cancer for a number of reasons related to the high linear energy transfer (LET) of fast neutrons in tissue. A fast neutron typically deposits 20-100 times more energy in matter per unit path length than does a megavoltage X ray, and this high LET gives rise to the radiobiological properties of potential importance in clinical cancer treatment.' High LET radiation is less dependent on the presence of oxygen to accomplish its cell-killing effect than are low LET X rays and, thus, is a more effective killer of the hypoxic cells found in large tumor masses. The oxygen enhancement ratio (OER) for fast neutrons is approximately 1.6 compared to an OER of 2.5-3.0 for high energy photons. Furthermore, the type of radiation damage inflicted by neutrons is less readily repaired by tumor cells. There is a reduced ability to repair sublethal damage manifested by a decreased shoulder on cell survival curves, and there is a reduced ability to repair potentially lethal damage which could be especially important for slowly growing tumors such as prostate cancer with a large fraction of cells in a G0 or "resting" phase. There is also less variation in radiosensitivity across the cell cycle with neutrons than with conventional X rays. These radiobiological properties, along with the work of Batterman et al.,' indicate a higher relative biological effectiveness (RBE) for neutrons over photons in slow growing, better differentiated, photon-radioresistant tumors, and suggest that neutrons should show an improvement over photons in the treatment of prostate cancer.
METHODS AND MATERIALS

Ninety-five patients were entered onto the study between June 1977 and April 1983. Four patients were ultimately excluded from the subsequent analysis (three were ineligible and one refused the assigned treatment), leaving 91 analyzable patients. All patients had either Stage C or Dr, biopsy-proven adenocarcinoma of the prostate gland. Mandatory prerandomization evaluation included a complete history and physical examination, chest X ray, complete blood count, blood chemistries including liver function tests, serum calcium, alkaline phosphatase, acid phosphatase, and a radionuclide bone scan. Bipedal lymphangiography and/or exploratory laparotomies were performed on 41 patients. Computed tormography (CT) scans of the pelvis were performed in

about half the patients. To be eligible for randomization, patients had to be less than 80 years of age, have an initial Karnofsky performance score greater than 40, could not have had prior pelvic irradiation or extensive prior pelvic surgery, and could not have had a prior history of cancer (excluding nonmelanoma skin cancers). Prior hormonal therapy was allowed but had to be adequately documented. Informed consent was given by all patients who entered the study. At the time of this analysis the mean follow-up time is 54 months (range 14-80 months), with 85 patients being placed on the study 3 or more years ago, and 48 patients being placed on the study more than 5 years ago. Patients were randomized through the RTOG operational office to receive one of two possible methods of treatment: (a) photon (control) radiation therapy, or (b) mixed-beam irradiation. Mixed-beam irradiation is a mixture of 2/5 neutrons and 3/5 photons. The randomization was purposefully unbalanced (60%-40%) in favor of the experimental treatment, resulting in 55 analyzable patients being assigned to the mixed-beam arm and 36 analyzable patients being assigned to the photon control arm. The following neutron treatment facilities participated in the study: the University of Washington, the Great Lakes Neutron Treatment Association, the M. D. Anderson Hospital and Tumor Institute at the University of Texas, and the Fermilab. Neutron doses were scaled according to the RBE' for the various institutions: 3.3 s for the University of Washington and the Great Lakes Neutron Treatment Association, 3.1 for M. D. Anderson, and 3.0 for the Fermilab. The gamma contaminant was included in the neutron dose. The experimental treatment was designed to use a neutron/photon combination rather than neutrons alone because of the poorly penetrating characteristics of the neutron beams available at many of the facilities. Also, we felt it was important to treat the pelvic nodes along with the prostatic primary, and we were concerned about treating this large volume with neutrons alone. Photon-treated patients were to receive a dose of 50 Gy to the whole pelvis (prostate and nodes) at a dose rate of 1.8 to 2 Gy per fraction followed by a 20 Gy boost dose to the prostate and any areas of proven bulky extra-prostatic disease. Mixed-beam treated patients were to receive a dose of 50 Gy photon-equivalent (neutron dose multiplied by the institutional RBE plus the photon dose) mixed-beam irradiation to the whole pelvis, followed by a 20 Gy photon-equivalent boost dose of mixed-beam irradiation to the prostate and any areas of proven gross extra-prostatic disease. The dose rate was 1.8 to 2 Gy photon-equivalent per fraction. All patients were to be treated 5 days per week. Mixed-beam patients were to receive neutrons 2 days per week and photons 3 days per week. The radiation dose to the entire bladder was restricted to 60 Gy photons or photon-equivalent, the dose to the posterior rectal wall was restricted to 55

Neutron radiotherapy for prostate cancer 0 G. E. LARAMORE al. et

1623

Gy photons or photon-elquivalent, and the dose to the small bowel was limited to 55 Gy photons or photonequivalent. Portal films were requ:ired for each treatment field as were computer isodose calculations through the central axis plane of the pelvis and also through the prostate. Patients were evaluated in follow-up at monthly intervals for the first 3 months after treatment, at 3 month intervals for the remainder of the next 3 years, and every 6 months thereafter. Prior to writing this report, one of us (GEL) visited RTOG headquarters and1 reviewed the beam films, isodose calculations, and treatment records for all patients on this study. Based on this review, five patients on the photon arm and eight patients on the mixed-beam arm were felt to exhibit major treatment deviations. The majority of these deviations were because of an overlyprolonged treatment tim' course (275 days) or too low e a neutron dose in the mixed-beam arm (125%). The latter situation arose because of repeated malfunctions of the neutron generators, which were originally designed for physics research purposes and not for medical use. To avoid problems with inadvertent bias due to patient exclusion, the data analysis will be performed both for the 78 patients (47 m:ixed-beam/31 photon) treated without major protocol deviations and for the entire group of 91 evaluable patients (55 mixed-beam/36 photon). The statistical methods used to analyze the patient data include the chi-square test of independence, the Kaplan-Meier method" of plotting failure curves, the Mantel-Haenzel12 test and the Wilcoxon' test. Based on the chi-square test of independence, the two groups were balanced according to age distribution, tumor grade (Mostofi scheme14), stage (C vs. DJ, method of diagnosis [transurethral prostatic resection (TURP) versus needle biopsy], percentage of patients having lymphangiograms, laparotomies or other methods of nodal evaluation, initially elevated acid phosphatase levels, degree of seminal vesicle involvement, Karnofsky performance status, race, prior hormonal therapy, cardiac disease status, other intercurrent disea:;e status, and Gleason score.6 The presence of concomitant, benign prostatic hypertrophy was unbalanced at a marginally significant level (p = 0.06) and occurred rnore frequently in the mixedbeam treatment group. Tumor size based upon the product of the clinically-assessed major diameters was somewhat larger in the photon treatment group (p < 0.05). All parameters except the Gleason score came from data recorded at the time of entry onto the study. The Gleason scores were obtained on 4 l/9 1 patients whose original biopsy rnaterial was retrievable at the time of analysis, and this material was reviewed centrally. RESULTS The major endpoints of this study are local/regional tumor control and survival. Complication rates and

tolerance of the irradiated normal tissues are secondary endpoints. The plots in this section are calculated using the actuarial method," with times measured from the initiation of treatment. Figure 1 shows the fraction of patients exhibiting a local/regional tumor control as a function of time for both the entire group of eligible patients and for the subset treated without a major protocol violation. In the analysis of local control, a posttreatment abnormality was assumed to be of unknown significance in the period immediately following irradiation and was not counted as a failure until progression was noted. This method of analysis was chosen because prostate cancer is slow to respond to radiation therapy and often does not regress completely until several months after treatment is finished. For this reason the curves in Figure 1 start at the 100% level. Local/regional failure was defined as either (a) product of tumor major diameters at least 25% larger than at the time of entry onto the study, (b) a positive biopsy after 2 years, (c) new extension of tumor beyond the prostatic capsule or re-extension after becoming temporarily negative, (d) new local extension of tumor or extension after temporary regression, or (e) pelvic nodes becoming newly positive or again being positive after becoming temporarily negative. The total number

CF 40 30 I
;j ,Photon;e,Casas , Mlxed Beam Eligible Cases Photons - Per Protocol Cases Mlxed Beam - Per Protocol Cases

i' 3

,

-----.-.-.-..-` .-

(3!47)

0

12

24 36 48 60 Months from onset of treatment

72

84

Fig. 1. Time to local/regional tumor progression. Plots are
shown both for the entire group of 91 evaluable patients and for the subset of 78 patients treated without major protocol violations. The specific subgroups are as indicated in the figure.

The differences between the mixed-beam and the photon curves are statistically significant at the p < 0.05 level for both
the entire group of patients and for the subset treated without major protocol violations (Mantel-Haenszel test). The numbers in parentheses indicate the fraction of patients exhibiting local/ regional failure at the time of analysis.

1624

Radiation Oncology 0 Biology 0 Physics

September 1985, Volume 11. Number 9

of failures in each subgroup of patients is indicated in the figure. Of the eight failures in the photon subgroup, six (75%) were determined via a positive biopsy after 2 years. Of the four failures in the mixed-beam subgroup, two (50%) were determined via a positive biopsy after 2 years. At 60 months the local/regional actuarial failure rate is about 7% for the mixed-beam group and about 38% for the photon group. As shown by both the MantelHaenszel12 and the Wilcoxon' tests, the mixed-beam group did significantly better (p < 0.05) for both the entire group of 91 analyzable patients and also for the subset of 78 patients treated without major protocol violations. Figure 2 shows the percentage of patients surviving as a function of time. Using the Mantel-Haenszel12 test, the mixed-beam curve is significantly better than the photon curve when the entire data set of 91 evaluable patients is considered (p < 0.05). However, when the subset of 78 patients treated without major protocol deviations is considered, this significance is lost as the p value changes to 0.13. When the Wilcoxon' test is used (which tends to weight more strongly the early observations), the difference between the curves remains significant for both the entire set of 9 1 evaluable patients and the subset of 78 patients treated without major protocol violations. At 5 years the actuarial survival rate was approximately 60% for the mixed-beam treated patients compared with approximately 40% for the photon-treated patients.

7060P ` ; 508 & 40CL 30 1 20 1 10

1 0-l
0

- Eligible Cases (12136) - Eligible Cases ( 5155) *- *- * Photons - Per Protocol Cases ( 9131) -*.-_ Mixed beam - Per Protocol Cases ( 5/47)
----Photons Mixed Beam

12

24 36 48 60 Months from onset of treatment

70

64

Fig. 3. Patient survival as a function of time using active cancer present at death as the endpoint. Deaths due to intercurrent disease with cancer controlled are treated as "censored" observations. Plots are shown both for the entire group of 9 1 evaluable patients and for the subset of 78 patients treated without major protocol violations. The specific subgroups are as indicated in the figure. The differences between the mixed-beam and photon curves are statistically significant (p < 0.02) for both the entire group of patients and for the subset treated without major protocol violations (MantelHaenszel test). The numbers in parentheses indicate the fraction of patients who died with active disease at the time of analysis.

m]

,;Fmm;e;
-----.-.-.-

,
Mixed Beam - Eligible Cases Photons - Per Protocol Cases Mixed Beam - Per Protocol Cases

;T

,

(10147)

0

12

24 36 48 60 Months from onset of treatment

72

84

Fig. 2. Patient "overall" survival as a function of time. Plots are shown both for the entire group of 91 evaluable patients and for the subset of 78 patients treated without major protocol violations. The specific subgroups are as indicated in the figure. The number in parentheses indicate the fraction of patients who have died at the time of analysis.

The problem with using overall survival as an endpoint is that we are dealing with an elderly population, and many deaths are a result of intercurrent disease. In an attempt to avoid this problem we have constructed modified determinantal survival curves, in which failure is defined as active cancer being present at the time of death (local and/or distant disease). These curves are shown in Figure 3. Using both the Mantel-Haenszel' * and the Wilcoxon' tests, the mixed-beam group does significantly better. The p-value is ~0.01 for the entire group of 91 evaluable patients and p -C0.02 for the subgroup of 78 patients treated without major protocol deviations. These curves probably are a more accurate representation of the increased efficacy of the mixedbeam form of treatment than those shown in Figure 2. The noncancer related deaths in the photon group included one cardiovascular event and one due to "unknown causes," whereas the noncancer related deaths in the mixed-beam group included two cardiovascular events, two coded as "not cancer related," and two coded as "unknown causes." All of these patients were felt to have tumor control at the time of their death. Distant metastases have been documented in 36% (20/55) of the mixed-beam treated patients and 44%

Neutron radiotherapy for prostate cancer 0 G. E.LARAMOREet

al.

1625

(16/36) of the photon-treated patients. This apparent difference fails to achieve statistical significance. Given the prolonged natural history of prostate cancer, it is important to evaluate the number of patients at risk as a function of time for each of the graphs shown in this section. This information is summarized in Table 1. Clearly, the number of patients at risk for times > 5years is small; therefore, it will be interesting to see how the accuracy of the actuarial projections holds with increasing follow-up times. Treatment associated complications in most patients were mild and were pre' dominately the expected side effects of nausea, diarrhea, dysuria, and urinarv urgency. Because of the poorly penetrating physics qualities of the neutron beams, skin and subcutaneous reactions were more common in the mixed-beam treated group of patients. For the patients treated without major protocol deviations, 60% on the photon arm and 82% on the mixed-beam arm exhibited some degree of toxicity. The incidence of severe complications was not significantly different between the two treatment groups, being 9% in the mixed-b' eam treated group and 7% in the photon treated group. The only fatal complication was a severe proctitis requiring surgical intervention that occurred in a photon treated patient.
DISCXJSSION

This paper reports the results of a prospective, randomized study comparing mixed-beam radiation therapy against what was judged to be the best conventional Table 1. Number
of patients at risk for failure as a function of follow-up time (months) for the parameters of local/ regional control (Fig. l), survival (Fig. 2), and determinantal survival (Fig. 3) 0 Local/regional control Photon Eligible Per protocol Mixed-Beam Eligible Per protocol Survival Photon Eligible Per Protocol Mixed-beam Eligible Per protocol Determinantal survival Photon Eligible Per protocol Mixed-beam Eligible Per protocol 12 24 36 48 60 72

36 31 55 47

35 30 52 45

27 23 48 42

12 11 32 30

6 6 18 17

1 1 6 6

1
1 1

1

36 31 55 47

36 31 53 46

30 25 50 44

16 14 35 32

9 8 20 18

1
1 7 6

1
1 1 1

36 31 55 47

36 31 53 46

30 25 50 44

16 14 35 32

9 8 20 18

1 1 7 6

1 1 1 1

treatment (high dose photon radiation therapy) for advanced (Stage C and Dr) disease. The mixed-beam treated group of patients appeared to do better than the photon treated group in terms of both local/regional tumor control, overall survival, and determinantal survival. There are, of course, some caveats to this statement because of the relatively small numbers of patients entered onto this study and the present spectrum of follow-up times. For the entire group of 91 evaluable patients, the differences for all parameters were significant based upon the Mantel-Haenszel12 and the Wilcoxon' tests. However, when the subset of 78 patients treated without major protocol violations was considered, only the difference in local/regional control and determinantal survival remained significant. The situation regarding the overall survival curves was more complex in that they were significantly different using the Wilcoxon test,' but not the Mantel-Haenszel test.12 There was some improvement in the photon control curve when the patients treated with major deviations from the protocol were eliminated partly because of the smaller number of patients. Given the number of deaths due to intercurrent disease in our elderly patient population, the determinantal survival curves in Figure 3 are probably a better measure of the improvement resulting from the mixed-beam form of treatment. These curves eliminate the "noise" due to nontumor related deaths and show significant benefit to the mixed-beam treatment. Most of the patients entered on this study were Stage C, but 5136 patients in the photon group and 6155 patients in the mixed-beam group had proven metastases to the pelvic lymph nodes. No doubt the frequency of occult nodal disease was substantially higher. Operative staging series of clinical Stage C patients show an incidence of nodal involvement ranging from 4060%.1,4,13 Furthermore, in one series, I3 29% of the nodal metastases occurred only in the obturator and hypogastric nodal groups-regions that are not well visualized with bipedal lymphangiography. The observed survival difference may have been partly a result of the ability of the mixed-beam treatment to more frequently sterilize nodal disease in the pelvis. The actuarial local/regional failure rate at 5 years on this study was 38% with the photon treatment and 7% with the mixed-beam treatment. Neglia et al." report a local/regional failure rate at 5 years of 5.2% for early Stage C lesions and 15.1% for advanced Stage C lesions. Perez et aI.l6 report 5-year local failure rates of 20 and 12% respectively for patients with Stage C lesions treated with either 65-70 Gy or >70 Gy total radiation dose to the prostate. Rangala et al." report a 5-year local failure rate of 24% for a mixed group of Stage B and C patients treated with definitive radiotherapy. The Patterns of Care study" demonstrated a 19% 5-year local failure rate in patients with Stage C lesions who received >65 Gy. Hence, the local/regional control exhibited by our photon treated patients is somewhat poorer than that

1626

Radiation Oncology 0 Biology 0 Physics

September 1985, Volume I 1, Number 9 Table 2. Important prognostic variables* relating to patient "crude" survival as determined by a multi-variant Cox step-wise analysis3 Independent variables Treatment (mixedbeam vs. photons) Age Stage (C vs. Di) Elevated serum acid phosphatase P-value for improvement

previously reported for patients with Stage C disease, whereas the mixed-beam treated group is doing substantially better. A stepwise Cox analysis3 has been used to identify the important patient parameters relating to local control in this study. The most important variable was the type of treatment given (p = 0.063, with "other disease status" being the next most significant (p = 0.07). It is important to note that the majority of local failures have been documented by a positive biopsy. In the future we plan to rebiopsy the patients entered onto this study to see if there are systematic differences between the two groups regardless of whether there is clinical evidence for a local/regional failure. Survival is a more easily evaluated parameter than local/regional tumor control. The actuarial 5-year overall survival rates were about 60% for the mixed-beam treated patients versus about 40% for the photon treated patients. Patient survival is dependent on many variables and has been reported in the literature93' 9 to be as 6,` high as 55-60% at 5 years. Neglia et al." show a definite dependence of survival on primary tumor size, with less advanced Stage C lesions having a 5-year survival of approximately 60% compared with approximately 45% for more advanced Stage C lesions. Although the majority of our patients had extremely advanced local disease, the photon treated group contained somewhat larger tumors. A stepwise Cox analysis3 has been used to identify the important patient parameters relating to overall survival in this study as shown in Table 2. Age, stage of lesion, and whether serum acid phosphatase levels were initially elevated were important parameters associated with survival; however, these parameters proved to be less important predictors of survival than form of treatment. The most important predictor of survival was

Rank

p < 0.01

p < 0.05 p < 0.05 p = 0.06

1st 2nd 3rd 4th

* Tumor grade, TURP vs. needle biopsy, seminal vesicle involvement, benign prostatic hypertrophy status, cardiac status, other intercurrent disease status, and total radiation dose (~67 Gy equivalent vs. >67 Gy equivalent) were not statistically significant in this analysis.

whether patients were treated with mixed-beam irradiation (p < 0.01). A total of 12/14 (86%) deaths on the photon arm occurred with uncontrolled cancer present compared with 5/l 1 (45%) deaths on the mixedbeam arm. The results of this study demonstrate that a local/ regional form of treatment can indeed affect survival rates in patients with locally advanced prostate cancer. A new generation of neutron treatment facilities is nearing completion and will greatly improve the technical ability of investigators to treat deeply-seated tumors. The advantageous physics characteristics of the treatment beams generated at these facilities will allow treatment with neutrons alone and offer the potential to further improve the results of treatment of locally advanced prostate cancer. The mixed-beam arm of this study will likely be used as the control arm for future Phase III trials.

REFERENCES
1. Baszell, W., Beam, M.A., Hilaris, B.S., Whitmore, W.F.: Prostatic adenocarcinoma: Relationship of grade and local extent to the pattern of metastases. J. Ural. 118: 278-282, 1977. 2. Batterman, J.J., Breur, K., Hart, G.A.M., van Peperzeel, H.A.: Observations on pulmonary metastases in patients after single doses and multiple fractions of fast neutrons and cobalt-60 gamma rays. Europ. J. Cancer 17: 539-548,

6. Gleason,

1981. 3. Cox, D.R.: Regression models and life tables. J. Roy. Statist. Sot. 34: 187-220, 1972. Donoghue, E.P.N., Milleman, L.A., Culp, 4. Flocks, R.N., O' D.A.: Surgery of prostatic cancer. Cancer 36: 705-717, 1975. 5. Frank, IN., Keys, H.M., McCune, C.S.: Urologic and male genital cancers. In Clinical Oncology for Medical Students and Physicians: A Multidisciplinary Approach,
6th edition, P. Rubin 1983, pp. 210-211. (Ed.). American Cancer Society,

D.F., Mellinger, F.T.: Veterans Administration Cooperative Urological Research Group: Prediction of prognosis for prostatic adenocarcinoma by combined histological grading and clinical staging. J. Ural. 111: 58-64, 1974. 7. Gross, A.J., Clark, V.A.: Survival Distribution: Reliability Applications in the Biomedical Sciences, New York, Wiley & Sons. 1975, pp. 243-250. 8. Hall, E.J.: Radiobiology for the Radiologist, 2nd edition. Hagerstown, Harper & Row, 1978. 9. Harisiadis, L., Veenema, R.J., Senyszyn, J.J., Puchner, P.J., Tretter, P., Romas, N.A., Chang, C.H., Lattimer, J.K., Tannenbaum, M.: Carcinoma of the prostate: Treatment with external radiation therapy._ Cancer 41: 2 13 l-

2142, 1978. 10. Kaplan, E.L., Meier, P.: Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observations. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 53: 457-48 1.
1958. 1 I. Leibel, S.A., Hanks, G.E., Kramer, S.: Patterns of care

Neutron radiotherapy for prostate cancer 0 G. E.LARAMOREet al. outcome studies: Results of the national practice in adenocarcinoma of the prostate. ht. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 10: 401-409, 1984. Mantel, N., Haenszel, PI.: Statistical aspects of the analysis of data from retrospective studies of disease. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 22: 719-748, 19.59. McLaughlin, A.P., Saltzstein, S.L., McCullough, D.L., Gittes, R.F.: Prostatic carcinoma: Incidence and localization of unsuspected lymphatic metastases. J. Ural. 115: 89-94, 1976. Mostofi, F.K.: Grading of prostate cancer. Cancer Chemother. Rep. 59: 11l-l 17, 1975. Neglia, W.J., Hussey, D.H., Douglas, D.E.: Megavoltage radiation therapy for carcinoma of the prostate. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 2: 873-882, 1977.

1627

12.

13.

14. 15.

16. Perez, C.A., Walz, B.J., Zivnuska, F.R., Pilepich, M., Prasad, K., Bauer, W.: Irradiation of carcinoma of the prostate localized to the pelvis: analysis of tumor response and prognosis, Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 6: 555563, 1980. 17. Rangala, N., Cox, J.D., Byhardt, R.W., Wilson, J.F., Greenburg, M., da Concicao, A.L.: Local control and survival after external irradiation for adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 8: 19091914, 1982. 18. Silverberg, E.: Cancer statistics, 1984. Ca-A Cancer J. Clin. 34: 7-23, 1984. 19. Taylor, W.J., Richardson, G., Hafferman, M.D.: Radiation therapy for localized prostate cancer. Cancer 43: 11231127, 1979.

