Monday June 26, 2000: Poster Abstracts P: W29 Oxidation and Atherogenesis
(DCF) and 4.5-diaminofluorescein diacetate (DAF DA) as expression of intracellular ROS and NO availability, were measured by flow cytometry. A radical scavenger (trolox) and a NO synthase inhibitor, NW-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (L-NAME), were also used. Results: OxLDL induced an early, significant and dose dependent increase in DCF formation (p < 0.1301) and a significant decrease in intracellular NO availability (,p < 0.001) starting from 1 min incubation and reaching the maximum after 5 rain. Native LDL had no effect on DCF and DAF formation. The preincuhation of BAECs with trolox and L-NAME significantly reduced DCF and DAF formation respectively (p < 0.001). Conclusions: The mechanism by which oxLDL inhibits endotheliumdependent relaxations is still under investigation. We give evidence that oxLDL increases ROS production and decreases NO availability in BAECs; we suggest that in presence of increased ROS production, NO reacts with ROS forming peroxinitrite with a consequent less NO availability for smooth muscle cells.

59

[ MoP29:W29 1 Oxidized low density liooprotein (OxLDL) induces an increase in nuclear Ca z+ in cultured but not freshly isolated smooth muscle cells (VSMC)
H. Massaeli, J.A. Austria, C. Hurtado, G.N. Pierce. Division of Stroke &

Vascular Disease, St. Boniface Hospital Research Centre, Winnipeg, Canada Objectives: OxLDL and Ca 2+ are thought to be important in atherogenesis.
Although it is known that oxLDL increases cell Ca 2+, it is not clear if this is a response only observed in atherosclerotic conditions. Therefore, we examined cellular distribution of Ca 2+ in response to oxLDL in freshly isolated control VSMC and VSMC maintained in a cultured environment where they are thought to have a pre-atherosclerotic phenotype. Methods: SMC were obtained from aorta or portal vein by explant (only 1st passage cells) or via enzymatic dissociation (freshly isolated). Cells were loaded with Indo-2 or fluo-3 to measure [Ca2+]i and exposed to minimally oxLDL (100 /~g/ml). Ratiometric imaging in a confocal microscope (UV laser) was used to examine intracellular Ca 2+. Results: Cultured VSMC exhibited an immediate rise in [Ca2+]i after exposure to oxLDL. Surprisingly, this was primarily localized to the nucleus. This was observed irrespective of the Ca 2+ indicator dye used. Conversely, in freshly isolated VSMC oxLDL did not induce an increase in cellular Ca 2+. Conclusions: OxLDL induces a Ca 2+ signaling response that may be important for gene expression in VSMC. This action may be limited to VSMC with an altered phenotype similar to that observed in atherosclerosis. Supported by the Medical Research Council of Canada

I MoP27:W29 I

Carnitines inhibits oxygen free radical release by endothelial cell and leukocytes

C. CaroseUi I , E. Rossi I , L. Loffredo 1, A. Picca 2, S. Natoli 1, F. Violi I .

l lstituto di 1 Clinica Medica; 2Istituto di I Clinica Ostetrica e Ginecologica, Rome, Italy Objective: To demonstrate the role of carnitines in cellular release of Oxygen
free radical (OFR). Methods: We analysed if camitines influence OFR release by endothelial cells and human monocyte. Human vascular endothelial cell (HUVEC) were incubated 10 minutes at 37 ° C with scalar concentrations (10-50/zM) propionyl-camitine and then stimulated with 4 ng/ml LPS. To assess OFR release by leukocytes human blood mixed with Na-citrate (ratio 9:1) was taken from healthy volunteers and stimulated with 1 /.tM FMLE a specific leukocyte activator, in presence of scalar (10-50/zM) acetyl-camitine concentration. 0 2 and O H - release by HUVEC and monocyte respectively was measured as we previously described (Circulation 1997, 95: 885-891). Results: Compared to control propionyl-camitine reduced dose-dependently 0 2 release by endothelial cell; percentage decrease was 4.5%, 54% and 82% with 10, 25, and 50 /zM respectively; compared to control, O H release by leukocytes was reduced by 23.8%, 32.9%, and 34.9% with 10, 25 and 50 # M acetyl-camitine respectively. Conclusions: This study shows for the first time that cellular release of OFR may be modulated by carnitines and suggests to investigate the relationship between intracellular camitines and OFR in conditions characterized by enhanced oxidative stress.

MoP30:W29 ] The formation of probucol and alpha-tocopherol

radicals the model of oxidative stress, influence of ubiquinol-10
E.K. Ruuge, K.B. Shumaev, S.B. Gomboeva, V.V. Kukharchuk. Russian

Cardiology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia Objective: It has been shown that the oxidative stress status and the formation
of oxidative modified low-density lipoprotein (LDL) plays an important role in pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. In this connection, the aim of our study is to investigate the influence of lipid peroxides and ubiquinol-10 on the production of probucol and alpha-tocopherol phenoxyl radicals in model systems. Methods: These model systems contained investigated antioxidants and LDL or the sodium dodecylsulfate micelles. The formation of a-tocopherol and probucol phenoxyl radical was detected after the addition of hemin and H202 or arachidonic acid hydroperoxides (LOOH) in these model system. Results: The intensity of the probucol radical EPR signal increased in the presence H202 or LOOH. However, the addition of LOOH to this model system containing the sodium dodecylsulfate micelles decreased the concentration of tocopheroxyl radicals. Besides, it has been found that ubiquinol-10 stimulates probucol radical formation during the LDL oxididation. Conclusions: Thus, probucol is an effective quencher for free radical intermediates formed as a result of interaction of heroin and H202 or LOOH while ubiquinol-10 is the mediator of this process. However, in model system containing LOOH, the oxidation of alpha-tocopherol did not result in the formation of free radical products.

I MoP28:W29 [ Pro- and anti-oxidative activities of human monocytes:
I

Effect of concentration of oxidatively modified low density lipoprotein

Lillemor Mattsson Hult~n l, Emifia Markstrtm I , Sofia Pettersson I , Claes Dahlgren2, David van Reyk3, Christina Ullstr6m I , Olov Wtklund I .

1Wallenberg Laboratory; 2phagocyte Research Laboratory, Gditeborg, Sweden; 3Heart Research Institute, Sydney, Australia Objective: Oxidatively modified low density lipoprotein (oxLDL) is believed to play a major role in the development of the atherosclerotic plaque. This study was designed to investigate if human monocytes, obtained from peripheral blood, secrete reactive oxygen species (ROS) in response to oxLDL. Methods: The production of extraceUular and intracellular ROS was detected as isoluminol/luminol-enhanced chemiluminescence (CL) in 5.105 cells, in the presence of native LDL, acetylated LDL (acLDL) or oxLDL. Results: The results show that oxLDL itself gave rise to a high CL signal. No increased chemiluminescence was seen when LDL or acLDL was analyzed. Addition of monocytes decreases the CL response of oxLDL at concentrations >50 #g/ml. This suggests that the cells activate a defense system against oxidative stress in response to the ROS production in oxLDL. On the contrary, adding low amounts of oxLDL (<50/zg/ml) to monocytes the production of ROS increased, indicating an pro-oxidant activity provided by the cells. Conclusions: This study shows both anti-and pro-oxidative effects of human monocytes, and may improve our understanding of the complexity and sometimes contradictory results from in vitro studies using modified LDL.

I MOP31:W29 I Nuclear accumulation of cell cycle proteins in response
[

to oxidized low density lipoprotein

M.E. Zettler, J.A. Austria, G.N. Pierce. Division of Stroke and Vascular

Disease, St. Boniface Research Centre and Dept. of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
Objective: To compare the capacity of oxidized low density lipoprotein (oxLDL) to induce nuclear accumulation of cell cycle proteins during cellular proliferation to that of fetal bovine serum (FBS). Methods: Cultured human fibroblasts seeded onto glass coverslips were serum starved for five days before being treated with either 1) serum-free media and 0, 10 or 50/zg/ml oxLDL or 2) 5% FBS and 0, 10 or 50/zg/ml oxLDL for 24 or 48 hours. Cells were then fixed and stained with antibodies to cell cycle proteins Cdk 4, Cyclin D1, Cdk 2, Cyclin A, Cdc 2, Cyclin B1 and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). Nuclear fluorescence was quantified by analysis of confocal micrographs with Imagespace software. Results: Incubating serum starved fibroblasts with serum-free media and oxLDL resulted in significant increases in nuclear levels of all cell cycle proteins examined. Levels of Cdk 4, Cyclin D1, Cdk 2, Cyclin A, Cyclin B1 and PCNA in oxLDL-treated cells surpassed those in cells treated with 5% FBS alone. However in cells treated with 5% FBS in combination with

Xllth International Symposium on Atherosclerosis, Stockholm, Sweden, June 25-29, 2000

60

Monday June 26, 2000: Poster Abstracts P: W29 Oxidation and Atherogenesis
MoP34:W29 [ *NO and peroxinitrite in hypercholesterolemia P. Mori¢l I , H. Rubbo 2, R. Radi 2, M.C. Bertolami 3, D.S.P. Abdalla I . ]Dept. of Clinical Toxicological Analyses, FCF-USP; 31nst. Dante Pazzanese de Cardiologia, San Paulo, S.P., Brazil; 2 Universidad de la Republica, Uruguay

oxLDL, nuclear levels of cell cycle proteins fell below those of cells treated with 5% FBS. This was not due to apoptosis. Nuclear levels of Cyclin D1 in these cells were as low as those in serum starved cells. Similar results were obtained in experiments using smooth muscle cells. Conclusions: OxLDL induced increases in nuclear levels of cell cycle proteins in serum starved cells. These increases were in some cases equal to or greater than those induced by FBS. OxLDL in combination with FBS reduced nuclear levels of cell cycle proteins as compared to FBS alone. OxLDL therefore diminishes the capacity of FBS to induce nuclear accumulation of cell cycle proteins. Supported by the Medical Research Council of Canada.

Objective: In this work we determined the nitrate and nitrotyrosine concentrations of blood plasma to evaluate the *NO and peroxinitrite production in human hypercholesterolemia. Methods: Plasma samples were obtained from hypercholesterolemic (HC) (n = 18) and normolipidemic subjects (N) (n = 12) after centrifugation in EDTA-coated tubes. Nitrate blood plasma concentration was determined by chemiluminecence elicited by reaction of "NO with ozone, after nitrate reduction with VC13, in the "NO analyzer (NOA TM2s°, Sievers, Corp.). Nitrotyrosine concentration was determined by a new chemiluminecence competitive ELISA developed in our laboratory with a polyclonal antibody. Apo B concentration was determined by nephelometric immunoassays (Dade Behring) Results: The levels of plasma nitrate, nitrotyrosine, apo B, total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol were significantly higher in HC than in N subjects. The concentrations of total cholesterol, apo B and LDL-cholesterol were positively correlated with nitrate and nitrotyrosine concentrations in blood plasma. Conclusions: These results suggest that: 1) there is an increase of "NO production in hypercholesterolemia; 2) a higher "NO inactivation seems to occur by its reaction with superoxide anion to form peroxinitrite; 3) the increase of nitrate concentration in blood plasma may result from peroxinitrite degradation, and 4) cholesterol, mainly that associated to LDL, may be related to the modulation of "NO concentration in blood plasma. Financial support: FAPESP (grant 97/05090-3 to DSPA)

MoP32:W29 ] Oxidized phospholipids activate PPAP~ in a phospholipase A2-dependent manner
i

Philippe Delerive, Christophe Furman, Elisabeth Teissier, Jean-Charles Fruchart, Patrick Duriez, Bart Staels. From the U.325 INSERM, D~partement d'Athgroscl~rose, lnstitut Pasteur de Lille, Lille; the Facultd de Pharmacie, Universit~ de Lille 11, Lille, France The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ~ (PPARc0 is a transcription factor belonging to the PPAR subfamily of nuclear receptors. Fatty acids and eicosanoids are natural PPARc~ ligands. Here, we show using transient transfection assays that oxidized (oxLDL) but not native low-density lipoproreins (LDL) dose-dependently activate PPARu in endothelial cells without affecting PPARa protein expression. Fractioning of oxLDL lipids followed by transactivation experiments demonstrated that the oxidized phosphofipid component in oxLDL is responsible for PPARa activation. Furthermore, using specific inhibitors, it is shown that oxLDL-mediated PPARa activation requires phospholipase A2 activity. Finally, we found that, similarly as the synthetic PPARa ligand Wy-14643, oxLDL induced expression of the fatty acid transport protein-1 (FATP-1) in human primary endothelial cells. Our findings define a novel group of PPARt~ activators and provide a molecular basis for certain effects of these biologically active phospholipids on gene transcription.

I MoP35:W29 [ Lipoprotein subfractions, antioxidant content and
activation of platelet adhesion
J. Hartwich, A. Gruca, R. Jopek, S. Niedbal, I. Gol~bek, M. Malczewska-Malec, A. Dembifiska-Kiet. Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Collegium Medicum, Jagiellonian University, Krakdw, Kopernika 15A str., Poland

MoP33:W29 I Atorvastatin and simvastatin interfere with NF-xB pathway activation elicited by reactive oxygen species in vascular smooth muscle cells and monoeytes through a decrease in IrB-~t phosphorylatlon
I

Introduction: Platelet activation conWibute to thrombosis and arteriosclerosis.
Atherogenic lipoprotein profile (ALP) characterized by small, more susceptible to oxidation, dense LDL- and triglyceride rich lipoproteins, have been established as the risk factor of coronary artery disease. Since lipoproteins were found to mediate platelet activation, the aim of the study was to investigate the influence of lipoprotein particle distribution profile and antioxidant content on the platelet adhesion ex vivo. Methods: Human platelets and lipoproteins were isolated from plasma of healthy volunteers. Adhesion of human washed blood platelets to different subpopulations of native lipoproteins immobilized in microtiter wells was examined. The total number of adhered platelets was measured as the platelet acid phosphatase activity. The LDL and HDL particle distribution profile, a tocopherol and fl carotene content; susceptibility to ex vivo oxidation and reactive lysine amino groups (R-Lys) in the lipoproteins were tested. Results: Platelet adhesion was activated by all lipoproteins tested. However VLDL and small dense LDL were the most potent activators. Degree of adhesion correlated with LDL and HDL particle density, oxidative susceptibility and R-Lys, ot tocopherol, ~6 carotene contents. Conclusion: Lipoprotein particle distribution strongly influences platelet adhesion. VLDL and antioxidant-poor LDL and HDL subpopulations are the most potent factors in such platelet activation.

M. Ortego l, M.A. Hern~mdez-Presa 1, L.M. Blanco-Colio 1, A. G6mez-Hern~a-ldez I , J.L. Martin-Ventura I , J. Tufi6n I , C. Dfaz2, G. HemAndez2, J. Egido. 1Fundacidn JimEnez Dlaz; 2Autdnoma University and Parke-Davis, Spain

Objective: To investigate the effect of lipophilic HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors atorvastatin (Atv) and simvastatin (Sv) on NF-rB activation pathway induced by 0 2 and H202 in rat vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) and human monocytes. Methods: NF-~cB binding activity of nuclear extracts was assayed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). lxB-cx, p-IxB-ot and IKK-ot levels were measured by western blot in whole cellular extracts. Results: 0 2 induced an increase of NF-rB activity from 15 min (6.7 43 fold; p < 0.01) and 30 min (2.3 -4- 2; p < 0.05) and diminished until 120 min in cultured VSMC. Pretreatment for 1 h with Atv and Sv 10-SM and 10-7M diminished NF-xB activity in around 52% (p < 0.05) and 43% (p < 0.05), respectively. Similar results were obtained in mononuclear cells (THP-I). H202 also increased NF-rB activity in VSMC at 90 min (2.3 4- 1; p < 0.05). Atv and Sv (10-SM) pretreatment reduced NF-xB activity induced by H202 around 28% (1.6 4- 1; NS) and 21% (1.8 4- 0.7; NS) respectively. Cell incubation with O~ caused a disappear in the cytosolic IrB-(x levels at 60 min that reappeared at 120 min. Atv and Sv (10-SM) prevented the decrease of lxB-ot levels maintaining them at control levels. Phosphorylated IrB-ot (p-lxB~) levels increased from 15 min with a maximum between 30 and 60 min and decreased at 90 rain. Atv and Sv (10-5M) decreased p-lxB-t~ levels at 60 min. IKK-ce levels were maintained as control ones along the time of stimulation with 0 2 and were slightly reduced by Atv and Sv (10-SM) preincubation. Condusion: These data suggest that some statins could interfere with the NF-KB signaling pathway activation induced by reactive oxygen species. These drugs could therefore play an important role in preventing the oxidative stress implicated in the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis.

MoP36:W29 ] Homocyst(e)ine increase the functional expression of the macrophage receptor CD36
I

M. Naruszewicz I , J. Han 2, A.C. Nicholson2, D.P. Hajjar2. 1pomeranian Medical University. Szczecin, Poland; 2Center of Vascular Biology, Cornell University Medical College New York, USA Objective: Elevated plasma levels of homocyst(e)ine (HCY) are considered a common risk factor of coronary artery disease, stroke and venous thrombosis. The fact that HCY is capable of generating reactive oxidative species during autooxidation suggested its possible role in foam cell development. In this regard we investigated the influence of HCY on macrophage expression of CD36, a type B scavenger receptor. Results: Incubation of murine macrophage cell line, RAW 264 cells with HCY (0.1 to 10 mM) for 24 h led to marked induction of CD36 m RNA expression (1.5-5.0 fold). This was paralleled by an increase in CD36

Xllth International Symposium on Atherosclerosis, Stockholm, Sweden, June 25-29, 2000

