PROPERTIFS

OF A CELL-BOUND

HOMOGENEOUS

MURINE
EFFECTS OF DENSITY

IgM ANTI-DEXTRAN-V.
IgM ON IMMUNOLOGICAL

OF CELL-BOUND ACTIVITIES*
PRUUL
xxi

HENDRIK
Department

and MYRON
Microtxologq. hll 4XX)I.

A. LEON
U.S.A.

of Imrnunolog~

Wayne State Um\cr\lty.

School 01` Medicine. Detrott.

Abstract 0-\ttxroyl dextran coated sheep erythrocqw (C)SD-t)+ were sensitircd ulth Increasing amount\ of MOP<' 104E IgM to gi\r IgM-OSD-E 111 antigt`n cwzsh. 111 equl\alcncc and In antibody eweas. These conea were dcfned operationall) b) \uwzptihiltt! of the ct`ll\ to complemwt-mediated I>~Is. and by the number ofrrec I.ah replonh on the cell-bound IsM The free Fab regions acre meaawed by ahllity to (a) bind soluble dextran and (h) to react v.lth and participate in complernrnt-mediated I~sI\ of bystander OSD-E. In antigen excess. complement-mediated I~SIS i\ proportional to cell-hound IgM and there art: t'ew threeFab regions. In the equivalence zone. complement-mediated 1)\1s reacheaa plateau. while the number ot'l'rce Fab rcglon\ becomes signiticant. Throughout the Low ol`nntihod! L`XCL`~.complement-mediated lqs~adlminl\hes uhlle the number 01 free Fah regon Incrcaw exponentlallq. Blocking these l'rcc Fah regions hlth wlublc dextran prckcnta reaction\ tiith hqstander OSD-E. The rate 01` reaction of IgM-OSD-E. in antlbodq cxce\s. Mith bystander OSD-E 15 proportional to rc;ictioc temperature and the r\tt`nt of rc;IctIon I\ proportional to cell concentration.

I`\ i'RODI~C`1`ION

iW~l'ERI.4l.S

41D

METHODS

The dissection of the in viva sequelae due to reaction of antibodies with cell membrane antigens of tumors or normal tissues is complicated by the heterogeneity of the antibody response. To circumvent such complications. we have developed a model system which utilizes homogeneous murine myeloma proteins of defined class and defined anticarbohydrate specificity to study cytotoxic reactions. Initially we examined the reaction of the IgM murine myeloma protein MOPC` l04E with 0-stearoyl dextransensitized sheep erythrocytes viz.. the parameters for binding the IgM to the sensitized erythrocytes. passive lysis of such cells. and the effects of haptens and soluble antigen on this system (Jocius & Leon, 1974a,h). In these studies only a limited range of cellbound IgM concentrations was examined. In this we describe the significant changes in paper. expression of the immunological properties of IgM boundatconsiderably higherconcentrations than were used in the above mentioned studies. -__
h) Puhllc Health Service Research awuded by The NatIonal Cancer Institute. DHEW and Grant No. AI-17700 auarded by The Institute for Allerg) and lnlctious Disease\. DHEW. t Abbre\iatmns used C. guinea pq complement. E. bhcep crthrocytes: EA. F sensitved with rabbit hemolgsln: OSD-F. 0.,tenroyl dextran coated crqthroqte~: IgM-OSD-E. OSDE scnsltired wth MOPC l04E IgM: G-TBS. trlrthanolaminc buffered saline containing dlvalent cation\ and gelatin: tCS. fetal calf xrum.

*Supported 1n part Grunt No. CA-18900

All dilutions. washings and reactlons. other than lysis by C. \%erccarried out In triethanolamine-hul'fered saline (Kent (`I II/.. 1957)pH 7.411 = 0.15. MgSO,(5 x IO I .Cf).CaCI, (I.5 x IO a .%I) and ().I",, gelatm were included in all hui`t'crb. Hemolysis by C ws carried out at 37 c`tor I hr in GTBS with lwtonic wmannltol (0.2') ,%f) added to adJu\t ,r to 0.09 (Jocius & Leon. 1974~). Sepharosc 4B-dcxtran was prcparcd by a modlticntion 01 dtxrihed methods (Hiramoto 01 cl/.. 1072). Brlellq. C`nBr Sepharose 48 (Pharmacla. Pxataway. NJ) wa\ coupled to BSA (General Blochcmxal. Chagrin Falls. Ohlo) in borate-sillnr. pH X.6. overnIght at 4 C. Unbound BSA ~,a.\ remowd sith alternate mashings of borate-saline (pH X 6) and acetate (pH 4.5) buffers. The Sepharose-4B-BSA wa\ reacted wth sodium penodate-oxidwd dextran (Ghanta cf c/l.. 1972) for 3 hr at 37 C. After extensl\e Lbashing. the Scpharoac 4B-dextran was stored in phosphate-sallnc huffcr. pH 7 4, at 4 C wth added sodium a/ldt` (().I",,). Sodium horotritide (330 mCi m-mole) hi,:, purchased from Amcrsham Searle (Chicago, IL). Drstran Bl355S (hereafter referred to as dextran) wa\ obtained through the courtesy of Dr. Allene Jeanes. The preparation 01` `H-deutran ha\ been described prebiouslq (Young c'( ~1.. 1071) The preparatmn and detcrminatlon 01` E. C, OSD-E. IgM-OSDt and FA have been prcviou,ly described (Jociu\ & Leon. lY73tr). MOPC' 104E IgM (retrrcd to as IgM hereat'ier) wa\ immuno~pecifically purified from the hera of tumor-hearing mice by al'tinitl chromatography on a column of Sepharose 4B-dcxtran. The bound Igm was eluted with I .2 .Mr-methyl I)-glucwide. After d~alyslh. the concentration or IgM U;I, dctermlned spectrophotomctri~~tly using f?!,,,,,,,, = I 6.0 (Leon cf al.. 1070). Purilied IgM ~`a$ labelled with `"I (ICN. Clcvcland. OH)

722

HENDRIK

PRUUL

and MYRON

A. LFON

t \\cre lahclled with `I C'r (Amerrham &II-lc. C`hlca~o. IL) b) Incubation 01`E (I x IO"cells ml) for 45 men at 37 C hlth IS/cC'i iiCr per ml ol'E in GTBS A hlch contained I",, heated FC S. The ccII5 wrc washed until supernatant counts uc`rc` rrducrd lo background ' 'Cr-F wc`rc` then acnsitlred with OSD (.lOClU\ & Leon, 1974rr) F'llter5 uith prwpltated `H-dextran uerc placed 111 sclntillatlon \lal~ *ith 5 ml oftoluene-based scintillation lluld containlne 5",, diphenqlozvolc and counted III a Liquimat (Picker Nuclear. C`lc\eland. OH). "`C`r was counted directly m tuhcc 111the snmc inhtrumcnt

loo-m_1
::r \
20I 0 I 4 I I I 12

I
yg
1 6 I 16

40-

IgM Bound

Rt:Sl'l.TS

IgM-OSD-E complexes were prepared containing @I 2 pg IgM bound per IO" OSD-E. C was added and the extents of lysis are shown in Fig. I. Maximal lysis occured at 3.5-5.5 pg of IgM:lO" bound cells. With increasing amounts of IgM bound, lysis was depressed. In unpublished experiments, the observed depression of lysis was not restricted to the particular dilution ofC giving maximal lysis of60", as in this experiment. Such depression of lysis was observed at all dilutions of C tested, i.e. dilutions giving maximal lysis ranging from 33",, to 94",,.

supernatants were tested for residual C by incubation with EA at 37'C for 60 min. The relationship between IgM bound and residual C activity is shown in Fig. 2. The data are expressed as the fraction of residual lytic activity in the supernatant compared with the activity of the supernatant from the control tubes containing C and OSD-E. The residual C activity decreased as the amount of IgM bound increased throughout the range explored, even at levels of IfM where direct Iysi\ uac suppressed (>5 /lg IgM IO" USI)-L) (keg. I).

To determine the relationship between C consumption and IgM bound, particularly at high levels of IgM bound where lysis is supressed (Fig. I), IgM-OSD-E were prepared containing different amounts of IgM. The IgM-OSD-E or control OSD-E were mixed with C and incubated at 0 C for 30 min. The cells were centrifuged m the cold and aliquots ot

The following experiment explored the change in number of free valences of cell-bound IgM (capable of reacting with soluble 3H-dextran) as a function of the amount of IgM bound to OSD-E. The amount of soluble 3H-dextran added was adjusted to nondissociating levels (Jocius & Leon. 1974h). An equal volume of ice-cold 3H-dextran (20 pg/ml) was added to IgM-OSD-E prepared with various concentrations of IgM. After 30 min at O'C, the cells

60 -

1
4

I pg

I
8

I

I 12

I 16 0 4 ,,g

IgM

Bound

IgM

:ound

12

16

were washed in the cold, transferred quantitatively to Fiberglass filters, washed with ice-cold water. dried, and binding of 3H-dextran determined. IgM-OSD-E bound significant amounts of soluble dextran when the amounts of cell-bound IgM exceeded 4.5 &lO"cells (Fig. 3). The amount of dextran bound per pg cell-bound IgM increased exponentially over the range from 4.5-l I /~g cell-bound IgM suggesting that many free Fab had been present on these cells. No dextran bound to OSD-E controls. The counts measured were not due to dissociation of IgM from IgM-OSD-E and subsequent precipitation of such dissociated IgM by soluble dextran. Control tubes containing various levels of free IgM (0.5-40 /cg/ml). "H-dextran (20 /cg/ml) and unsensitized E did not yield significant counts. indicating that the complexes formed were soluble and were not nonspecifically adsorbed to E.

IgM-OSD-E greater than 2.5 pg:lO" cells and was proportional to the level of IgM bound to the donor cells (Fig. 4). Release of "Cr from donor IgM-OSD-E was markedly suppressed at levels 01 cell-bound IgM greater than 8 pg/lO" cells. In control 51Cr-E. incubated in the presence or experiments absence of C. released less than 3",, intracellular "Cr and "Cr release paralleled hemoglobin release from IgM-OSD-51Cr-E lysed with C. The data on "Cr release clearly demonstrate the contribution of bystander OSD-E to lysis in a mixture of donor IgM-OSD-E and OSD-E. This contribution was greater that SOY,, of the total lysis when IgM bound initially to the donor cells exceeded IO I(; IO" OSD-E and further increased as the IgM bound to the donor cells increased. normal conditions 01 IgM-OSD-E Under preparation. there is no significant release of IgM into the supernatant on standing at 23 C or 0 C over a period of 2 hr.

The transfer of IgM and/or free valences of IgM from IgM-OSD-E to the free antigenic sites of bystander OSD-E was investigated by lysing mixtures of IgM-OSD-E and OSD-E with C, and assaying the release of intracellular i `Cr. To distinguish donor cell from bystander cell contribution to lysis. two parallel experiments were carried out. In one experiment the donor IgM-OSD-E were prepared from "Cr-E. and in the other the bystander OSD-E were so prepared. Transfer was carried out for 30 min at 23 `C. using 0.05 ml of each cell preparation, and the cells then lysed with 3 ml of C. The large dilution diminished the extent of transfer during the 37 C incubation with C. since transfer is markedly dependent on cell concentration (~.idt~ir$v, Fig. 8). Aliquots of the supernatants were assaysed for s'Cr release. Significant i `Cr release due to lysis of bystander OSD-E occured at levels of IgM bound to the donor

In the following experiment. the transfer of IgM and/or free valences of IgM from donor IgM-OSD-E to the free antigenic sites of bystander OSD-E was examined in the presence or absence of soluble dextran. Equal volumes of IgM-OSD-E and nondissociating levels of dextran (20 irg,ml) were preincubated for 30 min at 23 C. washed twice and then assayed for transfer to bystander OSD-E. Aliquots of IgM-OSD-E or dextran-IgM-OSD-E. prepared with various concentrations of cell-bound IgM. were incubated for 45 min at 23 C with an equal volume of E or OSD-E. The cells were then lysed with C. Lysis of the bystander OSD-E, the indicator for transfer, was calculated as the difference in lysis between the mixtures of IgM-OSD-E with bystander OSD-E and the mixtures with E. rather than by 5`C`r release as in the previous experiment. In the absence of soluble dextran. lysis of bystander OSD-E (Fig. 5) essentially paralleled that observed in

0
Fig. 4. Release of "Cr from donor and bystander cells a~ a function of ,cg IgM bound IO" donor cells. IgM-OSDE + "`Cr-OSD-E l : clCr-IgM-OSD-E + OSD-E. t: "`Cr-IpM-OSD-E+E. 17.

4 )19

6

12

16

IgM

Bound

t1.g. 5. Suppresson of Iysis of bystander cells by prclncuhation of IgM-OSD-E with soluble dextran as a function of /~g IgM hound:lO" cells. IgM-OSD-E+OSD-E. 0: destran-ILpM-OSD-E+OSD-E, n.

0

10

20 30 Preincubation

40 Time

50

60

the previous experiment (Fig. 4). The addition ol dextran to I&M-OSD-E. formingdextran-IgM-OSDE complexes. itihibited transfer at all levels of cellbound IgM. As shown in Table I, binding of soluble dextran itself suppressed lysis of IgM-OSD-E somewhat at levels ofcell-bound IgM greater than 2.5 /(g/per 10" OSD-E. and not at all when less IgM was bound. Such `intrinsic suppression' of lysis by binding of soluble dextran to IgM-OSD-E is insufficient to account for the suppression of lysis in the mixtures of dextran-IgM-OSD-E and OSD-E. which we therefore ascribe to suppression of transfer.

various volumes of 0.00 I( buffer (O.I-IO ml) ut'rc incubated 30 min at 23 C. All tubes were then made up to IO ml at 23 C. C was added (0. I ml) and lysis carried out at 37 C. Over the range of cell concentrations investigated. the per cent lysis of bystander OSD-E was proportional to the log of the cell concentration (Fig. 8). Transfer ;II most efficiently at high cell 23 C occurred concentrations with no indication of reaching an asymptote. Lysis of IgM-OSD-E. in the presence of E. did approach an asymptote at the higher cell concentrations.

IgM-OSD-E ( I2 pg IgM bound, IO" OSD-E) and OSD-E were mixed at 0 C, 23 C or 37 C. and 0.1 ml aliquots were sampled into 5 ml of Ice-cold C at various times and then immediatcl\ placed into ;I 37 C bath. Lysis of bystander OSD-I. uas determined as previously described. To correct for the amount ol transfer occurring during the incubation with C at 37 C, the value for lqsis of bystander cells in a sample mixed and added directly to C`, wlthout prior incubation, was subtracted -from the data (21.7",,). The rate and extent of transfer were both markedly dependent on tcmpcrature (Fig. 6). At 37 C, transfer was essentially complete in 5 min permitting approx 75",, of the bystander OSD-E to be lysed. At 23 C, approx 60",, of the bystander OSD-E could be lysed after I hr of preincubation. at which time the transfer reaction appears to approach an asymptote. At 0 C both the rate and extent of transfer to the bystander OSD-E were significantly lower. with only 25-30",, of the bystander cells lysed by c` after 60 min of preincubation with the donor LgM-OSD-E. The energy of activation of the transfer reaction, 10,100 cal:`mole per degree. was obtained from a plot of the logarithm of the initial reaction rate against the reciprocal of the absolute temperature (Fig. 7) at which the transfer reaction was carried out. Tlw r<#kt

`0

of wll

(.otl(.l'tltr~lIiot1

on rrotmfi~r

IgM-OSD-E (5 x IO" cells. 5 iig IgM bound,`lO") and OSD-E (5 x 1OHcells) or E (5 x IOH cells) in

70

I

I

I

I

I

I

I .

b

50-

40-

.c * 2 s

30-

zo-

01

I

1

2

I 3

I 5

I 10 Cells/ml

I 20 x 10'

I 30

1 50

I 100

DIb<`l

ss101,

Quantitative studies of conventional anti-E antisera have demonstrated that they may be divided into three different groups with respect to hemolytic activity as a function of antibody concentration (Osler et ul., 1952; Mayer. 1961). The first group reaches a plateau of activity with increasing antibody concentration. The second group does not reach a plateau. but continues to show increasing activity with increasing antibody concentration. The third group reaches a maximum and then shows diminishing activity with increasing antibody concentration. The IgM-OSD-E system. at least superficially. behaves like the third group ot conventional heterogeneous antisera. For convenience in discussion we define three zones on the cell surface, as antibody is bound in increasing amounts, analogous to those commonly defined for antibody-antigen interaction in solution (Heidelberger. 1939); (a) antigen excess, (b) equivalence, and (c) excess. The experimental data are antibody compatible with the following view ofevents occurring at the cell surface. In the zone of antigen excess, essentially all of the Fab regions of cell-bound IgM bind to antigen. Such IgM-OSD-E do not bind nondissociating concentrations of soluble dextran (Fig. 3). The bound IgM would be expected to take the form of'staple-like' structures on the high mol. wt antigen (dextran) as observed by electron microscopy (Femstein & Rowe, 1967; Feinstein & Munn, 1969). In this zone of antigen excess, both lysis of IgM-OSD-E complexes are and complement consumption proportional to the amount ofcell-bound IgM (Figs. 1 and 2). Transfer to bystander OSD-E is low (Figs. 4 and 5) as would be expected in a situation where essentially no free Fab regions of the IgM-OSD-E are available for reaction with the bystander OSD-E. Increasing the ratio of cell-bound IgM to antigen produces an equivalence zone, which we arbitrarily define as the range of bound IgM from 2.5 to 5pg per

10" OSD-E. Although lysis is not proportional to the amount of IgM bound(Fig. I ). there is no inhibition of lysis and complement is consumed in proportion to IgM bound (Fig. 2). In this zone, free Fab, detectable by binding of soluble dextran (Fig. 3). increase as a function of increasing amounts of cell-bound IgM. Paralleling the increase in binding of soluble dextran, greater transfer to bystander OSD-E occurs (Fig. 4) also indicating an increase in the number of free Fab regions of the cell-bound IgM in this zone. Further increasing the ratio of antibody to antigen gives rise to IgM-OSD-E complexes with many free Fab regions available. as shown by exponential increase in binding of soluble dextran (Fig. 3). Electron microscopic observations show that the free Fab regions of IgM bound to high mol. wt antigen orient both above and below the plane of the central disc of the IgM molecule (Svehag & Bloth, 1967; Feinstein et ul.. 1971). Such orientations of free Fab should exist when IgM is bound in excess to form IgM-OSD-E and be available for reaction with bystander OSD-E. In fact, these complexes do demonstrate a high level of transfer to bystander OSD-E (Figs. 4 and 5). Such transfer is blocked by prior binding of soluble dcxtran (dextranIgM-OSD-E). The soluble dextran presumably occupies the free Fab regions and prevents their mtcraction with untigcnic determinants of bystander OSD-E (Fig. 5). Transfer of cell-bound antibody has been observed previously (Muir, 1909: Bowman et u/.. 1951; Mayer, 1961; Humphrey & Dourmashkin. 1969). They have shown that such transfer may occur. during the hemolytic reaction, from site to site on the <Lime or different cells, thus enhancing the hemolytic efticiency of the antibody. However. as might be expected In studies of heterogeneous antibody populations. the extents of transfer in different sera varied widely. Gilliland and Turner ( 1969) demonstrated in Ctro transfer ofu strum factor believed to be Ig which binds to erythrocytes of some patients with rheumatoid arthritis. They were able to selectively remove the `donor' erythrocytes with anti-blood group antibody, and then test the `bystander' erythrocytes for bound components of complement with antisera to complement. In these situations. which involve antibodies with a spectrum of affinities for antigen, transfer may occur by virtue of low-affinity bonds, in a fraction of the antibody. breaking and reforming. Furthermore, since centrifugation of the donor cells abrogated or significantly reduced transfer (Bowman were probably rt ul.. 195 1). these investigations studying a system in antigen excess. where we find little or no transfer. Our data demonstrate that. in the case of MPOC 104E IgM-OSD-E. transfer requires the presence of free Fab regions of the cell-bound antibody (Figs. 3-5). This requirement suggests that transfer of IgM from IgM-OSD-E to OSD-E proceeds through the formation of the intermediate complex EOSD-IgM-OSD-E. The sequence of interactions may be represented by the following equations: (1) IgM,,-OSD-E + OSD-E 2 EOSD-IgM,,-OSD-E (2) E-OSD-IgM,,-OSD-E 2 E-OSD-IgM IgM,-OSD-E

(,. h +

726

HFNIIRIK

PRIJLIL

,~ncl VyROlu

.A. LFON

where b < a-b and IgM,,-OSD-E represent cells in antibody excess with free Fab regions. Reaction (1) proceeds through the interaction offree tab regions of` donor cells with bystander OSD-E. thereby cross-linking donor and bystander cells. Microscopic agglutination of the cells occurs (unpublished observations) when bystander OSD-E are added. As might be expected. transfer is facilitated by an increase in concentration of the donor and bystander species (Fig. 8). The observation that the contribution, to lysis. of the bystander cells is significantly greater than the contribution of the donor IgM-OSD-E, when the latter are prepared in antibody excess. (Fig. 4) suggests that the bystander cells are in antigen excess (no free Fab regions) and the donor cells are still in antibody excess (many free Fab regions). Transfer of small amounts of IgM [h <(I -h as shown in equation (2)] could explain these data. Houcver. the experimental data do not permit a decision as to whether actual transfer occurs (equation 2). whether lysix of donor and bystander cells takes place without dissociation of the intermediate complex (equation I ), or whether both processes play a role in the lytic events. Since MOPC l04E IgM is homogeneous (Young c'/ trl.. I97 I ). if equilibrium were attained in the reactions represented by equations (1) and (2) , donor and bystander cells would have an equal number of bound IgM molecules and no difference in lysabiiity between these cells would be observed. In fact. the data of Figs. 4 and 5 show differences between lysis of bystander cells and donor cells. suggesting that the time allowed I'or Iransfcr wax insufficient to attain a true reequilibration of the IgM. However, examination of Fig. 6 indicates that at 23 C. the temperature at which these experiments (Figs. 4 and 5) were carried out, such equilibration would require lengthy incubation. if ever achlcvable experimentally. The experiments carried out at 0 C or 73 C show much slower transfer than at 37 C. in accord with the significant energy of activation for the transfer reaction IO, 100 ca/mole per degree (Fig. 7). The data presented clearly demonstrate a decrease in the average number of Fab moieties bound to antigen per IgM molecule in antibody excess. It is not yet clear how this change in binding to antigen leads to depression of lysis (Fig. 1). The depression of lysis cannot be due to a decrease in C binding, since complement continues to be consumed in increasing amounts throughout the zone ofantibody excess (Fig. 7). However. since total C activity was measured in this experiment, the increased consumption might only rellect binding of Cl. Thus, the decrease in lyais could be ascribed to incomplete activation of the complement cascade after binding Cl. Although a single IgM molecule can activate Cl (Borsos & Rapp. 1965) by analogy with IgG.CI activation may require more than 2 of the Fab regions of an IgM molecule to react with antigen. If so. Incomplete activation of the complement cascade may

be a consequence of inappropriate conformation 01 IgM Fc regions in the zone of antibody excess, where some Fab regions are uncombined with antigen (Feinstein & Rowe. 1967; Ishizaka et al.. 1968; Linscott, 1970: Feinstein rt ul., 1971; lsenman et ul.. 1975). Linscott's data (Linscott, 1970). in fact, suggest that Cl binding affinity varies as a function of the number of IgM antibody binding sites which are occupied by antigen. Quantitative data on binding of labelled Clq and C4 throughout the region of antibody excess should help explain the decreased lysis in antibody excess. Similar data, in the region of antigen excess. should provide the maximal number of reactive Clq sites available on a cell-bound IgM molecule. Such proposed experiments, as well as the data described in this and the preceding papers (Jocius & Leon. lY74~.h: 19750.h) demonstrate the extraordinary usefulness of homogeneous Immunoglobulins with well defined binding properties in the exploration of immunochemical and biological
activities of immunoglobulins.

