SIMON EV PHILLIPS SIMON EV PHILLIPS

MINIREVIEW

MINIREVIEW

Built by association: structure and function of helix-loop-helix DNA-binding proteins
Structure 15 January 1994, 2:1-4 The transcription of genes in eukaryotic cells is controlled by a complex system of protein factors that interact both with each other and with DNA. A critical step in gene activation is binding of such transcription factors to specific DNA sequences. These DNA-binding proteins vary greatly in size and sequence, but frequently contain sequence motifs corresponding to one of a limited set of classes of DNA-binding domains. One example, the 'helix-loop-helix' domain (HLH), consists of two a-helices separated by a loop, and was first identified in an immunoglobulin enhancer binding factor, and other regulatory proteins [1]. The sequence of HLH domains is highly conserved, and they occur in a wide range of diverse regulatory proteins found in eukaryotes from yeast to humans. Most known HLH domains are of the b/HLH type, which have a conserved basic region (b) that is immediately amino-terminal to the HLH itself and that is required for DNA binding. Several also contain a second common DNAbinding motif, the 'leucine zipper' (Z) [2], immediately carboxy-terminal to the HLH and are therefore called b/HLH/Z domains. Sequences for a number of HLH proteins, mostly transcriptional activators, are shown in Fig. 1. The crystal structure of one member of the b/HLH/Z protein family, Max, has been determined as a complex with its DNA target [3]. Max is quite small, consisting almost entirely of the b/HLH/Z domain, in contrast to most HLH proteins which are much larger and in which the HLH simply constitutes one domain. Two recent papers [4,5] have now thrown more light on the general structural principles involved in DNA recognition, and the regulation of HLH activity through association of various combinations of subunits into dimers or tetramers. HLH proteins recognize a common DNA sequence motif, CANNTG (the E-box, see [6] for recent review), to which they bind as dimers, matching the central two-fold symmetry of the E-box. Interestingly, these dimers do not always have identical subunits, and the formation of homodimers or heterodimers is an important component of regulation in the system. For instance, Max is associated with Myc in vivo, presumably forming heterodimers, but while Myc cannot form homodimers or bind to DNA alone, Max can do both. Only certain HLH proteins can form homodimers and only certain combinations can form heterodimers. Since DNA binding is a property of the dimers, the selection of allowed dimer partners can serve to regulate their activity. This selective dimerization is a property of both HLH and Z domains, and is also observed for proteins containing only the basic and Z motifs (b/Z). The structure of the Max-DNA complex is shown in Fig. 2. The protein used for this structure determination was a truncated form of Max consisting of residues

Fig. 1. Partial sequence alignment of HLH DNA-binding domains of some transcription factors. Amino acid numbering corresponds to that for full size murine Max protein. Conserved regions and residues are coloured, and the two helices of the HLH are labelled H1 and H2. (Adapted from [3] with permission.)

(

Current Biology Ltd ISSN 0969-2126

1

2

Structure 1994, Vol 2 No 1

22-113 only. The upper part of the molecule corresponds to the Z region with its two helices forming a long parallel coiled-coil, as predicted [2] and as is also observed in the structure of the b/Z protein GCN4 [7]. The HLH domains fold into a parallel, left-handed, fourhelix bundle with a well-defined hydrophobic core, that lies just above the DNA in Fig. 2. Helices HI (see Fig. 1 for nomenclature) are extensions of the Z helices, while helices H2 extend beyond the bundle, and lie along the DNA major groove. The segments of the helices in the groove are formed from the basic region of the motif, and make numerous contacts to the DNA bases. Specific contacts are made between side chains of conserved residues in the basic region and bases of the E-box.

of this protein. They also report the crystal structure of a complex of the isolated b/HLH with a DNA fragment. The b/HLH/Z and b/HLH fragments bind specifically to E-box DNA, but the b/HLH-DNA complex is not stable under electrophoresis conditions, probably due to fast exchange of free and bound protein. Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy showed dramatic increases in a-helical content on DNA binding, even for intact USF, implying that an otherwise disordered segment of the DNA-binding domain is induced to form a helix on complex formation. Similar order-disorder transitions have been reported for the b/HLH of the muscle-determination factor, MyoD [8] and TFEB [9]. CD spectra also suggest that the DNA is distorted in the USF complex. The crystal structure of a complex between the b/HLH fragment of USF and an oligonucleotide containing an E-box was determined at 2.9A resolution [4], and is shown in Fig. 3. The structure is quite similar to the corresponding region of Max (Fig. 2), although the angle at which helices H1 and H2 cross in the helical bundle differs. The loop regions are longer in USF (see Fig. 1), and there is some distortion in both the DNA and parts of the protein, notably the basic region helices. Protein distortions appear to be the result of crystal packing contacts, suggesting that the structure is easily deformable. The DNA is not appreciably bent in the crystal structures of complexes with either Max or USF b/HLH domains, although it has been reported that Max and Myc bend DNA by between 50 ° and 80° in solution [10]. Ferre-D'Amare et al. [4] conclude that the USF b/HLH structure shows a great deal of plasticity, and that the disorder-order transition that occurs on DNA binding is the result of cooperative folding of the basic region from a random coil into an a-helix. Taken in conjunction with the distortions generated in the DNA, this represents a dramatic example of induced fit.

Fig. 2. Crystal structure of Max b/HLH/Z bound to an oligonucleotide containing a central CACGTG sequence. The subunits of the Max homodimer are coloured red and yellow. (Reproduced from [4] by permission of Oxford University Press.)

The structure of a second HLH domain, that from upstream stimulatory factor (USF), has now been published [4], and shows some interesting new features. USF is found in HeLa cell nuclei, and also binds to E-box sequences. The intact protein (which has a Mr of 34 000) has a highly conserved b/HLH/Z domain near its carboxyl terminus. It can form homodimers (and higher order oligomers) which bind to DNA and activate transcription. Ferre-D'Amare et al. [4] used fragments corresponding to the b/HLH/Z and truncated b/HLH domains, as well as full length USF, to investigate the DNA binding and oligomerization properties

Fig. 3. Crystal structure of the USF b/HLH-DNA complex in a similar orientation to Fig. 2. (Reproduced from [4] by permission of Oxford University Press.)

Helix-loop-helix proteins Phillips

3

Light scattering experiments performed on the USF b/HLH-DNA complex in solution [4], indicate that a protein dimer is bound to a single DNA duplex, as found in the crystal structure. USF b/HLH/Z fragments, however, form tetramers in solution, and, in the presence of specific DNA fragments, each tetramer binds two DNA duplexes. This suggests the possibility of forming DNA loops by binding to two non-adjacent target sequences simultaneously. The ability to form tetramers appears to reside in the Z segment, and leaves the DNA-binding ability unchanged. Intact USF aggregates in solution to form high molecular weight oligomers. The ability of other b/HLH/Z proteins, such as Myc [11], AP4 [12] and TFEB [13], to form tetramers had been previously reported, and may have functional significance.
Table 1. Examples of allowed oligomeric forms of helix-loop-helix domains and their DNA-binding activities. Homodimers Homotetramers Heterodimers Heterotetramers Max(+), USF(+), MyoD(+), E47(+), Id(-) USF (+ + )t, MyoD (-), Id (-) Myc/Max (+), MyoD/E47 (+) MyoD/Ild (-)

DNA-binding activity is indicated by (-)= no binding, (+)= binding. tFor the USF tetramer (+ +) indicates binding to two DNA duplexes simultaneously.

In another recent study, Fairman et al [5] investigated the oligomerization of peptides corresponding to HLH domains from MyoD, the immunoglobulin enhancer binding protein, E47 and Id (see below), and how this relates to their regulatory properties. The following discussion describes the properties of these peptides, rather than the intact parent proteins, except where stated otherwise. Id ('inhibitor of DNA binding') is a negative regulator of gene expression, that uses direct protein-protein interactions to prevent DNA binding by other HLH proteins [14]. The sequence of Id (Fig. 1) shows that the region corresponding to the basic region of b/HLH proteins is slightly acidic, so it could be described as a/HLH. In addition, this region of Id contains helix-breaking residues. Id can form dimers or tetramers in solution, but, not surprisingly in view of the lack of a basic region, these oligomers do not bind to DNA. MyoD and E47 form homodimers in solution that can bind DNA, but MyoD/E47 heterodimers are more stable. The preference for heterodimers is interesting, since activation of myogenesis, the in vivo function of intact MyoD, requires heterodimers of MyoD/E47 or MyoD/E12 (another immunoglobulin enhancer binding HLH protein). MyoD can also form tetramers in solution, but these do not bind DNA. Table 1 shows some of the allowed oligomeric forms, and their DNAbinding abilities. Fairman et al. [5] synthesized two peptides for Id, corresponding to the a/HLH region, and the HLH do-

main alone. Both peptides strongly inhibit DNA binding by MyoD, and, less strongly inhibit DNA binding by MyoD/E47 and E47 alone. When they used MyoD dimers cross-linked with a cysteine residue introduced near the carboxy-terminal end of H2, which still bind DNA, Id no longer inhibited the binding. Inhibition of MyoD by Id appears to be due to the sequestration of MyoD subunits into inactive MyoD/Id heterotetramers, but the cross-linked MyoD is resistant to formation of such oligomers. They investigated the association states of the various components using CD spectroscopy and showed that Id exists as stable tetramers with some dimer intermediates, MyoD exists as a mixture of dimers and tetramers, and E47 exists chiefly as dimers. MyoD tetramers are transcriptionally inactive, and it has been suggested that they could play a role in buffering transcriptional regulation by controlling the concentration of active dimers. Formation of Id homotetramers is a cooperative event, but MyoD/Id heterotetramers form with even higher cooperativity and affinity. To inhibit the formation of MyoD-DNA complexes, Id/MyoD complexes must have lower free energies. A MyoD/Id heterodimer could probably not compete effectively with MyoD-DNA complexes, owing to the loss of the protein-DNA interactions, but the additional protein-protein contacts in the heterotetramers could supply the necessary extra stability. This would allow Id to be an effective inhibitor at concentrations comparable to that of MyoD. Fairman et al [5] find the Id a/HLH peptide is less effective at inhibiting DNA binding by E47 than by MyoD, while other reports (for example [141), in which intact Id protein was used, suggest that it is a more potent inhibitor of E47 than of MyoD. This indicates that regions other than the HLH domain itself must be involved in inhibition by Id. The overall message from these new results is that transcriptional regulation by HLH proteins is regulated by a delicate balance between various combinations of homo- and hetero-oligomers. We clearly have a lot to learn about what is going on in the nucleus, but the combination of structure determination, biophysical assays in solution, and molecular biology, is now providing some clues.

References 1. Murre, C., McCaw, P.S. &Baltimore, D. (1989). Anew DNA binding and dimerisation motif in immunoglobulin enhancer binding, daughterless, MyoD and myc proteins. Cell 56, 777-783. 2. Landschultz, W.H., Johnson, P.F. & McKnight, S.L. (1988). The leucine zipper: a hypothetical structure common to a new class of DNA binding proteins. Science 243, 1681-1688. 3. Ferr&-D'Amare, AR., Prendegast, G.C., Ziff, E.B. & Burley, S.K. (1993). Recognition of Max by its cognate DNA through a dimeric b/HLH/Z domain. Nature 363, 38-45. 4. Ferre-D'Amare, AR., Pognonec, P., Roeder, R.G. & Burley, S.K. (1994). Structure and function of the b/HLH/Z domain of USF.
5. EMBO J. 13, 180-189. Fairman, R., et al, & and Brenner, S.L. (1993). Multiple

4

Structure 1994, Vol 2 No 1
oligomeric states regulate the DNA binding of helix-loop-helix peptides. Proc. Natl Acad Sci. USA 90, 10429-10433. Bexevanis, A.D. & Vinson, C.R. (1993). Interactions of coiled coils in transcription factors: where is the specificity? Curr. Opin. Genet Dev. 3, 278-285. Ellenberger, T.E., Brandl, CJ., Struhl, K. & Harrison, S.C. (1992). The GCN4 basic region leucine zipper binds DNA as a dimer of uninterrupted ca-helices - crystal structure of the protein-DNA complex. Cell 71, 1223-1227. Anthony-Cahill, S.J., et al., & DeGrado, W.F. (1992). Molecular characterization of helix-loop-helix peptides. Science 255, 979-983. Fisher, D.E., Parent, LA & Sharp, PA (1993). High affinity DNAbinding Myc analogs: recognition by an c helix. Cell 72, 467-476. Fisher, D.E., Parent, LA & Sharp, P.A (1992). Myc/Max and other helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper proteins bend DNA toward the minor groove. Proc Nat. Acad Sci. USA 89, 11779-11783. 11. Dang, C.V., McGuire, M., Buckmire, M. & Lee, W.M.F. (1989). Involvement of the 'leucine zipper' region in the oligomerization and transforming activity of human c-myc protein. Nature 337, 664-666. Hu, Y.-F., Lilscher, B., Admon A., Mermod, N. &Tjian, R. (1990). Transcription factor AP-4 contains multiple dimerization domains that regulate dimer specificity. Genes Dev. 4, 1741-1752. Fisher, D.E., Carr, C.S., Parent, LA & Sharp, P.A. (1991). TFEB has DNA-binding and oligomerization properties of a unique helix-loop-helix leucine-zipper family. Genes Dev. 5, 2342-2352. Benezra, R., Davis, R.L., Lockshon, D., Turner, D.L. & Weintraub, H. (1990). The protein Id - a negative regulator of helix-loophelix DNA-binding proteins. Cell 61, 49-59.

6.

12.

7.

13.

8.

14.

9. 10.

Simon EV Phillips, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK.

