28

First Asia-Pacific Congress

results of specific amino acid modification studies are also consistent with the predicted anticoagulant region. This region should be located on the surface of the molecule and be available for interaction, based on analogy with the available crystallographic structures of phospholipases. The 'anticoagulant' region is distinct and separated from the 'neurotoxic' and 'myotoxic' sites and is on the opposite side of the phospholipase protein.

Non-phospholipase anticoagulants from Naja nigricollis venom. R. M. KINI, S. STEFANSSONand H. J. EVANS
(Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Commonwealth University, Medical College of Virginia, Richmond, Virginia 23298, U.S.A.). SNAKEVENOMSinterfere with hemostasis at various steps of the coagulation cascade, showing both procoagulant and anticoagulant effects. Proteinases and phospholipases, respectively, are mainly responsible for these effects. During our attempts to purify proteins interfering with hemostasis we have purified four anticoagulant proteins from Naja nigricollis venom by FPLC and gel filtration. These proteins are homogeneous by native and SDS PAGE. The molecular weights of these proteins are about 7000. They do not exhibit either phospholipase or proteinase activities. They show different anticoagulant potencies on prothrombin times. They also inhibit both ADP and collagen initiated platelet aggregation.

Scorpions, spiders and centipedes - - a colour chart for identification and clinical features of poisoning with special reference to Singapore. J. KOH, P. GOPALAKRISHHAKONEand H. KWAN(Singapore).
SCORPIONS, spiders and centipedes found in Singapore are venomous, but not fatal to human beings. The victims may experience local pain and symptoms associated with fright and fear. The site of bite or sting can become swollen and red, which may be followed by necrosis and loss of skin, leaving a deep ulcer. The scorpions which are of medical importance are the black scorpion (Heterometrus Iongimarus) and the spotted house scorpion (lsometrus maculatus). The giant centipede (Scolopendra morsitans) and the centipede (Scolopendra subspinipes) are two common species found in Singapore. Among the spiders, those belonging to the families Theraphosidae, Phlogiellus inermis; Barychelidae, Siapalolasma aedificatrix; Spaxassidae, Heteropoda venatoria; Clubionidae, Chiracanthium; Araneidae (orb-weavers), such as Nephila antipodiana, Nephilengys malabarensis, Cyrtophora unicolor and Argiope versicolor are described. Scanning electron microscopy of the fangs, sting and poison claw of these arthropods is featured. Also provided are some suggestions to the public on prevention and treatment. Supported by the Venom and Toxin Research Group of the National University of Singapore.

Toxicity o f cone toxin on fishes Mugil cephalus and Arius maculatus. R. KASINATHAN,J. TAGORE and N. RAJENDRAN (Centre of Advanced Study in Marine Biology, Parangipettai-608 502, India).
INVESTIGATIONS were carried out to determine the toxic nature of crude extracts of the venom apparatus of Conus amadis (Gmelin) collected from Portonovo, east coast of India, on the fishes grey mullet, Mugii cephalus, and cat fish, Arius maculatus. Different doses of crude extract of venom apparatus were injected into the fishes and the time of death observed. Lethal doses and LDs0values were also determined. A. maculatus was found to be more tolerant to the Conus toxin than M. cephalus. However, M. cephalus was able to survive from 0 to 64 hj whereas A. maculatus was found alive from 10 to 72 h at the same dosages. Oxygen uptake is a meaningful index to assess the toxicant stress due to the toxin of Conus using a continuous flow-through system. The rate of oxygen uptake was monitored for the two fishes immediately after the injection of Conus toxin until their death. When compared to the control, initially the rate of oxygen uptake was high in the toxin injected fishes. Interestingly, the colour of grey mullet M. cephalus changed to red at the time of death. Further, the behaviour of fishes after the injection of toxin was also observed for toxin effect.

Tetrodotoxin in the horseshoe crab Carcinoscorpius rotundicauda inhabiting Thailand. A. KUNGSUWAN, Y. NAGASHIMA,T. NOGUCHI, Y. SHIDA, S. SUVAPEEPAN,P. SUWANSAKORNKUL and K. HASHIMOTO(Laboratory of Marine Biochemistry, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113, Japan).
FURTHER attempts were made to identify the toxins of the horseshoe crab, Carcinoscorpius rotundicauda, which causes sporadic food poisoning in Thailand. Toxic C. rotundicauda eggs were crushed and extracted with distilled water repeatedly under ultrasonication. After being defatted with dichloromethane, the combined extracts were ultrafiltered on an Amicon YM-2 membrane to cut off more than 1000 mol.wt substances. The filtrate was applied to a Bio-Gei P-2 column (6.6 x 55 cm) using 0.1 M acetic acid, and rechromatographed on a Bio-Gel P-2 column (2.5 x 90 cm) using 0.03 M acetic acid. Toxic fractions were further purified by Bio-Rex 70

