SOB

Tenth European Sympoai~

Hxauae the alkylation ~ho affxta the infra-H-chain -S-S- ~nkage, the lack of internaliratioa could result from the modification of the -SH of the inter-chain bridée or those implicated in the infra-H-chain bridée. To teat this hypothesis, we examined the properties of a modified H-chain in which infra-H~hain -S-S- was intact whereas the cysteine of intenchain bridée was alkylated (r+enatured~elkylated-H-chain) . This modified H~ain was able to antagonize HONT/A binding but not to mediate internafvation of HONT/A-Lchain at either marine or Aplysia paeparations . Thin indicated that the lass of internalization was due only to the alkylation of the -SH normally involved in the intnr~chain linkage. These collective raaulq demonstrate that the ability of BoNT/A H~hain to mediate inta~nalization of HONT/A L~hain requims an intact -S-S- or at least the froc -SHs Participating in this bond .

Structure~ftatcttort relationships of scorpion narrotoxlns that act on sodpan chmvtel. H. Rooter (CNRS URA 1455, Laboratoire de Biochimie, Faculté de Médecine Secteur Nord, Boulevard Pierre Dramard, 13326 Marseille Cedex 1 S, France). Ntn®tooa scorpion nourotoxina have been purified that act on voltaée-dependent sodium channels. Some of them have proved to be highly speci>rc iu their Pharmacological activity and were called `mammal', `imect' or `crustacean' toxins according to the animals they are abk to paralyse and kill . Mammal toxin have been defined as a- and ß-toxins as they bind to two different binding sites and induce difi'ereut pharmacological actions on the node of Rauvier. Insect toxins are aLo of two types, racing either a contrastive or a fisocid paralysis, although they are abk to compete on insect neuronal membranes . Moreover, it has been shown more racentfY that some scorpion toxins may be 1as spaia specific than others : these toxins are abk to interact with mammal and insect neuronal membranes and are lethal both to mammal and insects . As all scorpion toxins alive on sodium channds have the same structural archetype as determined by X-ray crystallography and RMN studies, it is of great interest to delete better their surfaces at an atomic keel, in order to define the parts which are concerned with target rncogitition and to link them teatatively to sPxia sad pharmacological speciflcitia of scorpion neurotoxins.

Deteemüratio~n of protein atmttoes lA aohuian Lafng nrxltldirtrenaiaeal hettroetaelear NAfR spcetrarrnpy. H. Rtir~ueta (Institut für Biophysikalische Chemie, J .W . ßoetho-Universität Frankfurt, F.R.ß.) . Ix ortumt to exploro the limits of the nuclear magnetic resonance technique for the determination of protein structure iu solution a detailed investigation of structuroa of ~'C and ~'N labelled proteins was carried out . 1[n addition to the distance between hydroéen atoms derived from NOE values, stareospeciflc aasi is of methykne protons and of methyl protons in valine and lysine r+aidtua were achieved sad various ~npling u constants wens determined from which dihedral angles could be derived. In addition to the structural parameters, rolaxatioa times T,, T~ p and T2 as well as exchange rates of amide protons wens measured in order to describe the dynamics of protein structures . It can be shown that mutant proteins as well as complexes of the native proteins with ligands may be very different is the dynamics of the structure, although the average static stnrcturea are very similar. The structure of various oligopeptides and smaller proteins aro presented. Oligopeptida and smaller proteins, in particular some WxiC proteins, have different conformations when dissolved in water or when bound to a membrane or a hydrophobic surface .

Structror m~ftorctlat oj E. ooli heat-labile urteroroxirt . T. K. Stxxe, C . L . M . J . Vttat.nvne, K . H . Kert, S. E. Pttorr[, H. A . M . vety T .ern~r and ß. J. Hex. (BI~ON Research Institute, University of Groninéen, Nijemborgh 4, 9747 Aß ßroninécn, The Netherhmds). Hser labile enterotoxin (LT) sad its close rolative cholera toxin era major virulence fedora in diseaea such as cholera and traveller's diarrhoea . They era AB, multimer protein: the B pmtamen bind to ßw , gangliodde in the target cells and allow the translocation of the enzymatic A aubunit into the cytoplasm, where the A subunit acts by ADP-riboaylation of ßsa. We present the throe-dimensional structure of LT and the complex with lactose . The X-ny structure of the AH D multimer complex of LT has been solved by a combination of MIR and flvo-fold averaging, and roflned to 1 .95 A. The B subunib combine to a pentamer by forming tix-stranded intersubunit ß-shorts surrounding a central poro lined by a long a-helix from each subunit . The intenscction with the A subunit is ahaoat exdutivdy by the C-terminal fragment, which inserts into the pons of the pentamer and emerges on the other end es a small helix . Thin interaction doe not dirturb the symmetry of the B subuaits and allows the A aubunit wme flexibility of orientation with rasped to the H pentamer . Copystallization studies have revealed the galactose part of ßr in the flue binding tits on the H pentamer in a location which indicate that

Teeth European Sympoûum

509

the A subunit is moat likely far from the membrane upon binding to the target cell. Only the extreme Gterminw of the A subunit probably interacts with the membrane and may have an important role in the translocation process. The toxin has intriguing structural resemblance to other toxins uarslated by sequence: the core of the enzymatic domain is similar to that of exotoxia A of Pseudbmortar Amrgbwsa, while the H subunits are remarkably similar to Escherichia colt Vero toxin .

Topographic epitopes ojcuraremirnetic toxin: identificatlour by NAlR spectroscopy. S. Z.wra-Jusnrv, P. DaevEr, C. Rou~rerro, A. Mh~z and F. Tolu (Département d'Ingénierie et d'Etude des Protéines, Laboratoire de Structure den Protéines en Solution, C .E.Saday, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France). Toxnv a from Na}a nigrkollir (61 rsaiduea, 4 disulfides) is a short neurotoxin which binds to the nicotinic rsoeptor of acetylcholine, thus blocking the nerve-muscle transmission . The 3D etnxture of the protein is solution Gas been recently determined in our laboratory by proton 2D-NMR apectrosoopy and simulated annealing cak :ulations . Numerous monodonal antibodies have been raised against toxin a. Two of them, called Mal and Mat/3, inhibit the binding of toxin a to the receptor. IntereatinglY, they interact diffetsatly with the toxin. Thus, only Mat is capable of accelerating the dissociation of the toxin-roaptor complex. In order to understand the molecular basis of thex antigen-antibody interactions, we have undertaken the mapping of the two antigenic binding sites oa toxin a using proton 2D-NMR spectroscopy. It hen been recently shown that NMR can provide an interesting means for the identification of the antigenic site of a protein whose proton raonanoe froquescies are assigned. The approach is based on the comparison of the 'H/'Ii exchange kinetics of the amide and side~hain labile hydrogens in the free protein and in the protein bound to the antibody. The region of the antigen mokpile containing labile hydrogena with decreased exchange rates in the antigeo-antibody complex is expected to provide a global image of the site involved in the interaction with the antibody. Using this method, ntly lower amide exchange rates, we have found that in the Mat-toxic a complex, four reaidius show whereas in the Mat/3-toxin a complex, eight residues present sigsißcantly lower amide exchange rates. Is both complexes, the involved residues are not sequentially close, but ors clone in the 3D structure of toxin a . We could thus define two different antigenic binding regions corresponding to the two antibodies.

Neurotoxins in the study of nicotinic acetylcholine rtceptws in the nervous system . C . Vroer. (Institut Pasteur, Neurobiologie Moléculaire, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75015 Paris, France) . To nets, the nicotinic aeetykholine receptor (nAChR) from skeletal vertebrate muscle is the bat understood neurotransmitter receptor. This is due to two main factors: (1) the existence of a rich souroe of nAChRs in the electric organ of certain fish; and (2) the availability of a polypeptide toxin, a-bungarotoxin, isolated from the venom of Bragarur multicinctus, which blocks these raxptors with high afiùvty and apecißcity. In contrast, the study of sAChRs in the nervous system has been hampered by the lack of a suitable ligand. Although abungarotoxin exhibits high affinity binding to autonomic ganglia and brain, it fails to antagonise nicotinic synaptic transmission in these neuronal systems. Recently, a minor component from Brogmus multicinen~r venom, the neur+asal bunlgatwoxin (previously referred to as busgatoroxin 3 .1, toxin F or K-busgatoroxin) hen bees shown to block nicotinic responses in autonomic ganglia while having little or no affect on muscle nAC6Ra. Tlu neuronal bungarotoxin thus appears as a useful probe to functionally characterize nAChRs in the brain . In the seocortex, our experiments have shown that the electrophyaiological responses of pyramidal neurone to nicotinic a®onista are blocked by neuronal bungarotoxin but not by a-bungarotoxin (Vroer . and Ctuxaeux, 1989) . However, in other brain areas such as the medial habennla and the interpeduncuhtr nudeua, nicotinic responses are resistant to both neuronal and a-bungarotoxin, thus indicating the existence of various functional subtypes of nAChR in the central nervous system (MtJLrB et aL, 1991) . These results oon&m cloning experiments' prsdidiona of multiple neuronal nAC6Rs: a gene family of at leaf 10 nAChR subusits has boa identi~d in the brain . Moreover, expreas;on atudia is Xsnopus oocytea (LusrrE et aL, 1990) have revealed several subtypes of functional nAChR exhibiting differential sensitivity to neuronal bungarotoxin and also to other toxins, e.g. neosurugatoxin (from the Japanese ivory mollusc, Babylovria faponica) and lophotoxin (from Pacific gorgoniana). These toxins are all promising tools for the study of the structural and functional properties of neuronal nAChRs. Ltnrr~e et al. (1990) J. Neurochem. S6. 63240. Mr n " e et ol. (1991) J. Neurwci. 11, 2588-2597 . Vmet. and Crurroeux (1989) Newosciarce 29, 261-270 .

