Reviews Fox, J. W., ELZINGA, M. and TtI, A. T. (Department of Biochemistry, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado and Department of Biology, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, Long Island, N.Y., U.S.A.). Amino acid sequence of a snake neurotoxin from the venom of Lapemis hardwickii and the detection of a sulfhydryl group by laser Raman spectroscopy. FEBS Lett. 80, 217-220, (1977).

411

AMINO acid sequence of the major "neurotoxin" from L. hardwickii venom is presented. The amino acid composition yielded a total of 60 rather than 61 amino acids and the total number of half-cystines was 9, compared to 8 from the original amino acid composition reported. This is in contrast to most of the short "neurotoxins", which usually contain 8 half-cystines involved in disulfide bonds. Laser Raman spectroscopy was utilized to ascertain the free cysteine residue not participating in the disulfide bonds. The spectrum of the hardwickii toxin showed the typical S-H stretching vibration at 2585cm-1 and indicates the presence of free sulfhydryl group in addition to the 4 disulfide bonds. C.C.Y.

HSEU,T. H., Liu, Y. C., WANG,C., CHANG,H., HWANG,D. M. and YANG,C. C. (Institute of
Molecular Biology, Department of Physics and Department of Chemistry, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China). Conformational prediction for snake venom toxins and laser Raman scattering of a cardiotoxin from Taiwan cobra (Naja naja atra) venom. Biochemistry 16, 2999-3006, (1977). SECONDARY structure regions in snake venom toxins were predicted using the prediction method of Chou and Fasman (Biochemistry 13, 222, 1974) and an averaging scheme assuming structural homology in each type of toxins. The results indicate that snake toxins contain only some B-sheet regions and B-bends. The predicted results correlate well with conclusions from chemical modification and physicochemical studies. B-Bend regions predicted for the two types of "neurotoxins", short- and long-neurotoxins, are primarily located in the middle of disulfide loops in spite of large differences in amino acid sequences. Comparisons between predicted results and the crystal structure of erabutoxin b determined at 2.74/~ resolution suggest that the two types of neurotoxin are both sequencely and conformationally related while cardiotoxins could have an entirely different molecular topology. The Raman spectrum of cobra cardiotoxin indicates that the content of B-pleated-sheet structure could be greater than that in neurotoxins.

C.C.Y.

