474 / THIRD INTERNATIONAL
145

WORKSHOP

ON CYTOKINES
148 GENOMIC STRUCTURES OF HUMAN TYPE I AND II TNF RECEPTORS: IMPUCATIONS FOR PROTEIN STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTICNARY HISTORY. Raymond G. Goodwin and Craig A. Smith. lmmunex Corp., Seattle, Wa. 88101. U.S.A. Overlapping genomic clones encoding human type I (~80) and type II (11601 TNF receotors were isolated and the exonlintron borders maipedl. The Iwo $enes share rather similar exon structures, most of which suggest little obvious correlation to putative protein domains. This is particularly true for the extracellular, cysteine-rich regions characterized by fourfold, pseudo-repeats of about 40 amino acids and six cysteines. This region in both receptors, which contains the ligand binding site, is contained within 5 exons, but the intron/exon junctions do not mark edges of these pseudo-repeats. Three of these exons, however, encode protein of similar size (about 40 residues). An interesting comparison can be made with the much different gene structure of the low affinity nerve growth factor receptor (Sehgal et al., Mol. Cell. Biol. 8, 3160, 1988), also a member of this superfamily of transmembrane proteins comprising al least 8 distinct members. Here the cysteine-rich region lies within two exons. whose borders again do not correspond to pseudo-repeats. Evolutionary trees relating superfamily members, based on single amino acid substitutions, appear in conflict with those derived from genomic structures. Thus, genomic architectures are not consistent with the simple idea of pseudo-repeats corresponding to protein domains, and also suggest that evolution of this superfamily involved additional mechanisms other than point mutations.

ENZYME IMMUNOASSAYS FOR DETECTION OF SOLUBLE HUMAN TNF RECEPTOR IN BIOLOGICAL FLUIDS. G R. Adolf and 1. Aof&, Bender + Co Ges mbH, A-l 121 Vienna, Austria We have developed monoclonal antibodies that define three different epitopes on human tumor necrosis factor binding protein I UNF-BP I), a soluble fragment of the 60 kDa TNF receptor. For quantitation of TNF-BP I in biological fluids, an enzyme immunoassay employing two of the antibodies was developed and extensively characterized with respect to sensitivity, reproducibility, recovery and other parameters. TNF-BP I was detectable in serum from all of 42 healthy donors at a mean concentration of 2.1 * 1 .O pg/L (range, 0.52 - 5.4 pg/L), and was present also in urine from normal individuals (2.2 + 1.2 pg/L, range 0.78 - 4.3 pg/L; n=16). TNF-BP I serum levels were not significantly different in patients with chronic polyarthritis (2.3 + 0.79 pg/L; n=15), but were elevated in burn patients (6.5 ?r 1.7pg/L; n=lO). Patients with renal failure showed markedly increased values (49 f 17 pg/L; n=6). TNFBP I was also detected in culture supernatants of several human cell lines. TNF-BP I in both serum and urine was remarkably stable upon freezing/thawing and storage. As TNF-BP I is released by cells after binding of the membrane TNF receptor by its ligands, the assay we have developed might be a useful tool to detect activation of the TNF system in various pathological conditions.

146

149

STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONAL DOMAINS OF THE G-CSF RECEF'TOR R. Ftiunaga and S. Nagata. Osaka Bioscience Institute, 6-2-4 Furuedai, Suita, Osaka 565, Japan. G-CSF is a growth and differentiation factor which works on cells restricted to the neutrophilic granulocyte lineage. The number of G-CSF receptor (G-CSF-R) is around 300 - 2,000 per cell, and G-CSF binds to the receptor with a dissociation constant of about 100 - 500 PM. We have purified G-CSF-R from mouse NFS-60 cells, and shown that it has a Mr.lOO,OOO 130,000. Cloning of marine and human G-CSF-R cDNAs has shown that G-CSF-R is an 812(mouse) or 813chuman) amino acid polypeptide with a single transmembrane domain. The extracellular domain consists of an Ig-like domain, B cytokine receptor-homologous (CRH) domain and three fibronectin type III (FNIII) domains. Mouse G-CSF-R expressed in COS cells was able to bind G-CSF with an affinity ( Kd = 290 pM) similar to that of the receptor of NFS-60 cells, indicating that the single polypeptide is sufficient to form the highaffinity binding site for G-CSF. Introduction of G-CSF-R cDNA into IL-j-dependent mouse myeloid cell line FDC-PI and pro-B cell line BAF-B03 which normally do not respond to GCSF, enabled them to proliferate in response to G-CSF. Mutational analysis of the G-CSF-R in FDC-PI cells indicated that the N-terminal half of the CRH domain was essential far the recognition of G-CSF, but the Ig-like, FNIII and cytoplasmic domains were not. The CRH domain and a 76-amino acids portion of the cytoplasmic domain were indispensable for the transduction of G-CSF-triggered growth signal. 147

HETEROGENEITY OF TNF/LT RECEPTORS ON ACTIVATED T CELLS. M. Grell. B. Thoma and P. Scheurich. lnstitut ftir Zellbiologie und Immunologie, Univ. Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 57, 7000 Stuttgart 80, Germany. Both tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and lymphotoxin (LT) act as costimulators for activated normal human T lymphocytes. Recent studies have shown that two distinct TNF/LT receptors molecules (~60 and ~80) are coexpressed on neoplastic cell lines. Crosscompetition studies on activated human T cells with TNF and LT

indicate that both cytokines bind t? qne receptor type.. In d ition Scatc$erd analyses of saturation bIndIng experiments with ~%$-TN; and 1 6l-LT revealed only one class of high affinity binding sites.
When the radiolabeled cytokines were crosslinked to the binding

protein, in both cases a major 100 kDa complex was found, representing the p80 receptor attached to monomeric TNF or LT. However, by the use of a p60 specific antibody (H398) we could show for the first time that both receptors are coexpressed on T lymphocytes in an activation dependent manner. Though p60 receptors accounted for only 6% of total high affinity TNF/LT binding sites, blocking of ligand binding to p60 by H388 strongly antagonized typical TNF and LT responses on activated T cells. Furthermore,
whereas both cytokines bound with high affinity to ~80, we show

here that the lower specific bioactiviy of LT, compared to TNF, correlates with its lower affinity to p60 receptors, indicating a potential causal relationship. Together, these results demonstrate that ligand binding to ~60 and not to p80 is response limiting in T cells and underline the crucial role of p60 in TNF and LT signaling.

150
IDENTIFICATION OF HETEROGENEOUS IL-8 RECEPTORS ON HUMAN NEUTKOPHILS, U937 AND HL 60 HUMAN MYEMCYTIC CELL LINES. A. Hishinuma, J-M. Wang, D. J. Kelvin, J. J. Oppenbeim and K. Matsushima. LMI, BRMP, DCT, NCI-FCRDC, Frederick,
MD 21702-1201.

HIGH AND LOW AFFINITY RECEPTORS FOR THE HUMAN LYMPHOKINE HILDA/LIF: BINDING PROPERTIES AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE. Anne Gm, Dominique mYMANN, &&& m and Yannick JACOUF& Unid INSERM 211, n. Plateau Technique CHR, Quai Moncousu, 44035 NANTES Cedex &man Interleukin DA (HlLDA) is a lymphokine initially characterized by its growth promoting activity on an lL3-dependant murine cell line @Ala). It has been shown to be identical to human Leukemia Inhibitory Factor (LlF) and more recently to cover a variety of biological activities. Specific HILDA/LIF binding components have been demonstrated on various cell types. Among them, the choriocarcinoma cell line JAR was chosen to analyze the physico-chemical parameters of HlLDA/LlF binding as well as the molecular characteristics of the receptors. A highaffinity binding component was fast identified at low con entr tions f HlLDA/LlF (Kd= P2 pM, Bm= 4,l? site&e15 ken= 2.2 1051 M- min- P ; 0.0084 min- at 4°C). Affinity cross-hnkmg showed two bands F&=and 290 kDa of similar intensities) under both reducing and nonreducing conditions corresponding to the linkage of HlLDA/LIF with receptor species of 120 and 250 kDa. Binding experiments at higher concenaations of HILDA/LlF enabled the identification of a lower affinity binding component (Kd= 5 nM, 8000 sites/cell). Cross-linking under these low-affinity conditions showed predominantly the 290 kDa band. Together, our data suggest that two components of 120 and 250 kDa enter in the shucture of HlLDA/LlF receptors. The 250 kDa species could constitute the low affinity binding component whereas the association of both components would form the high-affinity structure.

The IL-8 receptor present on rabbit and human neutrophils has recently been cloned and is homologous `co the B-adrenergic, f-MLP and C5a receptors with a seven transmembrane structure and a molecular weight of 40 kDa. We have obtained evidence for the existence of different IL-8 receptors on human neutrophils and on the human myelocytic cell lines U937 and HL60. Chemical crosslinking of radiolabeled IL-8 to its receptors was performed using 1,5-difluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (DFDNB). The crosslinked receptor-ligand complexes were
extracted and subjected to SDS-PAGE and autoradiography. Humar neutrophils yielded a major 70 kDa and minor 52 kDa crosslinked products. In contrast, a dominant 54 kDa species, as

well

as broader

U937 cells. While IL-E, DMSO treated identical to that

band between unstimulated

75 to 85 kDa was obtained from HL60 cells bound verv little
yielded crosslinked species

HL60 cells

lation

found in U937 cells. by swainsonin yielded additional

Inhibition of glycosy67 kDa and 47 kDa

species from U937 cells. Thus two distinct peptides of 60 kDa and 40 kDa MW with IL-8 binding activity are present on U937 cells. We conclude that myelocytic cells at different stages of development such as U937 cells, DMSO induced HL 60 cells and neutrophils may express differing and possibly multiple receptors for IL-8.

