44

SESSION Xlh Structure and Structure Function

153
CATALYTIC DOMAIN OF TISSUE-TYPE PLASMINOGEN ACTIVATOR: THE FUNCTIONAL ROLE OF THE SURFACE-LOCATED LOOPS AND THE IDENTIFICATION OF A HYDROPHOBIC EXOSITE THAT MODULATES SPECIFICITY FOR PLASMINOGEN. D. Lamba', W. Bode 2 and E.L. Madison 3 Ilstittuo di StrutturisticaChimica, C.N.R, Area della Ricercadi Roma,P.O. Box 10, I--00016 Monterotorido Stazione (Portia), Italy. ~Max Planek Institut fiir Biochemie, Abteilung Strulaufforst:htmg, D-82152 Martinsried bei Mfinchen, Germany. 3The Scripps Research Institute, Departmentof Vascular Biology,La Jolla, California92037, U.S.A. Tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PAl, a multidomainal serine proteinase of the trypsin-family, catalyses the rate-limiting step in fibrinolysis, the activation of plasminogen to the fibrin-degrading proteinase plasmin[l ]. The recombinant two-chain catalytic domain of human t-PA has been crystallised with benzamidine and the crystal structure has been solved to 2.3~. resolution[2]. The chain fold, active-site geometry and Ile276-Asp477 salt bridge are similar to that observed for trypsin. A few surface-located insertion loops differ significantly, however. The disulfide bridge Cys315-Cys384, practically unique to the plasminogen activators, is incorporated without drastic conformationai changes. The insertion loop Asp380-Arg383 forms a bulge projecting out of the molecular surface. The unique basic insertion loop Lys296-Arg304, flanking the primed subsites, which has been shown to be of importance for PAI-I binding and for fibrin specificity, is partially disordered. The residues Leu420-Phe423 of t-PA, which form a fully solvent-exposed, hydrophoblc region of a surface loop mapping near one edge of the active site of t-PA, form an important secondary site of interaction between t-PA and plasminogen that significantly modulates the rate of plasminogen activation in the absence, but not in the presence, of fibrin[3]. [I] E.L. Madison,Fibrinolysis, 8, 221-236 (1994). [2] D. Lamba, M. Bauer, R. Huber, S. Fischer,R. Rudolph, U. Kohnertand W. Bode, J. MoL BioL, 258, 117-135(1996). [3] S-H. Ke, K. Tachias, D. Lamb,a,W. Bode and E.L. Madison,d. BioL Chem., 272, 1811-I816 (1997).

154
CONVERTING TISSUE TYPE PLASMINOOEN ACTIVATOR INTO A ZYMOGEN. Kathy Tachias and Edwin L. Madison. The Scripps Research Institute, Department of Vascular Biology, La Jolla, California, USA. In striking contrast to most other members of the chymotrypain family of serine proteases, tissue type plasminogen activator (t-PAl is not synthesized and secreted as a true zymogen. The zymogenicity, or ratio of the catalytic efficiencies of the mature, two chain enzyme and the single chain precursor, is only 5-10 for t-PA. This exceptional property of t-PA, however, is not shared by urokinase (u-PAl, a plasminogen activator that is very closely related to t-PA. The molecular basis of this important functional distinction between these two intimately related serine proteases has not been previously investigated. Based on observation of the recently described structures of the protease domains of two chain t-PA and u-PA, and molecular modeling of the corresponding single chain enzymes, we propose that the presence or absence of an acidic residue at position 144 (chymotrypsin numbering system) is the primary determinant of the distinct zymogenicities of the two enzymes. Consistent with this hypothesis, mutation of bistidine 144 of t-PA to an acidic residue, as in uPA, selectively suppressed the activity of single chain t-PA and thereby significantly enhanced the enzyme's zymogenicity. A variant of t-PA containing an aspartate residue at position 144, for example, exhibited a zymogenicity of 150, compared to a value of 9 for wild type t-PA and 250 for u-PA.

155
CONVERTING TISSUE TYPE PLASM1NOGEN ACTIVATOR INTO A ZYMOGEN: IMPORTANT ROLE OF LYS 156. Kathy Tachias and Edwin L. Madison. The Scripps Research Institute, Department of Vascular Biology, La Jolla, California, USA. In stark contrast to most other members of the chymotrypsin family of serine proteases, tissue type plasminogen activator (t-PAl is not synthesized and secreted as a true zymogen. Instead, single chain t-PA exhibits very significant catalytic activity. Consequently, the zymogenicity, or ratio of the catalytic efficiencies of the mature, two chain enzyme and the single chain precursor, is only 2.5-10 for t-PA. Both we and others have previously proposed that Lys 156 may contribute directly to this exceptional property of t-PA by forming interactions that selectively stabilize the active conformation of the single chain enzyme. To test this hypothesis we created variants of t-PA in which Lys 156 was replaced by a tyrosine residue. As predicted, the KI56Y mutation selectively suppressed the activity of the single chain enzyme and thereby snbstantially enhanced the enzyme's zymogenicity. In addition, however, this mutation produced a very dramatic increase in the ability of t-PA to discriminate among distinct fibrin co-factors. Compared with wild type t-PA, one of the variants characterized in this study, t-PA/R15E, K156Y, possessed substantially enhanced response to and selectivity among fibrin co-factors, resistance to inhibition by plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1), and significantly increased zymogenicity. The combination of these properties, and the maintenance of full activity in the presence of fibrin, suggest that the R15E, K156Y mutations may extend the therapeutic range of t-PA.

156
LYSINE 156 PROMOTES THE ANOMALOUS PROENZYME ACTIVITY OF TPA: X-RAY CRYSTAL STRUCTURE OF SINGLE CHAIN HUMAN TPA AND VAMPIRE BAT PLASMINOGEN ACTIVATOR Martin Renatus', Richard A. Engh ''2, Milton T. Stubbs', Robert Huber ~, Stephan Fischer2, Ulrich Kohnert2, Peter Bringmann3 Peter Donner', Wolf-Dieter Schleaning3and Wolfram Bode a Addresses: 'Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Structural Research, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany; 2Biochemical Research Center, Boehringer Mannheim GmbH, Noanenwald 2, D-82372 Penzberg, Germany; 3Research Laboratories, Scbering AG, Mfillerstr. 170-178, D-13342 Berlin, Germany Tissue type plasminogen activator (tPA) is the physiological initiator of fibrinolysis, activating plasminogen via highly specific proteolysis; plasmin then degrades fibrin with relatively broad specificity. Unlike other chymotrypsin family serine proteinases, t-PA is proteolytically active in a single chain form, prior to activation cleavage. The related plasminogen activator from vampire bat (Desmodus rotundus) saliva (DSPA), which assists the ingestion of blood, has no activation cleavage site and functions only in a single chain form. The X-ray crystal structures of the catalytic domains of recombinant human single-chain tPA and DSPA reveal the molecular mechanism of the anomalous single chain activity of tPA. In the single chain species, Lys 156 forms an internal salt bridge with Asp 194 and stabilizes an enzymatically active conformation, a function performed in other serine proteinases only by the N-terminus generated up.on proteolytic activation. Comparisons with the structures of other serme proteinases that also possess Lys156, such as trypsin, fXa and hnman uPA, identify a set of secondary interactions which are required for Lys156 to fulfill this activating role. Comparison of the tPA and DSPA structures provides explanations for the faint difference in the cathalytic efficiency of both molecules. Both crystal structures will be presented and the structural requirements for zymogen activity will be discussed.

