Neuroscience Letters, 151 (1993) 89-93 Elsevier Scientific Publishers Ireland Ltd.

89

NSL 09324

Bovine neurofilament-enriched preparations contain kinase activity similar to casein kinase I - Neurofilament phosphorylation by casein kinase I (CKI)
William T. Link, Ayse Dosemeci, Carl C. Floyd and Harish C. Pant

Laboratory of Neurochemistry, NINDS, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, IUD 20892 (USA)

(Received 6 July 1992; Revised version received 2 November 1992; Accepted 12 November 1992) Key words: Casein kinase I; Neurofilament; Phosphorylation

Neurofilament (NF)-enriched preparations from bovine spinal cord contain regulator-independent kinase activities that phosphorylate NF subunits as well as a-casein. CKI-7 (N-2-amino ethyl, 5_chloroisoquinoline, 8-sulfonamide), a specific inhibitor of casein kinase I (CKI), inhibits the phosphorylation of NF subunits in the neurofilament preparation. This inhibition occurs at a concentration range identical to concentrations where CKI-7 inhibits rabbit reticulocyte CKI phosphorylation of a-casein. Heparin, a specific inhibitor of casein kinase II (CKII), produced only 20% inhibition of 32Pincorporation into NF subunits, and only at concentrations 5 to lo-fold higher than those required to inhibit CKII from reticulocytes. CKI from rabbit reticulocytes phosphorylated all three NF subunits (NF-H, NF-M and NF-L). Comparison of the tryptic phosphopeptide maps of NF-M, phosphorylated by the NF-associated kinase and CKI, indicates that the casein kinase I phosphorylates many of the peptides phosphorylated by the NF-associated kinase and this phosphorylation occurs at the carboxy terminal tail domain of the NF-M subunit. These studies suggest that the major independent kinase activity associated with NFs is CKI.

Neurofllaments (NFs) are a subclass of intermediate filaments (IFS) which appear to play a role in maintaining the mechanical properties of axons [ 141. The mammalian NFs are composed of three protein subunits with apparent molecular weights of 68, 145-160 and 200 kDa on SDS-PAGE, known as NF-L, NF-M and NF-H respectively [2]. Like all IF proteins, each of these polypeptides has a central a-helical rod domain of about 310 amino acid residues responsible for a 10 nm lilamentous structure [14]. This rod domain is flanked by a variable N-terminal `head' domain that is important for polymerization and a highly variable C-terminal `tail' domain that interacts with other NFs and other cytoplasmic components such as MTs, membrane organelles and vesicles in the axon [lo]. Due to the C-terminal tail domain, NF-M and NF-H are the largest and the most highly phosphorylated IF proteins known [4]. It has been shown that the major phosphorylation sites are located within the tail domain [ 121,however the functional significance of this heavy phosphorylation and the protein kinases involved are not known. A second messenger-independent kinase activity
Correspondence: W.T. Link, Laboratory of Neurochemistry, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

NINDS,

which co-purifies with the NF preparation and phosphorylates a-casein and NFs has been demonstrated [5, 6, 13, 151. Our previous studies [5] show that among the various exogenous protein substrates, a-casein is the preferred substrate for this NF-kinase, a substrate preference similar to that for CKI and CKII [7]. The sites phosphorylated by CKI and CKII have been characterized by the presence of acidic amino acids N-terminal and C-terminal to the phosphorylated residues in protein substrates [16]. There are several such sites in mammalian neurotiament proteins in the C-terminal tail domain. In rat NF-M and H, one cluster of sites is following the KLLEGEE region, prior to the KSP repeats. Another cluster of sites is immediately C-terminal to the KSP repeats and continues to the extreme C-terminus. [12]. These are suitable sites for phosphorylation by casein kinases [ 161.The possibility therefore exists that the NFassociated kinase activity, phosphorylating the NF proteins, is a casein kinase-like enzyme. In the present study we used a specific inhibitor of casein kinase I (CKI-7) and casein kinase II (heparin) to examine their role in endogenous phosphorylation of the NF preparation. The data obtained indicate that casein kinase I-like enzyme is associated with NFs and may be responsible for phosphorylating the NF proteins.

90

r
100, 60 E 6 ; 40 60 -

(A)
------t + NF-Ii NF-M NF-L Cas+CKI -

w

I
0

/
20 40 CKI-7

I
60 (PM)

I
60

1
100

I

:-A-_-L1
0 20 40 Heparm

l~__iIP_l 60 (fig/ml) 60 100

Fig. 1. Effect of casein kinase I and II inhibitors on bovine NF subunit phosphorylation. A: inhibition of NF-associated kinase by a specific inhibitor of CKI (CKI-7). CKI-7 (&lOOpM) was added to the reaction mixtures containing the bovine neurofilament preparation (50,~g protein) or a-casein plus CKI. The data are plotted as a percentage of `*P incorporated into substrates in the absence of added inhibitor (control). The figure shows the inhibition of NF-associated kinase activity phosphorylating NF subunits NF-H (0). NF-M (0) and NF-L (m) and purified casein kinase I phosphorylating a-casein (0) by the CKI inhibitor. B: effect of CKII inhibitor (heparin, &lOO~g/ml) on j2P incorporation in NF subunits, NF-H (o), NF-M (0) and NF-L (w) phosphorylation by NF-associated kinase; and a-casein phosphotylation by CKII (0).

ATP, a-casein and heparin were obtained from Sigma. [y3'P]ATP was purchased from New England Nuclear. N-Zamino ethyl, 5chloroisoquinoline, 8-sulfonamide (CKI-7), a specific inhibitor of casein kinase I [3] was a gift from Dr. Hiroyoshi Hidaka (Dept. of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Japan). Casein kinases I and II were prepared from rabbit reticulocytes according to the method of Hathaway and Traugh [7]. NF preparation from bovine spinal cord, and isolation and purification of NF subunit were as previously described [5]. Protein estimation was performed using the method of Bradford [l]. Phosphorylation studies were conducted as previously described [6]. SDS-PAGE was carried out by the method of Laemmli [9] using resolving gels of 7.5% polyacrylamide. Following drying, 32P-containing bands were visualized by autoradiography using Kodak x-omat AR film. The amount of radioactivity incorporated into electrophoretic bands was determined by excising individual bands from gels and 32P activity was measured using a Beckman liquid scintillation counter. Peptide mapping and autoradiography was performed as described [6]. The major kinase activity associated with the NF preparation, which phosphorylates the NF subunits, also phosphorylates a-casein and is regulator independent, suggesting a similarity to casein kinases. Therefore, we examined the effects of casein kinase I and II inhibitors on the endogenous phosphorylation of the NF preparation. Heparin, at low concentration (<I ,@ml), specifically inhibits the CKII activity [7] and, recently, CKI-7 has been used as a specific inhibitor of CKI [3]. Fig. 1A

illustrates the effect of CKI-7 on NF-H, NF-M and NFL subunit phosphorylation. The neurofilament preparation was phosphorylated in the presence of 0 to 100 PM CKI-7. After termination of the reaction, the proteins in the mixture were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained. The identified bands NF-H, NF-M and NF-L were cut out from the gel and the 32P incorporation determined. The amount incorporated in the absence of inhibitor was taken as 100%. The phosphorylation of NF protein was inhibited 50% by 40 ,uM CKI-7. The effect of this inhibitor on CKI from reticulocyte is also shown for comparison, using a-casein as substrate. Similar experiments were performed using the CKII inhibitor, heparin (O-100 pg/ml). These data are shown in Fig. 1B. There appears to be no significant inhibition of neurofilament subunit phosphorylation at lower heparin concentration (~2 &ml), which dramatically inhibited CKII activity from reticulocytes. At higher heparin concentration (>5 ,&ml), inhibition of NF subunit phosphorylation was minimal (20%). The possibility that casein kinase I could phosphorylate the NF proteins was tested using bovine NF subunits and purified casein kinase I. Fig. 2A, lane 1, illustrates a typical 32P autoradiog ra p h of the autophosphorylated NF preparation. The staining pattern (not shown) contained intense bands at 210, 160 and 70 kD which have been identified as NF-H, NF-M and NFL neurofilament protein [2], minor bands in the 55-50 kDa range and low molecular weight proteins (LMW) with ran at the front of the gel (~30 kD). As has been previously reported for neurofilament-enriched preparations from other species [5, 151, there is an endogenous

91

A 123
200 + 116 + 97 * 66 * 45+

B
123 +NF-H +NF-M
NF-H-, NF-M*

MKdw

+NF-L
NF-L+

Fig. 2. Phosphorylation of bovine NF proteins by endogenous NFassociated and CKI kinases. A: phosphorylation of NF preparation by reticulocyte CKI. The endogenous kinase activity in the NF preparation was inactivated by heating at 100°C for 10 min. Equal aliquots (50 pg protein) of NF preparation (lane 1, control, not heat inactivated); heat-inactivated NF preparation in the presence (lane 2) or absence (lane 3) of CKI (3.0 units) were incubated with [y'*P]ATP as described in the text. Figure represents the autoradiograph of NF preparation under these conditions. B: phosphorylation of neurofilament subunits by reticulocyte CKI. Purified neuro8lament subunits NF-H, NF-M or NF-L (10 pg each) were individually incubated with [r'*P]ATP as described in the text in the presence of 2.0 units of CKI. Figure represents the autoradiograph of NF-H, NF-M and NF-L in lane 1, 2 and 3, respectively.

kinase activity present in the bNF preparation with can effectively phosphorylate neurofilament proteins. Among the neurofilament triplet proteins, NF-M and NF-L are labeled more intensely, relative to NF-H (Fig. 2A, lane 1). The endogenous kinase activity in the NF preparation was inactivated as described [5] in lanes 2 and 3. Aliquots of heat-inactivated NF preparation (50 lug protein) were incubated with CKI (3.0 units, lane 2), or without CKI (control, lane 3) and the phosphorylation reaction was carried out as described above. Phosphorylation of all three subunits, NF-H, NF-M and NF-L, by CKI is evident. The NF-phosphoprotein pattern in the presence of CKI appeared to be similar to that of the endogenous kinase in the NF preparation, except that the low molecular weight (LMW) proteins were not phosphorylated by CKI (compare lanes 2 and 1, Fig. 2A), and proteins in the 55 to 33 kD range were phosphorylated more with CKI relative to the NF-associated kinase. The phosphorylation, of purified NF subunits, by CKI was also examined (Fig. 2B). Neurofilament sub-

Fig. 3. Tryptic phosphopeptide maps of [y'*P]ATP labeled NF-M phosphorylated by either NF-associated kinase, CKI or CAMP-dependent protein kinase. NF-M phosphorylated by each of these kinases was excised from wet, unstained gels after autoradiography and treated with TPCK-trypsin for 18 to 24 hours. Aliquots of the phosphorylated peptides, containing 4000 to 8000 cpm were spotted on TLC plates and separated by high voltage electrophoresis followed by ascending TLC as described [6]. Fig. 3 A, B, and C represent the peptide maps for NF-M phosphorylated by NF-associated kinase, CKI, or PKA, respectively. The small circles in the lower left corner of each panel represent the origin of the sample applied and the arrows indicate the direction of sample migration for each of the separations.

units were purified as described [5], and CKI was purified from rabbit reticulocytes [7]. Equal aliquots of CKI (2.0 units) were incubated with NF-H, NF-M or NF-L (lanes 1, 2 and 3, respectively) in equal amounts under

92

standard phosphorylating conditions. Fig. 2B illustrates that CKI can phosphorylate all three NF subunits. The above studies show that CKI phosphorylates NF proteins. To identify and compare the specific sites phosphorylated in NF-M by either endogenous NF-associated kinase, exogenous CKI or PKA, we studied two dimensional peptide maps of NF-M phosphorylated by NF-associated kinase activity and by purified CKI and PKA (Fig. 3). The peptides cleaved from NF-M following labeling by the NF-associated kinase are shown in Fig. 3A. More than 20 spots can be observed in Fig. 3A. The streaking seen in many of them may be due to differing numbers of phosphate groups on clusters of phosphorylation sites on a single peptide. The phosphopeptide patterns generated following phosphorylation in the presence of CKI is shown in Fig. 3B. Some of the phosphopeptides identified in Fig. 3B are in similar positions (shown by numbers on the spots) to those in Fig. 3A, although a large difference in the relative intensities can be observed. The N-terminal head domain of NF-M is highly basic, and the SEIUTHR residues in this region are likely sites for second messenger-dependent protein kinases [ 131. Since the NF-associated protein kinase phosphorylation of NF-M is second messenger-independent, it is unlikely that it will phosphorylate the head domain. This was verified by analyzing the phosphopeptide maps of NF-M phosphorylated in the presence of PKA (Fig. 3C). A comparison of Figures 3A and 3C show that the phosphopeptide patterns are different. The pattern of phosphopeptides in Fig. 3C is similar to those obtained from mouse NF-M labeled in the presence of PKA [13]. The neurofilament preparation from bovine spinal cord contains a regulator-independent kinase activity that can phosphorylate NF subunits as well as a-casein, suggesting that a casein kinase-like `enzyme co-purifies with NFs and is involved in their phosphorylation. This latter supposition is further supported by the following evidence: 1) nervous tissue, specifically in the axon, has been shown to contain high levels of casein kinase-like activities, of both type I and II [5, 13, 15, 161; 2) the amino acid sequence of NF subunits contains potential phosphorylation sites for casein kinases located in C-terminal tail domains [12]; 3) casein kinase and NF kinase activities co-elute from phosphocellulose (P-l 1) and gel filtration columns [6]; and 4) by the findings in this study that purified CKI from reticulocytes is capable of phosphorylating NF subunits. Furthermore, 5) we were able to show, by 2-D phosphopeptide map analysis of NF-M, that peptide fragments from the molecule, when phosphorylated by the NF-associated kinase, show similar mobilities to peptides phosphorylated by purified CKI, suggesting that the same sites are involved. Data

presented in Fig. 1A indicate that the phosphorylation of NF-H, NF-M and NF-L by this endogenous activity is inhibited approximately 60% by the inhibitor CKI-7, at a concentration where it selectively inhibits CKI [3]. The maximal inhibition, and the concentration range over which it occurs, is similar to that for reticulocyte CKI using a-casein as substrate. While the approximately 20% inhibition of the NFassociated kinase activity by heparin (Fig. lB), could suggest that heparin-inhibitable CKII may also be present in the preparation, we do not feel that this is the case. The heparin sensitivity of this activity is much lower than that previously reported for CKII [7], and is not comparable to that shown for the inhibition of reticulocyte CKII (using a-casein as substrate). Furthermore, the NF-associated kinase did not significantly phosphorylate (data not shown) the synthetic peptide RRREEETEEE, a putative specific substrate for CKII 181. Neurofilament proteins are extremely rich in SER/ THR residues, particularly at their N-terminal head and C-terminal tail domains. While the exact location of the sites phosphorylated by the NF-associated kinase has not been ascertained, it is unlikely that the head domain, the rod region, or the KSP repeats are involved. The head domain is highly basic in character and the SER/ THR residues in this region are likely sites for second messenger-dependent protein kinases. Previous studies have shown that NF proteins can be phosphorylated by multiple regulated kinases in vitro in their N-terminal head domain [ 131.Since the bovine NF-associated kinase phosphorylating NF proteins is a second messenger-independent, CKI-like kinase, it is unlikely that it will phosphorylate this N-terminal head domain. This is further supported in the present study by comparison of the phosphopeptide maps of purified NF-M subunit in the presence of NF-associated, CKI and PKA (Fig. 3). It is apparent from Fig. 3 that the peptides phosphorylated by CKI and the NF-associated kinase are similar to each other and different from the N-terminal peptides phosphorylated by PKA. Similarly, the KSP repeat region is unlikely to be the site of phosphorylation because KSP-containing synthetic peptides not are phosphorylated by CKI kinase (unpublished results). Finally, the rod region does not contain an acidic environment which would likely be phosphorylated by casein kinases. The present study indicates that CKI accounts for the majority of the NF-associated kinase activity in bovine neurofilament preparations. This finding is consistent with those in the axonal NF-associated kinase activity in the squid giant axon [63. Considering that the nerve cell contains high levels of casein kinases, and that CKI is

93

capable of phosphorylating NF subunits under in vitro conditions, it is possible that a casein kinase I-like enzyme is involved in phosphorylation of NF proteins in the intact cell. We would like to thank Dr. Harold Gainer for his continuous encouragement, advice and valuable suggestion, and Dr. Jolinda Traugh, University of California, Riverside, CA for purified CKI and CKII from rabbit reticulocytes.

1 Bradford, M., A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of proteindye binding, Anal. Biochem., 72 (1976) 248-254. 2 Carden, M.J., Schlaepfer, W.W. and Lee, V.M-Y., The structure, biochemical properties, and immunogenicity of neurofilament peripheral regions are determined by phosphorylation state, J. Biol. Chem., 260 (1985) 98059817. 3 Chijiwa, T., Hagiwara, M. and Hidaka, H., A newly synthesized selective casein kinase I inhibitor, N-(2-aminoethyl)-Schloroisoquinoline-8-sulfonamide, and affinity purification of casein kinase I from bovine testis, J. Biol. Chem., 264 (1989) 49244927. 4 Chin, S.S.M. and Liem, R.K.H., Transfected rat high-molecular weight neurofilament (NF-H) coassembles with vimentin in a predominantly nonphosphorylated form, J. Neurosci., 10 (1991) 3714 3726. 5 Dosemeci, A. Floyd, CC. and Pant, H.C., Characterization of neurofilament-associated protein kinase from bovine spinal cord, Cell. Mol. Neurobiol., 10 (1990) 369-382.

6 Floyd, CC., Grant, P., Gallant, P.E. and Pant, H.C., The principal neurofilament-associated kinase in squid axoplasm is related to casein kinase I, J. Biol. Chem., 266 (1991) 49874994. 7 Hathaway, G.M. and Traugh, J.A., Cyclic nucleotide-independent protein kinases from rabbit reticulocytes. Purification of casein kinases, J. Biol. Chem., 254 (1979) 762-768. 8 Kuenzel, E.A. and Krebs, E.G., A synthetic peptide substrate specific for casein kinase II, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 82 (1985) 737-741. 9 Laemmli, U.K., Cleavage of structural proteins during assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4, Nature, 227 (1970) 680-685. 10 Miyata, Y., Hoshi, M., Nishida, E., Minami, Y. and Sakai, H., Binding of microtubule-associated protein 2 and tau to the intermediate filament reassembled from neurofilament 70 kDa subunit protein, J. Biol. Chem., 261 (1986) 1302&13030. 11 Pant, H.C., Gallant, P.E. and Gainer, H., Characterization of a cyclic nucleotide- and calcium-independent neurofilament protein kinase activity in axoplasm from squid giant axon, J. Biol. Chem., 261 (1986) 2968-2977. 12 Shaw, J., Neurofilament proteins. In R.D. Burgoyne (Ed.), The Neuronal Cytoskeleton, Wiley-Liss, 1991, pp. 185-214. 13 Sihag, R.K. and Nixon, R.A., Phosphorylation of the amino-terminal head domain of the middle molecular mass 145 kDa subunit of neurofilaments, J. Biol. Chem., 265 (1990) 41664171. 14 Steinert, P.M. and Roop, D.R., Molecular and cellular biology of intermediate filaments, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 57 (1988) 593625. 15 Toru-Delbauffe, D. and Pierre, M., A rat brain kinase phosphorylating specifically neurofilaments, FEBS Lett., 162 (1983) 230234. 16 Tuazon, P.T. and Traugh, J.A., Casein kinase I and II - Multipotential serine protein kinases: structure, function and regulation, Adv. Second Messenger Phosphoprotein Res., 23 (1991) 123-164.

