264

Abstracts Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94110, bFox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Human antibody fragments can be selected from phage libraries displaying human single chain Fv (scFv) antibody fragments and their affinity increased by mutagenesis and selection to values not achievable in vivo. Using this approach, we isolated a human scFv from a non-immune phage antibody library which binds the tumor antigen c-erbB-2 with a Kd of 1.6 x 10-s M. To increase tumor retention, phage display was used to increase affinity for c-erbB-2 100 fold to a Kd of 1.6 x 10 - to M. The increase in affinity resulted largely from a reduction in the dissociation rate constant (korr) from 6.3 x 10 - 3 S t to 6.7 X 10 -5 S- t . Higher affinity scFv were produced by evolving the center of the antigen binding pocket by sequentially randomizing amino acid residues located within the heavy and light chain CDR3. Amino acid residues confering higher affinity were located in loops within the CDRs and had solvent accessible side chains. In contrast, residues known to have a structural role were conserved. Isolation of higher affinity scFv required a stringent selection process using limiting concentrations of soluble biotiylated antigen, use of a biosensor based screening process to identify higher affinity scFv, and optimization of elution conditions. Higher affinity scFv were retained to a greater extent on SK-OV-3 cells expressing c-erbB-2 in vitro. Biodistribution of C6.5 based scFv with affinities ranging from 1.6 × 10 - 7 M to 1.0 × 10 - 9 M were determined in scid mice bearing human SK-OV-3 xenografts. Significantly greater tumor retention was observed at 4 and 24 h with higher affinity scFv. The V-genes of C6.5 scFv of varying affinity have been cloned to create Fab, (sFv')2 and (Fab)2 to permit a thorough evaluation of the effect of affinity, binding kinetics, size and valency on in vivo biodistribution. Using multiple IoxP sites to access antibody heavy-fight chain combinatorial diversity. Samuel C. Williams, Ahuva Nissim, Oliver Hartley, Jacqueline L. Harrison, Andrew D. Griffiths, Greg Winter, MRC Centre for Protein Engineering, Cambridge, England, CB2 2QH, UK. We previously used the loxP recombination system of bacteriophage PI to build a large combinatorial library of antibody Fab fragments displayed on filamentous bacteriophage (6.5 x 10 t° clones). Whilst antibodies with high affinities (up to 4 nM) can be isolated from this library, their affinities might be improved by 'chain shuffling' and further rounds of selection. In this '2-1oxP' system, recombination can be used to shuffle the heavy chain but not the light chain, since only the heavy chain gene is flanked by loxP sites. We have now developed a range of '3-1oxP' expression systems with multiple loxP sites which flank both heavy and light chain genes for phage display of scFv and Fab fragments. In the scFv constructs, a loxP site encodes the linker. These expression systems allow the construction of extremely large primary repertoires (up to 5 x 10 t2 clones) and the affinity maturation of selected clones or reper-

plementarity-determining regions were enriched by successive rounds of affinity selection. Analyses of the mutant sequences, affinity for digoxin and specificity for digoxin analogues were useful for defining combining site structural constraints. In addition, we recruited mutants with increased affinity for digoxin, as well as mutant Fabs which demonstrated change in specificity. Mutation of an HCDR3 hapten contact residues in antibody 26-10 results in Fabs which bind preferentially to cardiac glycosides substituted at the steroid 16 position. These results could not have been readily anticipated by inspection of the crystal complex, and demonstrate the utility of ex vivo antibody engineering via a 'selective' approach.

Exploring and exploiting the anti-tumor monoclonal antibody BR96. S. SherifP, C. Chang ~, P.D. Jeffreya, J. Bajorath b, D. Yelton b, Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute, aP.O. Box 4000, Princeton, NJ 08543, b3005 First Avenue, Seattle, WA 98121, USA. Monoclonal antibodies with specificity for tumor-associated antigens provide, as immunoconjugates, a possible route for the treatment of cancer by selective delivery of cytotoxic agents to tumors. The murine monoclonal antibody BR96 (IgG3, x, referred to as mBR96) was raised against human breast carcinoma cells. For its potential application in anticancer therapy, a chimeric form of BR96 (referred to as cBR96) has been constructed from murine variable domains and human x and IgG1 constant domains. BR96 recognizes the Lewis Y (Ley) tetrasaccharide, which was used for crystallization as the nonoate methyl ester:
D-Galaetose ~1 -+4) N-acetyl-l)-glueasamine-Ol-(CH2)gCOOCH 3 ~ 1--.2) ~ tz(l~3) L-Fucos~ L-Fuco¢~ The structures of cBR96 Fab', cBR96 Fab'-LeY and mBR96 Fab-LeY have been determined by X-ray crystallography. BR96 binds to Ley and interacts through complementarity determining regions (CDRs): L1, L3, HI, H2 and H3. In the binding site, a number of aromatic residues interact with LeY: His L27D, Tyr L32, Phe L96, Tyr H32, Tyr H33, Tyr H35, Tyr H50, and Trp H100A (Kabat numbering). In addition to interactions with aromatic groups, several hydrogen bonds are formed between the antibody and Ley. BR96 also interacts with the (CH2)sCOOCH3 suggesting that the antibody may be capable of recognizing a larger carbohydrate. The antigen binding site undergoes backbone conformational change upon complexation with LeY: CDR L3, a segmental motion; CDR H2, a backbone rearrangement (in the region of two consecutive glycines); and CDR L1, both segmental motion and backbone rearrangement (yielding differences of up to 10 A between Cc~ positions).

Engineering the antibody combining site for high affinity binding. Robert Schier~, Adrian McCallb, Greg Adams b, Louis M. Weinerb, James D. Marks a, aDepartments of Anesthesia and

