A4 Folding and stability P-A&33 P-A4-34 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE OF @IJWNCATED INDC&@-GI;YCERC?L ?ISOS'MATE SYI+R%ASEFROM 8. SO~FAIXRKXJ~ POS$kE FUNCl2ON OF THE NTERMkNAL %-HELIX IO@CHEL TR,' HENNIG M,' DARIMONT D,' IURSCHNER IC: JANSONIUS JN.' Dept.of `Struct. Biol. and sBiophys. Chem., Biozcntrum,
Univ. of Basal (CH)

`Fat. Phys. & Astron., VrijeUniversiteit. Amstev (NL), Dept. *Dept. of Microbial., Univ. of Amsterdam (NL), Microbial. & Mol. Genet.. Univ. of Texas, Houston (USA)

Purpose: Elucidation of the thermodynamicsof the last step of the photocycle, i.e. the return of the blue-shifted intermediate pB back to the groundstate pG of the photoactive yellow protein (PYP) from E. halo@&. At pH below 3.5 PYP is protonated and convertsto PBd,, which is similar to pB. Methods: Difference absorption traces,time gated and steadystateabsorption spectrawere measured asa function of pH and temperature.The data were globally analysedusing models for kinetics, spectra and thermodynamicsof protein unfolding. Results: Tbe recoverypB+pG is deceleratedby lowering the PH. At every pH the recovery accelerates and then decelerates upon increasingtemperature. This can be describedby a pH- and temperature-independentactivation heat capacity change (AC,", of -2.35 kJ/mol/K. From pGt)pBtik equilibnum data a AC, of 2.04 kJ/mol/K is esumated. Conclusions: The formation of photocycle intermediate pB, and of the acid denatured statepBd,k, are accompaniedby a heat capacity increase, which indicatespartial unfolding of the photoreceptor. P-A&3 5 THE ACl'IVAmON ENTHALPJES OF H-D FOR EXCHANGE REACI'ION INDIVIDUAL AMIDE EWDROGENS IN LYSOZXME YASUO NODA, YASUO FUKUDA SHIN-ICI-ll SEGAWA school of 8cimce, Dspprtmcntof physics,Kwansei G&in Univershy, Niiomiya, Japan
Purpose: The activation e&alpy is very

Indoleglycerolphosphatesynthase(IGPS) has a common @labbarrel fold, but carriesa Nterminal extensionof about 50 residues.The iirst 24 of these residuesform the helix a, that covers the active site cleft. The structure of a hyperthermostablemonomeric IGPS form Suljidobus solfataricus was recently solved at 2 A resolution. A truncated variant, A(2-25)sIGPS,is 100 times lessactive, but unfolds reversiblyin guanidinium hydrochloride,in contrastto the wild type enzyme. The X-ray structureof A(2-25)sIGPShas now been solvedby molecularreplacement at 2.8 A resolution. A comparisonwith the structure of the native enzymeshowsthat the Q-helix can be removed without significant effects on tbe structureof the TIM-barrel core. This may explain the unchangedthermostability of A(2-25)sIGPS with respectto sIGPS.We conclude that the role of the N-terminal extensionis to stabilize additionally the structurallycrowded transition state of the IGPSreaction. P-A4-36
ELECTROSTATIC CONTRIBUTION PROTEIN COMPLEX STABILITY T-HI T. TO

Dept.of Life Sciences, of Tokyo(JAPAN) Univ. Purpose:As organic molecules
like proteins contain many ionizable msidues, the assembly largely depends on pH and ionic strength. A calculation method to simulate the effects was developed and was applied to a pmtcin molecule, fenitin,whichcontains 24 ide.ntical subunits.

immrtant to elucidate the mechanism of structural fhihations mediating the H-D exchange reaction of amide hymogenS; We deeed it for individual amide hydrogens in lysozyme and lysozymederivative with an extra cross-link. Methuds: Exchangebehavior of amide hydrogens has been studied by observing the fingerprint region of COSY spectra. Hydrogen exchange reaction was carried out at pH 7.0 and several temperatures. The activation enthalpy for each amide hydrogenswere deWmined. Resulti There exist 41 amide hydrogens whose exchange reaction are detectable. They are ctassifledinto two categoriesIII and IV. colu!hiotw: Categ6ry III hydrogens are exchaufted throwh fluctuation with a low 5lccaVmol). They are little =by cgtcsory IV hydrogens are exdangd with a l&h activation enthalpy(SOWkc&mol). They are drastically influenced by crass-linldng. Further we found that the exchange ratea of tide hydrom of residues 34-39 (binge region) are drasticallyretarded by cross-linking.
1 .-

Methods: First,theeffective dielectric constant

of the ferritin molecule was evaluated by solving Poisson-Boltzmann equation numerically. Then, the ionization of the individual ionizable residues determined on were based

Charge MonteCarlo simulation, whichcanbeapplicable to verylarge systems. calculated charge T%c total was
compared with those by the exact statistical the fast Tanford-Roxby algorithm. mechanics and

Results: The surface electrostatic potential of ferritin ,molccuIes based on the e&dated charge distribution ,agreed well with the measmd one cxcep4 for high pH region, where the molecule seems to be pa&Uy denatured. The surface potential inside Ihe human H

fcrritinwaspositive.It wasmnsisteat theionizable with residue distribution Asp,Glu,His,Arg,andLys when
wen fully iooized. The simulated dcetraptatie free energy reproduced pH and ionic strength effect on the subunit interactions. Conclusions: This method reproduced the experimental surface potential of ferritin molecules and also the protein oligomer stability depcodeoce on pH and ionic strength.

59

