J. Mol. Biol. (1996) 260, 251­260

The Motile Major Sperm Protein (MSP) from Ascaris suum is a Symmetric Dimer in Solution
Andreas Haaf1, P. Jonathan G. Butler1, Helen M. Kent1 Ian M. Fearnley1, Thomas M. Roberts2, David Neuhaus1 and Murray Stewart1*
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK
2 Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee FL 32306, USA 1

The major sperm protein (MSP) of Ascaris suum mediates amoeboid motility by forming an extensive intermeshed system of cytoskeletal filaments analogous to that formed by actin in many amoeboid cells. We have used a combination of biochemical and NMR methods to show that, in contrast to actin, MSP exists in solution as a symmetrical dimer. This result has important implications for the mechanism of both MSP filament assembly and the recognition of different MSP isoforms in vivo.
7 1996 Academic Press Limited

*Corresponding author

Keywords: major sperm protein; amoeboid motility; filaments; polymerization

Introduction
The simplicity and specialisation of the motile machinery of nematode sperm offer unique and powerful advantages for probing the molecular mechanism underlying amoeboid cell motility (for reviews see Roberts & Stewart, 1995; Theriot, 1996). Nematode sperm are unusual amoeboid cells in which motility is not based on actin, but instead on the major sperm protein (MSP). However, nematode sperm retain all the characteristics of actin-containing amoeboid cells. Their locomotion is based on extension of a filament-packed pseudopod and they are able to crawl at up to 50 mm/min. In nematode sperm, MSP polymerises to form a cytoskeleton constructed from intermeshed filaments. As cells crawl forward, MSP filaments treadmill rearwards as a consequence of polymerisation at the leading edge of the pseudopod and dissociation at its base (Sepsenwol et al., 1989; Sepsenwol & Taft, 1990; Roberts & King, 1991). Ascaris suum is a convenient source of nematode sperm and, in this species there are only two MSP
Abbreviations used: BSA, bovine serum albumin; IPTG, isopropyl b-D-thiogalactopyranoside; MSP, major sperm protein; NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance; PAGE, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; PMSF, phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride; SD, standard deviation; SDS, sodium dodecyl sulphate; TFA, trifluoroacetic acid; TSP, 2,2,3,3-(2H4 )-3-trimethylsilyl propionic acid, sodium salt; NOESY, nuclear Overhauser enhancement spectroscopy; HSQC, heteronuclear single quantum correlation; DTT, dithiothreitol.
0022­2836/96/270251­10 $18.00/0

isoforms (King et al., 1992). These isoforms, denoted a and b-MSP, differ at only four amino acid positions and appear indistinguishable in their polymerisation properties and filament structures (King et al., 1992). MSP polymerises both in vivo and in vitro to give filaments that are constructed from two helical subfilaments that can spontaneously assemble into larger bundles and networks (King et al., 1992, 1994; Stewart et al., 1994). Whereas actin requires a spectrum of different bundling proteins to control bundling and network formation (for a review see Machesky & Pollard, 1993), the unique structure of MSP filaments ensures that they have intrinsic bundling potential. Vectorial assembly of MSP and its association into networks are intimately involved in nematode sperm amoeboid motility and indeed may be sufficient for pseudopod extension (Roberts & Stewart, 1995), since it appears possible to move membranes in vitro using these properties alone (Italiano et al., 1996). Here we have investigated the state of aggregation of MSP in solution under conditions where it does not form filaments and find that, in contrast to actin, MSP exists as extremely stable symmetrical dimers rather than as monomers.

Results
Bacterially expressed a-MSP has the same fold as native material A range of physical measurements showed that the structures of bacterially expressed and native
7 1996 Academic Press Limited

252 Ascaris a-MSP are extremely similar. The two proteins were indistinguishable by SDS-PAGE, both migrating with an apparent Mr of 18,000 (data not shown) in this system. N-terminal sequence analysis of the expressed material gave AQSVPPGDINTQP, indicating that Met1 had been removed proteolytically in the bacteria. The mass determined for expressed a-MSP by mass spectrometry (14,260 Da, SD 2 Da) matched that calculated from the primary sequence without Met1 (14,260.2 Da), demonstrating the absence of any additional post-translational modifications in the bacterially expressed material. Since Met1 is also cleaved by post-translational processing in native a-MSP, the sequence of the expressed material was identical to native a-MSP, except that in the native protein the N terminus is acetylated (King et al., 1992), whereas in the expressed protein it is not. NMR spectroscopy indicated that the folds of the polypeptide chains of the two native isoforms of MSP and of bacterially expressed a-MSP are all essentially identical. Figure 1 shows equivalent portions from homonuclear two-dimensional NOESY spectra of bacterially expressed and native a-MSP; in each case, the selected region includes cross-peaks linking amide protons to other protons ° within a distance of approximately 5 A. It is clear from comparing these spectra that the three-dimensional structures of bacterially expressed and native a-MSP are essentially identical (a similar conclusion holds also for native b-MSP, data not shown). This conclusion is based on two key features of the spectra. Firstly, the pattern of relative intensities of cross-peaks is very much the same within each spectrum, indicating that the corresponding internuclear distances are also very similar amongst the three proteins. Secondly, the positions of almost all the cross-peaks are essentially identical in all three spectra. This observation is particularly compelling, since proton chemical shifts in proteins are well known to be highly sensitive to even minor variations in local environment, such as small movements of aromatic side-chains or distortions of the backbone geometry (Wuthrich, 1986). This ¨ structural similarity was perhaps to be expected, since the two native isoforms differ in their primary sequence at only four amino acid positions (King et al., 1992), while recombinant a-MSP is identical to native a-MSP except for the missing N-acetyl group, which results in an additional positive charge at the N terminus in the bacterially expressed material. Although the overall fold, and also the great bulk of the detailed structure, of all three protein samples is undoubtedly very similar, detailed comparison of the NOESY spectra does reveal a subtle difference between expressed a-MSP and either of the native isoforms. There are several intense, sharp cross-peaks in the fingerprint region of the spectrum of expressed a-MSP (Figure 2) that are weak or absent in the spectrum of native a-MSP (similar conclusions hold for the comparison with

MSP Dimerization

b-MSP; data not shown). We have available partial sequential assignments of expressed a-MSP as a result of an ongoing NMR study and, using these, we showed that these sharp, intense cross-peaks arise from intra-residue and sequential connectivities involving NH and Ha resonances of residues 2 to 4 and 111 to 114, as illustrated in Figure 2. Therefore we propose that the absence of the N-terminal acetyl group in the expressed protein causes these small regions of the polypeptide chain to become somewhat more mobile. Furthermore, these observations suggest that these two regions, although distant in the primary sequence, are close to one another within the three-dimensional structure of MSP. Consistent with this, we found a clear and unambiguously assigned NOE connectivity between Hb of Ser3 and the CeH3 of Met114. In addition, there are a number of other NOE connectivities consistent with this hypothesis, although their assignments are not wholly unambiguous at this stage of the NMR analysis. It is important to emphasise that the number of cross-peaks that differ between the spectra represents a very small proportion of the total, and that any structural differences between expressed and native MSP must therefore be quite subtle. The principal conclusion from the comparison of NOESY spectra is clearly that the overall structures are very similar indeed. Moreover, the bacterially expressed material has been shown to polymerise to give filaments that are indistinguishable from those formed from native material (Bullock et al., 1996), indicating that its structure has not been altered in any functional sense. Bacterially expressed a-MSP is a dimer Both gel filtration and sedimentation equilibrium centrifugation indicated that MSP dimerises in solution under a broad range of conditions (Table 1). At pH 4.5, (the same pH as that used to record NMR spectra) bacterially expressed a-MSP eluted from an S100 column at an apparent molecular mass of 28 kDa (Figure 3), which was at almost the same position as carbonic anhydrase (29 kDa). At pH 8.5, bacterially expressed a-MSP still migrated close to carbonic anhydrase, indicating that it existed as a dimer over a wide pH range. Under the conditions used (Table 1B), analytical ultracentrifugation also showed an apparent average molecular mass matching that calculated for an a-MSP dimer. Even at the lowest protein concentration used, there was minimal evidence for any dissociation into monomer (Figure 4). Calculations based on the concentration dependence of the apparent weight average molecular mass indicated that the Kd was less than 5 × 10-8 M. The intracellular concentration of MSP is approximately 4 mM (King et al., 1992) and so this Kd value would indicate that, under physiological conditions, effectively only dimers or higher assemblies will be present. Bacterially expressed and native MSP gave essentially identical results (Table 1B) and clearly

Figure 1(a) legend on page 254.

Figure 1(b) Figure 1. Portions of the homonuclear 2D NOESY spectra of (a) recombinant and (b) native a-MSP. Both proteins have an almost identical NOE pattern and hence their three-dimensional structures must be very similar. The box in (a) indicates the fingerprint region shown in Figure 2.

MSP Dimerization

255

Figure 2. Expansion of the fingerprint region of bacterially expressed a-MSP. Assignments of intra-residue (NH, Ha ) connectivities are indicated using the one-letter-code of the relevant amino acid. Assignments for sequential (NH, Ha ) connectivities are indicated giving first the C-terminal residue (NH-shift) of the pair and second the N-terminal residue (Ha-shift) of the pair, e.g. S3/Q2.

both isoforms were dimeric under the conditions tested. To check that the dimerisation of MSP was not produced by an artefactual formation of disulphide bonds, bacterially expressed a-MSP and native b-MSP were reduced as described in Materials and Methods and both gel filtration and ultracentrifugation measurements were repeated in the presence of reducing agent (see Table 1). These results were identical to those obtained previously, showing molecular masses corresponding to dimers. Moreover, using bacterially expressed a-MSP, electrospray ionisation mass spectrometry showed the presence of the monomer only, confirming that the two subunits in the dimer were not covalently linked by a disulphide bond. The a-MSP dimer has dyad symmetry MSP dimers could arise in two ways. The protein in solution could be intrinsically dimeric and should then have its two chains arranged symmetrically with a 2-fold rotation axis between them. Alternatively, a dimer could represent an intermediate in a simple monomer­dimer­oligomer

polymerization system, in which case its chains should not be arranged symmetrically (see Oosawa & Asakura, 1975). We used NMR spectroscopy to establish whether the two polypeptide chains in the MSP dimer were structurally equivalent, which would imply that they had dyad symmetry. In a symmetric protein dimer, a particular atom or group of chemically equivalent atoms in one of the chains must always have an identical environment, and hence identical chemical shift, to its counterpart in the other protein chain. It follows that the number of signals from a symmetric dimer will match that expected from the primary sequence of the monomer. In contrast, for an asymmetrical dimer, the environment of corresponding protons in the two protein chains will be different. Thus, more signals would be observed than predicted for a monomer and, depending on the extent of asymmetry, up to twice as many signals will be observed. Our NMR spectra consistently showed only the number of signals expected for a single polypeptide chain. As an illustration of this, Figure 5 shows a portion of the ( 15N, 1H) HSQC spectrum of bacterially expressed a-MSP where only signals

256
Table 1. Ultracentrifugation and gel filtration conditions
Sample A rec a-MSP rec a-MSP rec a-MSP* B rec a-MSP rec a-MSP* nat b-MSP* nat b-MSP Buffer 50 mM NaPi (pH 4.5), 3 mM NaN3 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT 50 mM NaPi (pH 4.5), 3 mM NaN3 50 mM NaPi (pH 4.5), 3 mM NaN3 2 mM DTT 50 mM NaPi (pH 4.5), 3 mM NaN3 , 2 mM DTT 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT Temp. (°C) 4 4 4 25 25 25 25 Mr ( × 10-3 ) 28 29 29 29.5 31.1 29.3 29.5

MSP Dimerization

Summary of different conditions used for (A) gel filtration and (B) ultracentrifugation runs. The initial protein concentration was 0.1 to 0.5 mg/ml for the samples used for ultracentrifugation and 2 mg/ml for gel filtration. Samples marked with an asterisk were first reduced in 40 mM DTT, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1 M NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) for 30 minutes on ice and then dialysed against the buffer indicated. The molecular mass determined under all these conditions corresponded to the calculated mass for a dimeric protein; for gel filtration the apparent molecular mass is given at which the protein samples eluted, whereas for ultracentrifugation, the weight average ¯ molecular mass Mw,app . rec, recombinant; nat, native.

from NeH groups of arginine side-chains are expected, and a portion of the ( 13C, 1H) HSQC spectrum where only signals from CdH3 groups of isoleucine side-chains are expected (spin-system specific assignments for these signals have been confirmed unequivocally in other experiments; data not shown). In each case, only nine signals were found. Since the primary sequence of MSP contains

nine arginine and nine isoleucine residues, these data are consistent with a symmetrical dimer, but not with an asymmetric dimer.

Discussion
The molecular mass determination by both gel filtration and ultracentrifugation showed that the two native isoforms and also recombinant a-MSP are dimeric in solution under a broad range of conditions. Moreover, the two-dimensional NMR data show that the two polypeptide chains in a-MSP are arranged as a symmetric dimer. This has important implications both for the polymerisation

Figure 3. Results of the analytical gel filtration carried out at 4°C using a Sephacryl S 100 column equilibrated with 50 mM sodium phosphate (pH 4.5), 3 mM NaN3 . The elution volumes of the different proteins are plotted against the logarithm of their molecular mass in kDa. For a-MSP a molecular mass of 28.6 kDa was plotted corresponding to twice the molecular mass calculated from the primary sequence, but this datum point was not included for the linear regression fit. The plot indicates that the bacterially expressed a-MSP was dimeric under the conditions used.

Figure 4. Plot of protein concentration versus the ¯ apparent weight average molecular mass Mw,app in multiples of the monomer mass as obtained from an analytical ultracentrifugation experiment which was run at 25°C with an initial sample concentration of 0.02 mM bacterially expressed a-MSP in 50 mM sodium phosphate (pH 4.5), 3 mM NaN3 . These data are consistent with the results of the analytical gel filtration experiments in showing that MSP is dimeric under the conditions used.

MSP Dimerization

257

Figure 5. Selected portions of (a) the ( 15N, 1H) and (b) the ( 13C, 1H) HSQC spectra of bacterially expressed a-MSP. In (a) only signals from NeH groups of arginine side-chains occur and in (b) only CdH3 groups of isoleucine side-chains (each partially split in F, due to (13C, 13C) coupling to Cg1). The number of signals is consistent only with a monomer or a symmetric multimer.

of MSP and for the molecular recognition between isoform polypeptide chains in vivo. The dimeric nature of MSP molecules implies that an interesting molecular recognition event may occur in vivo. Native MSP can be separated completely into its a and b-isoforms by ion exchange chromatography under benign conditions (King et al., 1992). Significantly, under these conditions, it appears that only homodimers are present because only two fractions are obtained, each containing only one of the two isoforms; there is no evidence for a third fraction containing a­b heterodimers. This result suggests that the formation of heterodimers composed of both isoforms does not occur in vivo. If so, there may be an extraordinarily sensitive molecular recognition mechanism to account for this selectivity, since they differ at only four positions in their sequence.

The presence of dimers in solution has a number of implications for MSP filament structure and assembly. Polymerization into filaments and their bundling into higher aggregates are the principal biological functions of MSP and are intimately linked to amoeboid locomotion in nematode sperm. MSP polymerization and filament bundling can move membrane vesicles in vitro (Italiano et al., 1996) and appear to be responsible for pseudopod extension in crawling sperm (for reviews see Roberts & Stewart, 1995; Theriot 1996). Although MSP exists as a dimer in solution, it is possible that its filaments are constructed from single polypeptide chains as the repeating unit. If this were the case, then part of the energy required for polymerisation could be used to dissociate the dimers into single chains, which would then polymerise to form the filaments. When the single chains dissociated from the filaments, they would

258 then reform dimers. This sort of polymerisation mechanism would raise the fascinating possibility that MSP could act as its own sequestering protein, analogous to the way in which actin monomers are sequestered in vivo by molecules such as profilin (Machesky & Pollard, 1993). Thus, although the MSP concentration in vivo is of the order of 4 mM, dimerization could maintain the concentration of polymerisation-competent MSP monomers below their critical concentration and so prevent the formation of filaments until energy was added to dissociate the dimers. In this context, the site of filament formation could then be determined by the location of the energy-requiring MSP dissociating machinery, which itself could be controlled by other cellular switches such as, for example, those involving GTP-binding proteins that appear to be involved in regulating actin filament dynamics in cultured cells (Nobes & Hall, 1995). Consequently, although in vitro the sequestering of MSP into dimers might only add another rate or equilibrium constant to the polymerisation process, in vivo it could add an important spatial dimension of control to the vectorial assembly and bundling of MSP. Alternatively, our results raise the possibility that MSP filaments may instead be constructed from dimers. Although the repeating unit in MSP filaments has been assumed implicitly to be a single polypeptide chain, we are not able, on the basis of current structural information, to exclude the possibility that the repeating unit in the filaments is instead a dimer. Electron microscopy and computer image processing have established that MSP filaments are constructed from two intertwining helical subfilaments (Stewart et al., 1994), but the resolution of these studies was insufficient to establish the precise nature of the repeating unit in these subfilaments unequivocally. Three-dimensional MSP crystals, based on subfilament helices, have also been produced, but although there appear to be 16 MSP polypeptide chains in five helical turns in these crystals (Stewart et al., 1993, 1994), it has not been possible to distinguish between helices that contain 16 single MSP polypeptide chains or eight MSP dimers per five helical turns. If the subfilament helices are constructed from MSP dimers, then the presence of a 2-fold axis within the dimer raises the possibility that the filaments may not be polar. This would be in marked contrast to actin and tubulin filaments, which are assembled from polar subunits and so have an intrinsic polarity. The polarity of actin and myosin filaments is often intrinsic to their function and, for example, establishes the directionality of motor proteins and the pattern of elongation in vivo. Although the presence of non-polar MSP filaments would make it extremely unlikely that motor proteins were involved in pseudopod extension in nematode sperm amoeboid motility, available evidence indicates that vectorial assembly and filament bundling may

MSP Dimerization

be sufficient for at least pseudopod extension (for reviews see Roberts & Stewart, 1995; Theriot, 1996). Vectorial assembly and disassembly could still result if other cellular components ensured that subunits were added to only one end of the filament. This could happen, for example, if some component of the plasma membrane of the pseudopod were to be involved in filament elongation, and indeed observations on an in vitro system certainly indicate that filament extension does require the presence of plasma membrane components (Italiano et al., 1996). Consequently, MSP filaments need not necessarily be polar. However, non-polar MSP filaments would only result if the dimer twofold axis were perpendicular to the helix axis so that each subfilament had line group S2 symmetry (see Klug et al., 1958). Any other arrangement of the twofold axis would still result in polar filaments. To resolve whether MSP filaments are constructed from dimers or single polypeptide chains, it will be necessary to solve the structure of filaments to higher resolution or, alternatively, determine the high resolution structure of the orthorhombic crystals constructed from subfilaments (Stewart et al., 1993). However, establishing the dimeric nature of MSP in solution has already highlighted the unusual nature of the polymerization process and also the possibility of an extraordinarily selective mechanism that results exclusively in the production of homodimers in vivo.

Materials and Methods
Expression of a-MSP in Escherichia coli Ascaris a-MSP cDNA was inserted into the bacteriophage T7-based expression vector pET11d as described (Bullock et al., 1996), transformed into calcium-competent E. coli strain BL21 (DE3) (Studier et al., 1990) and grown in 2 × TY medium containing 100 mg/ml ampicillin, overnight at 37°C. Under these conditions, the basal level of T7 polymerase was sufficient to initiate transcription and ensure high levels of expression without any addition of IPTG. When uniformly 15N-13C-labelled protein was required, cells were grown in M9 medium supplemented with 1 mM MgCl2 , 0.2 mM CaSO4 , 40 mg/ml thiamine, and 100 mg/ml ampicillin. NH4 Cl was replaced by 1 mg/ml 15NH4 Cl (Sigma) and [U-13C6 ]glucose (Martek) was added to a final concentration of 2 mg/ml. In addition, 10 ml of a trace element solution containing 5 mg/ml EDTA (pH 7), 0.5 mg/ml FeCl3 0.05 mg/ml ZnCl2 0.01 mg/ml CoCl2 ·6H2 O, 1.6 mg/ml MnCl2 ·6H2 O, 0.01 mg/ml CuCl2 , 0.01 mg/ml H3 BO3 was added per litre of medium. When the cells had reached an absorbance of 0.8 to 0.9 at 600 nm, protein expression was induced by adding IPTG to a final concentration of 0.4 mM and grown under the same conditions for another four hours. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 4000 g for 20 minutes, resuspended in 25% (w/v) glucose, 150 mM Tris (pH 8), 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF and lysed using a French press. 10 ml of 10 mg/ml Sigma D-4527 DNase I, 80 ml 1 M MgCl2 , and 20 ml 1 M MnCl2 were added per 100 ml cell lysate and the mixture incubated for 20 minutes at room temperature, after

MSP Dimerization

259
concentration. When required, samples were first reduced in 40 mM DTT, 0.1 M NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) for 30 minutes on ice at a protein concentration of 2 mg/ml and then dialysed against the required buffer (Table 1) at either pH 4.5 or pH 8. Sedimentation measurements were made using a Beckman An-G analytical rotor in a Beckman L8-70 ultracentrifuge equipped with a Prep UV scanner that measured the absorbance at 280 nm as a function of radius. Samples were centrifuged to equilibrium at 15,000 r.p.m. after overspeeding for approximately five hours at 25,000 r.p.m. (van Holde & Baldwin, 1958). Scans were taken at intervals of 24 hours and assumed to be at equilibrium when no difference could be detected between successive scans. The baseline was determined by overspeeding at 45,000 r.p.m. to sediment any protein away from the meniscus before a further scan was taken at 15,000 r.p.m. Data were analysed by calculating the apparent weight ¯ average molecular mass (Mw,app ) for successive sets of 11 datum points radially. To analyse the concentration ¯ dependence we plotted Mw,app expressed as number of monomers against the concentration at the midpoint of each set of 11 datum points. The dissociation constant (Kd ) for the monomer­dimer equilibrium was estimated using proFit (Cherwell Scientific Publishing Ltd) to perform a non-linear regression fit of the data by the equation: ¯ Mw,app = Kd + 8[Ct ] - zKd (Kd + 8[Ct ]) 4[Ct ]

which the viscosity was greatly reduced. The lysate was centrifuged at 45,000 g for 30 minutes, and the supernatant dialysed exhaustively against 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 6), 20 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM PMSF, and 1 mM NaN3 at 4°C. The dialysed sample was loaded onto a 80 mm × 25 mm CM52 ion-exchange column (Whatman) equilibrated with 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 6), 20 mM NaCl, 1 mM NaN3 . MSP was eluted using a linear 20 mM to 200 mM NaCl gradient in 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 6), 1 mM NaN3 . Fractions containing a-MSP were pooled and dialysed against 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 6), 20 mM NaCl, 1 mM NaN3 at 4°C. Aliquots of the dialysed sample containing approximately 40 mg of protein were purified further using a 100 mm × 10 mm MonoS column (Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden) equilibrated with the same buffer and eluted at 0.7 ml/min with a linear gradient of 1%/min using 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 6), 20 mM NaCl, 1 mM NaN3 as buffer A and 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 6), 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM NaN3 as buffer B. This procedure yielded protein that was homogeneous by SDS-PAGE and typically we obtained 150 mg MSP per litre 2 × TY medium and 30 mg of labelled MSP per litre of minimal medium. N-terminal sequence analysis N-terminal sequences were determined by automated Edman degradation using an Applied Biosystems 477A pulsed liquid sequencer after transfer of 100 pmol of protein to a PVDF membrane (Schleicher & Schuell) from an SDS-PAGE gel. Mass spectrometry Unlabelled bacterially expressed a-MSP was analysed by electrospray ionisation mass spectrometry using a Perkin Elmer Sciex API III Plus triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thornhill, Ontario, Canada). Samples were prepared by dialysing 2 mM unlabelled bacterially expressed a-MSP against 20 mM sodium phosphate, 1.2 mM NaN3 . A 5 ml portion of this sample was applied ° to a Vydac (Hesperia, California) C8 300 A HPLC column (150 mm × 1.0 mm) equilibrated with an aqueous solution of 0.1% TFA (w/v) and eluted with a linear gradient of acetonitrile containing 0.09% TFA (w/v) at a flow rate of 50 ml/minute. Eluted protein was detected using an Ultrafast Microprotein Analyser (Michrom Bioresources Inc., Auburn, California, USA) and directed to the ionisation interface of the mass spectrometer using fused silica tubing with 75 m internal diameter. Analytical gel filtration Gel filtration was carried out using a 900 mm × 15 mm Sephacryl S-100 column (Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden). Samples (5 ml) of 2 mg/ml protein in running buffer (see Table 1) were eluted at a flow rate of 23 ml/h and 7.5 ml fractions collected. The column was calibrated using bovine serum albumin (BSA, 66 kDa), Ovalbumin (43 kDa), carbonic anhydrase (29 kDa), and RNase A (13.7 kDa). Analytical equilibrium ultracentrifugation Protein samples were dialysed against the appropriate buffer (see Table 1) and diluted to the desired final

¯ where Mw,app is the apparent weight average molecular mass and Ct is the total concentration of protein. Preparation of NMR samples MSP was concentrated to approximately 3 mM (42 mg/ml) using a 3000 Da Centriprep concentrator before exhaustive dialysis against 50 mM sodium phosphate (pH 4.5), 3 mM NaN3 . 2H2 O and TSP (Aldrich) were added to a final concentrations of 10% (v/v) and 0.003% (w/v), respectively, and finally the solution was passed through a 0.45 mm filter. Protein samples in 2H2 O were prepared by twice freeze-drying an aliquot and dissolving it in the same volume of 2H2 O. Typically, the protein concentration of these samples was of the order of 2.5 mM. The samples were stored at -70°C until required. NMR spectroscopy All spectra were recorded at 35°C on a Bruker DMX600 spectrometer equipped with a 5 mm triple resonance 1 H/13C/BB probe optimised for proton detection. Sign discrimination of F1 frequencies of all two-dimensional experiments except the ( 15N, 1H) HSQC experiment was achieved using time-proportional phase incrementation (TPPI, Marion & Wuthrich, 1983). The two-dimensional ¨ ( 15N, 1H) HSQC experiment was recorded using echo anti-echo sign discrimination in F1. Homonuclear NOESY experiments were recorded with a mixing time of 150 ms with 10% random variation between successive increments to attenuate zero quantum coherence. Water suppression was achieved by on-resonance coherent presaturation during the relaxation delay and the mixing time. The spectral widths were 8012 Hz in both dimensions.

260
A two-dimensional ( 13C, 1H) HSQC experiment was recorded using a protein sample in 2H2 O. Residual solvent signal was suppressed using periods of spin locking. The spectrum was recorded with 1024 complex points in the directly acquired dimension and 512 real points in the indirectly detected dimension. Spectral widths were 8012 Hz and 10,000 Hz, respectively. A two-dimensional ( 15N, 1H) HSQC experiment was recorded with a ``water flip back'' pulse scheme for water suppression to avoid saturation of the solvent (Stonehouse et al., 1994). In the directly acquired dimension 1024 complex points were recorded and in the indirect dimension 206 complex points. The spectral widths were 8012 Hz and 6690 Hz, respectively. Data were processed using the program UXNMR (Bruker). Time domain data were multiplied by a sine function and zero filled to give a final matrix size of 2048 × 512 complex points after Fourier transformation.

MSP Dimerization

Acknowledgements
We thank our colleagues in Cambridge and Tallahassee, especially Tim Bullock, Joe Italiano, Karen King and Aaron Klug, for their helpful and stimulating comments and criticisms. A.H. holds a fellowship of the Boehringer Ingelheim Fonds, Germany. This research was supported in part by NIH GM 29994, NATO CRG 910264 and EC CHRX-CT93-0250.

References
Bullock, T. L., Parthasarathy, S., Kent, H. M., Roberts, T. M. & Stewart, M. (1996). Production of a new crystal form of the Ascaris major sperm protein using expressed material. J. Struct. Biol. 116, 432­437. Italiano, J. E., Roberts, T. M., Stewart, M. & Fontana, C. A. (1996). Reconstitution in vitro of the motile apparatus from the amoeboid sperm of Ascaris shows that filament assembly can move membranes. Cell, 84, 105­114. King, K. L., Stewart, M., Roberts, T. M. & Seavy, M. (1992). Structure and macromolecular assembly of two isoforms of the major sperm protein (MSP) from amoeboid sperm of the nematode Ascaris suum. J. Cell Sci. 101, 847­857. King, K. L., Stewart, M. & Roberts, T. M. (1994). Supramolecular assemblies of the Ascaris suum major sperm protein (MSP) associated with amoeboid cell motility. J. Cell Sci. 107, 2941­2949. Klug, A. Crick, F. H. C. & Whycoff, H. W. (1958).

Diffraction by helical structures. Acta Crystollog. 11, 99­123. Machesky, L. M. & Pollard, T. D. (1993). Profilin as a potential mediator of membrane­cytoskeleton communication. Trends Cell Biol. 3, 381­385. Marion, D. & Wuthrich, K. (1983). Application of ¨ phase-sensitive two-dimensional correlated spectroscopy (COSY) for measurements of 1H-1H spin-spin coupling constants in proteins. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 113, 967­974. Nobes, C. D. & Hall, A. (1995). Rho, Rac and Cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibres, lamellipodia, and filopodia. Cell, 81, 53­62. Oosawa, F. & Asakura, S. (1975). Thermodynamics of the Polymerisation of Proteins, pp. 204, Academic Press, London. Roberts, T. M. & King, K. L. (1991). Centripetal flow and directional reassembly of the major sperm protein (MSP) cytoskeleton in the amoeboid sperm of the nematode Ascaris suum. Cell Motil. Cytoskel. 20, 228­241. Roberts, T. M. & Stewart, M. (1995). Nematode sperm locomotion. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 7, 13­17. Sepsenwol, S. & Taft, S. J. (1990). In vitro induction of crawling in amoeboid sperm of the parasite, Ascaris suum. Cell Motil. Cytoskel. 15, 99­110. Sepsenwol, S., Ris, H. & Roberts, T. M. (1989). A unique cytoskeleton associated with crawling in the amoeboid sperm of the nematode Ascaris suum. J. Cell Biol. 108, 55­66. Stewart, M., King, K. L. & Roberts, T. M. (1993). Crystallisation of the motile major sperm protein (MSP) of the nematode Ascaris suum. J. Mol. Biol. 232, 298­300. Stewart, M., King, K. L. & Roberts, T. M. (1994). The motile major sperm protein (MSP) of Ascaris suum forms filaments constructed from two helical subfilaments. J. Mol. Biol. 242, 60­71. Stonehouse, J., Shaw, G. L., Keeler, J. & Laue, E. D. (1994). Minimizing sensitivity losses in gradient-selected 15 N­1H HSQC spectra of proteins. J. Magn. Reson. Ser. A, 107, 178­184. Studier, F. W., Rosenberg, A. H., Dunn, J. J. & Dubendorff, J. W. (1990). Use of T7 RNA polymerase to direct expression of cloned genes. Methods Enzymol. 242, 60­71. Theriot, J. A. (1996). Worm sperm and advances in cell locomotion. Cell, 84, 1­4. van Holde, K. E. & Baldwin, R. L. (1958). Rapid attainment of sedimentation equilibrium. J. Phys. Chem. 62, 734­743. Wuthrich, K. (1986). NMR of Proteins and Nucleic Acids. ¨ pp. 28­31, John Wiley, New York.

Edited by M. F. Moody (Received 14 February 1996; received in revised form 10 April 1996; accepted 25 April 1996)

