J. Mol. Biol. (1997) 265, 187­201

Solution Structure of the Calicheamicin g1 I-DNA Complex
R. Ajay Kumar, Norihiro Ikemoto and Dinshaw J. Patel*
Cellular Biochemistry and Biophysics Program Memorial-Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York NY 10021, USA Calicheamicin g1 I is an enediyne antibiotic possessing antitumor activity associated with its ability to bind and following activation, affect double-strand cleavage at oligopyrimidine·oligopurine tracts on DNA. Footprinting and chemical modification studies have identified the (T-C-C-T)·(A-G-G-A) sequence as a prefered calicheamicin g1 I binding site and established the importance of the 5'-guanine residue as critical for high affinity binding. The sequence specificity of intermolecular recognition has been identified with the aryltetrasaccharide component of the drug together with an important contribution from the iodine atom on the thiobenzoate ring to the affinity of complex formation. Calicheamicin g1 I binds to the minor groove of the DNA duplex and in the process positions the enediyne ring to abstract hydrogen atoms from partner strands leading to double-strand cleavage. We report on the solution structure of the calicheamicin g1 I-DNA hairpin duplex complex containing a central (T-C-C-T)·(A-G-G-A) segment based on a combined analysis of NMR and molecular dynamics calculations including intensity refinement in a water box. The refined solution structures of the complex provide a molecular explanation of the sequence specificity of binding and cleavage by this member of the enediyne family of antitumor antibiotics. Calicheamicin g1 I binds to the DNA minor groove with its aryltetrasaccharide segment in an extended conformation spanning the (T-C-C-T)·(A-G-GA) segment of the duplex. Further, the thio sugar B molecule and the thiobenzoate ring C molecule are inserted in an edgewise manner deep into the minor groove with their faces sandwiched between the walls of the groove. A range of intermolecular hydrophobic and hydrogen-bonding interactions account for the sequence specific recognition in the complex. These include critical intermolecular contacts between the iodine and sulfur atoms of the thiobenzoate ring of the drug with the exposed exocyclic amino protons of the 5' and 3'-guanine bases, respectively, of the A-G-G-A segment on the DNA. The bound aryltetrasaccharide in turn positions the enediyne ring deep in the minor groove such that the pro-radical carbon centers of the enediyne are proximal to their anticipated proton abstraction sites. Specifically, the pro-radical C-3 and C-6 atoms are aligned opposite the abstractable H-5' (pro-S) and H-4' protons on partner strands across the minor groove, respectively, in the complex. The DNA duplex is right-handed with Watson-Crick base-pairing in the complex. The helix exhibits a B-DNA type minor groove width at the aryltetrasaccharide binding-site while there is widening of the groove at the adjacent enediyne binding-site in the complex. The DNA helix exhibits localized perturbations at the binding-site as reflected in imino proton complexation shifts and specific altered sugar pucker geometrics associated with complex formation. Sequence-specific binding of

*Corresponding author

Present addresses: R. A. Kumar, Molecular Simulations Inc., 9685 Scranton Road, San Diego, CA 92121, USA; N. Ikemoto, Merck Research Laboratories, P.O. Box 2000, Rahway, NJ 07065, USA. Abbreviations used: ring R, bicyclo (7.3.1) tridecadiyene ring; ring A, hydroxylamino sugar; ring B, thiosugar; ring C, thiobenzoate ring; ring D, rhamnose sugar; ring E, ethylamino sugar; r.m.s.d., root mean squared deviation; NOE, nuclear Overhauser enhancement; NOSEY, NOE spectroscopy; COSY correlated spectroscopy; TOCSY, total COSY; HMQC, heteronuclear multiple quantum coherence.
0022­2836/97/020187­15 $25.00/0/mb960718
7 1997 Academic Press Limited

188

Calicheamicin g1 I-DNA Oligomer Solution Structure

calicheamicin g1 I to the (T-C-C-T)·(A-G-G-A) containing DNA hairpin duplex is favored by the complementarity of the fit through hydrophobic and hydrogen-bonding interactions between the drug and the floor and walls of the minor groove of a minimally perturbed DNA helix.
I

7 1997 Academic Press Limited

Keywords: calicheamicin g1 -DNA complex; enediyne alignment within walls of minor groove; saccharide insertion into DNA minor groove; intermolecular drug iodine-guanine amino proton interactions; specificity of binding and cleavage processes

Introduction
Calicheamicins isolated from Micromonospora echinospora are potent antitumor agents with pronounced activities against leukemias and melanomas. Calicheamicin g1I has been isolated from fermentation media to which sodium iodide has been added (Lee et al., 1987a,b). Its chemical structure (Figure 1(a)) consists of a core bicyclo (7.3.1) tridecadiynene moiety (ring R) to which is attached an aryltetrasaccharide chain. This chain consists of linked elements involving a hydroxylamino sugar (ring A), a thio sugar (ring B), a thiobenzoate (ring C) and a rhamnose sugar (ring D). An ethylamino sugar (ring E) is connected to sugar A through a glycosidic linkage. The enediyne core and attached trisaccharide segments are common to esperamicin A1 (R, A, B and C rings; Golik et al., 1987) and calicheamicin g1I (R, A, B and E rings) including the novel NH-O connectivity linking the A and B sugars. Chemical footprinting studies have established that calicheamicin g1I binds preferentially to oligopurine·oligopyrimidine tetranucleotide stretches with the highest binding specificity for (T-C-CT)·(A-G-G-A) sites (Zein et al., 1988, 1989a; De Voss et al., 1990; Mah et al., 1994). Following activation and Bergman cycloaromatization of the enediyne segment of calicheamicin g1I, oxidative cleavage occurs on both strands of the DNA duplex. This is achieved through specific abstraction of the H-5'(S) hydrogen of the 5'-C of the T-C-C-T segment and the H-4' hydrogen of the sugar three nucleotides to the 3' side of the complementary A-G-G-A segment (Zein et al., 1989b; Walker et al., 1992; Hangeland et al., 1992; Dedon et al., 1993). Calicheamicins show great promise as extremely potent antitumor antibiotics and their efficacy has been greatly enhanced by covalent linkage to oxidized sugar molecules on an internalising anti-polyepithelial mucin antibody (Hinman et al., 1993). This conjugate approach has been successfully applied to target antigen positive cells in vivo (Hinman et al., 1993). An NMR study of calicheamicin g1I in organic solvents points towards the antitumor antibiotic being substantially preorganized and adopting a rigid, extended conformation ideal for DNA groove recognition (Walker et al., 1991). The 3' asymmetric stagger of the chemical footprinting patterns for calicheamicin g1I-DNA complexes (Zein et al., 1988,

1989a; De Voss et al., 1990; Mah et al., 1994) established unequivocally that the antibiotic bound in the minor groove of the DNA helix. Footprinting studies of calicheamicin g1I and its analogs on DNA restriction fragments have established that the sequence specificity of calicheamicin g1I for its DNA targets resides within the aryltetrasaccharide component of the drug (Drak et al., 1991; Nicolaou et al., 1992; Aiyar et al., 1994). In addition, the binding and cleavage activities of calicheamicin g1I are critically dependent on the presence of guanine residues, and more specifically, their exocyclic amino groups as key DNA recognition elements (Hawley et al., 1989; Li et al., 1994). The binding and cleavage activities of calicheamicin were first investigated at the duplex level (reviewed by Nicolaou & Dai, 1991; Nicolaou et al., 1993) but have been more recently extended to the nucleosomal level (Yu et al., 1995; Li et al., 1995; Kuduvalli et al., 1995). This research has identified sequence specific modulations in DNA damage by calicheamicin observed for nucleosomal relative to native DNA. Structural features of the calicheamicin-DNA oligomer complex have been approached from modeling (Hawley et al., 1989), computational (Langley et al., 1994) and NMR based experimental

Figure 1. (a) The chemical structure and numbering system for calicheamicin g1I. (b) The sequence of the 23-mer hairpin duplex with the (T4-C5-C6-T7).(A17-G18G19-A20) calicheamicin g1I binding-site highlighted in bold lettering.

Calicheamicin g1 I-DNA Oligomer Solution Structure

189 the post-activated radical species proximal to their hydrogen abstraction sites on the sugar-phosphate backbone on partner strands of the DNA duplex. Our group has also investigated the solution structure of the calicheamicin g1I complex by focusing on the hairpin duplex containing a (T-C-C-T)·(A-G-G-A) segment whose sequence is shown in Figure 1(b) (Ikemoto et al., 1995). This NMR-molecular dynamics study in vacuum was based on 70 intermolecular restraints and was facilitated by the observation of resolved H-4 and H-5 protons on the enediyne R ring (see the numbering system in Figure 1(a)) in the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex (Ikemoto et al., 1995). Here we report on a further refinement of the structure of the complex based on a combined NMR-intensity refined molecular dynamics study in a water box and defines, at the molecular level, the principles associated with sequence-specific saccharide-DNA recognition and subsequent enediyne mediated cleavage of the DNA backbone by the bound calicheamicin g1I in the minor groove.

(Walker et al., 1993, 1994; Paloma et al., 1994; Ikemoto et al., 1995) approaches. The first molecular modeling study on the complex emphasized the importance of the stereochemistry at the sugar linkage sites in maximizing the linearity of the aryltetrasaccharide segment and its interaction with the minor groove of the duplex (Hawley et al., 1989). Further, this group suggested that the polarizable iodine substituent on aromatic ring C of calicheamicin g1I forms attractive intermolecular contacts with the guanine exocyclic amino groups of the (T-C-C-T)·(A-G-G-A) segment in the bindingsite (Hawley et al., 1989). In addition, hydrophobic intermolecular interactions are also believed to be an important contributing factor in calicheamicin g1I DNA association in solution (Ding & Ellestad, 1991). The structure of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA complex was also probed from solvated molecular dynamics calculations (Langley et al., 1994). Several models were generated which rationalized the correct DNA hydrogen abstraction and resulting cleavage patterns, with one of the models also providing a rationale for the observed (A-G-G-A)· (T-C-C-T) sequence specificity (Langley et al., 1994). Unlike the earlier modeling study of the complex with its inwardly pointing iodine atom (Hawley et al., 1989), the favored hydrated molecular dynamics model had the iodine atom directed outwards towards the solvent (Langley et al., 1994). Walker et al. (1993, 1994) were the first to attempt an NMR-based structural characterization of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA complex at the oligomer duplex level in solution. The few available intermolecular drug-DNA NOEs were analyzed to position the enediyne ring and the aryltetrasaccharide along the minor groove of the duplex. The authors concluded that calicheamicin g1I does not undergo a structural distortion on complex formation in contrast to the DNA oligomer which was postulated to distort primarily at the C-C step in the pyrimidine-rich strand of the recognition (A-C-C-T)·(A-G-G-T) sequence (Walker et al., 1993). They also concluded that the binding specificity of calicheamicin g1I for the oligopurine·oligopyrimidine sites may reflect the deformability of such sequences and their facile accommodation of the bound drug (Walker et al., 1994). Paloma et al. (1994) have independently studied the complex between calicheamicin u1I (differs from the g1I isomer in that S-COCH3 replaces the S-S-S-CH3 trigger functionality) and a (T-C-C-T)·(A-G-G-A) containing DNA oligomer duplex. A structure of the complex was deduced from a combined NMR-molecular dynamics study in vacuum guided by approximately 15 drug-DNA NOEs. The observation of exchange cross-peaks identified two conformations of unequal populations in slow equilibrium separated by a 15 kcal activation barrier (Paloma et al., 1994). These researchers proposed that DNA doublestrand cleavage required that the aglycone shift between two alternate conformations to position

Results
Complex formation and stoichiometry Our choice of DNA sequence for solution structural characterization of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA complex was governed by our long term plan to study complex formation at both the duplex and triplex level. There are clear advantages to generating DNA triplexes through intramolecular folding of a single-strand through judicious placement of hairpin loops (reviewed by Radhakrishnan & Patel, 1995) and the same strategy can also be used at the duplex level through study of stem-loop DNA hairpin structures. The present study focuses on the 23-mer hairpin duplex shown in Figure 1(b), which contains the preferred (T4-C5-C6-T7)·(A17-G18G19-A20) calicheamicin g1I binding-site in the central part of the stem segment. The complex could be readily generated by shaking a mixture of calicheamicin g1I in methanol with the DNA hairpin duplex in aqueous solution in the dark in the cold room over a 24 hour period. The complex was stable to lyophilization and could readily be exchanged between H2 O and 2H2 O. The imino proton spectrum (12.4 to 14.4 ppm) of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex (one drug bound per hairpin duplex) in H2 O buffer at pH 7.0 and 25°C established the predominant formation of a single species with well resolved imino protons in the spectra of the complex. We observe separate imino proton resonances for the free DNA hairpin duplex and the complex at substoichiometric additions of calicheamicin g1I indicative of slow exchange of the drug on the NMR time scale between free and bound states of the DNA.

190

Calicheamicin g1 I-DNA Oligomer Solution Structure

2

Figure 2. Expanded NOESY (160 ms mixing time) contour plots of the calicheamicin g1I hairpin duplex complex in H2 O buffer, pH 7.0 at 10°C showing NOEs between the base protons (7.1 to 8.5 ppm) and the sugar H-1' protons (5.2 to 6.4 ppm). The NOE connectivities between the base protons and their own and 5'-flanking sugar H-1' protons are traced in a from C1 to G9 and b from C15 to G23.

Exchangeable protons We detect all eight non-terminal imino protons in the NMR spectrum of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex in H2 O buffer at 25°C. These imino protons can be assigned based on NOE patterns in the NOESY (150 ms mixing time) data set of the complex in H2 O buffer at 5°C. We can readily trace NOE connectivities between imino protons on adjacent base-pairs from A2·T22 towards one end of the helix to G9·C15 that closes the hairpin loop in the complex. Further, we detect NOEs between thymine imino protons and adenine H-2 and amino protons across A·T base-pairs and between guanine imino protons and cytosine amino and H-5 protons (the latter through spin diffusion) across G·C base-pairs. This establishes that WatsonCrick base-pairing is retained at all base-pairs on complex formation. The imino protons of the (T)5 loop appeared as broad peaks in the 10.5 to 11.5 ppm region in the spectrum of the complex at pH 7.0 and 25°C. The imino and amino proton chemical shifts in the complex have been tabulated at 5°C. Several imino protons undergo unusually large chemical shifts on complex formation. These include upfield complexation shifts at T7 (-0.77 ppm) and T22 (-0.46 ppm) and a downfield complexation shift at G18 (+0.61 ppm) at 5°C. The guanine amino protons of G18 and G19 exhibit resolved resonances separated by unusually large chemical shift differences (approximately 4 ppm) in the complex. Specifically, the exposed guanine amino protons of G18 and G19 have undergone large upfield shifts on complex formation.

Non-exchangeable protons The non-exchangeable protons are well resolved in the proton spectrum of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex in 2H2 O buffer solution at 25°C. The non-exchangeable protons have been assigned following analysis of NOESY (160 ms mixing time) data sets on the complex in 2 H2 O buffer at 10°C as shown in the expanded contour plots outlining NOEs between the base and sugar H-1' protons in Figure 2a and b. We can readily trace the sequential NOE connectivities between the base and its own and 5'-flanking sugar H-1' protons along individual strands in the complex from C1 to G9 in Figure 2a and from C15 to G23 in Figure 2b. It should be noted that the NOE between the H-6 and H-1' protons of C5 is weak (peak labeled C5 in Figure 2a) most likely due to a broadening of the H-6 and/or H-1' protons of this residue in the complex. By contrast, the same cross peak can be readily detected in the corresponding NOESY data set of the free hairpin duplex. The other expanded regions in the NOESY data set in the complex in 2H2 O buffer were similarly analysed along with the analysis of complementary through bond COSY and TOCSY data. These analyses provided an essentially complete list of non-exchangeable base and sugar proton chemical shifts in the complex at 10°C. The complexation shifts for the exchangeable and non-exchangeable protons are primarily restricted to the (T4-C5-C6T7)·(A17-G18-G19-A20) segment of the hairpin duplex with large upfield shifts observed for the H-4' protons of T7 (-1.70 ppm) and A20 (-1.17 ppm) on complex formation. The puckers of the nucleic acid deoxyribose sugar residues were qualitatively analysed from the

Calicheamicin g1 I-DNA Oligomer Solution Structure

191 conformations in the complex. Intramolecular restraints The available assignments of the drug and nucleic acid protons in the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex has yielded 353 restraints among DNA protons (19.6 per residue) and 52 restraints among drug protons (8.6 per residue). Their distribution by residue for the DNA and drug components in the complex have been graphically represented in Figure 3(a), which outlines the relative contributions of exchangeable proton, non-exchangeable proton and hydrogen-bonding restraints while Figure 3(b) outlines the relative contributions between intra and inter-residue restraints. These restraints which are reasonably distributed within the drug and DNA segments are sufficient to guide the molecular dynamics calculations. Intermolecular drug-DNA restraints We have been able to assign 70 drug-DNA intermolecular restraints in the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex. It is readily apparent that all components of the drug show extensive NOEs to primarily the DNA minor groove protons. These intermolecular NOEs are tabulated by residue position within each component of the complex in Figure 3(c) and provide critical restraints for aligning the drug on the DNA and defining the solution structure of the complex. Structure calculations The protocols used to estimate the distance and torsion restraints and their bounds involving exchangeable and non-exchangeable protons are outlined in Experimental Methods. Hydrogen-bond restraints were incorporated to enforce WatsonCrick alignments for all base-pairs in the complex consistent with the experimental NMR data. The relaxation matrix refinements in a water box were

multiplet patterns for the sugar (H-1')-(H-2'), (H-1')-(H-2"), (H-2')-(H-3') and (H-2")-(H-3') crosspeaks in the COSY-45 spectra of the complex in 2 H2 O buffer at 20°C. Calicheamicin g1I protons The exchangeable and non-exchangeable protons of calicheamicin g1I in the complex were assigned following analysis of through space and through bond connectivities in two-dimensional data sets in H2 O and 2H2 O solution. The drug protons were distinguished from the DNA protons in the complex following analysis of the natural abundance 1H-13C-HMQC data set and identifying cross-peaks that lie outside the DNA spectral regions. For instance, the olefinic H-4, H-5 and H-14 protons on the enediyne ring R were observed in unique and well resolved regions of the heteronuclear contour plot. Exchangeable drug protons were identified through connectivities to their assigned non-exchangeable counterparts in the complex. We also detect strong NOEs between protons on adjacent residues of the drug in the complex. These include the following NOEs: R(H-1)-A(H-1), A(H-2)-E(H-1), A(H-4)-B(H-1), B(CH3-5)-C(OCH3-6) and C(OCH35)-D(CH3 -5), which help to connect the R-A enediyne-sugar linkage, as well as A-E, A-B, B-C and C-D linkages in the aryltetrasaccharide segment of the complex. We have tabulated the exchangeable (5°C) and non-exchangeable (25°C) proton chemical shifts of the drug in the complex. Most importantly, the R(H-4) proton (6.08 ppm) and R(H-5) proton (6.23 ppm) exhibited distinct chemical shifts in the spectrum of the complex. A comparison between experimental and simulated cross-peaks for vicinal proton pairs within individual sugar residues of the drug in the complex established that the A(H-2)-A(H-3), A(H3)-A(H-4), A(H-4)-A(H-5), B(H-4)-B(H-5), B(H-1)B(H-2ax), D(H-3)-D(H-4), D(H-4)-D(H-5) and E(H-3)-E(H-4) pairs exhibit coupling constants in the 9 to 11 Hz range. These values establish that the A, B, D and E sugars of the drug adopt chair

Table 1. Quality of the structures for the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex
Parameters Distance-refined structures Relaxation matrixrefined structures 0.008­0.013 2.6­2.7 2.4­3.3 0.329­0.356 0.173­0.190 0.037­0.040 0.77 2 0.08 0.50 2 0.04

A. r.m.s. deviations from ideal covalent geometry ° Bond length (A) 0.008­0.016 Bond angle (°) 3.0­3.2 Impropers (°) 5.3­5.8 B. R-factors Unweighted R1 Weighted R1 R 1/6 C. Convergence ° Average pairwise r.m.s.d. (A)a ° r.m.s.d. to average structure (A)
a

0.458­0.563 0.502­0.584 0.051­0.052 0.96 2 0.15 0.63 2 0.10

Complex excluding terminal base-pairs.

192

Calicheamicin g1 I-DNA Oligomer Solution Structure

Figure 3. Histogram for the number of distance restraints used to compute the structures of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex. These are listed by DNA (left panel) and drug (right panel) residues. Each intra-residue restraint is counted as one for that residue. Each inter-residue restraint is counted as half for one residue and half for the other residue in the interaction. (a) The total number per residue of DNA-DNA and drug-drug distance restraints involving non-exchangeable protons (open bars), exchangeable protons (filled bars) and intra-base-pair hydrogen-bonds (hatched bars). (b) Number of DNA-DNA and drug-drug intra-residue restraints (open bars) and inter-residue restraints (filled bars). (c) Number of intermolecular drug-DNA restraints involving the non-exchangeable protons (open bars) and exchangeable protons (filled bars). (d) Pairwise root-mean-squared deviation values (RMSD) in the atomic co-ordinate positions calculated for each residue among the four intensity-refined structures. Average values (open circles) are shown along with the standard deviations (vertical bars).

Calicheamicin g1 I-DNA Oligomer Solution Structure
Table 2. NMR refinement statistics for the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex
A. Distance refinement (8 structures) Number of distance/intensity restraints ° Number of NOE violations (>0.2 A) r.m.s.d. values for input distance restraints ° Pairwise r.m.s.d. values for the full complex (A) ° and excluding the terminal base-pairs (A) B. Relaxation matrix refinement (6 structures) Number of non-exchangeable proton intensity restraints (for 4 mixing times) Number of distance restraints involving exchangeable protons Number of additional hydrogen-bond distance restraints ° Number of NOE violations (>0.2 A) r.m.s.d. values for input distance restraints ° Pairwise r.m.s.d. values for the full complex (A) ° and excluding the terminal base-pairs (A) 523 8­14 0.108­0.193 0.94 2 0.15 0.94 2 0.17 1528 44 48 2­4 0.095­0.127 0.86 2 0.10 0.77 2 0.08

193

guided by NOE cross-peak intensities from NOESY data sets in 2H2 O solution collected at four mixing times with bounds as defined in Experimental Methods. The starting structure of the complex as described in Experimental Methods contained an extended calicheamicin g1I molecule positioned ° >6 A off the minor groove of an idealised B-DNA helix segment of the 23-mer hairpin duplex with a parallel alignment of the long axis of the drug and the DNA. The restrained molecular dynamics simulations guided by the distance and torsion restraints were performed with a simulated annealing protocol with a distance-dependent dielectric constant in vacuum. The docking of the drug onto the DNA during the simulation was guided by the intermolecular drug-DNA restraints. Different seeds were used for random initial velocity assignments and yielded eight distance refined structures of the complex with pairwise root mean square deviations (r.m.s.d.s) of ° 0.94(20.17) A. The refinement statistics and quality of these distance refined structures of the complex are listed in Tables 1 and 2.

Six of these distance refined structures of the complex were next solvated in a water box containing sodium cations and then refined against the intensity restraints. These calculations yielded six intensity refined structures of the complex which exhibit pairwise r.m.s.d. values of ° 0.77(20.08) A. The refinement statistics and quality of these intensity refined structures of the complex are listed in Tables 1 and 2. We observe good R-factors and convergence statistics for the six intensity refined solution structures of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex. Structure analysis Stereo views of the six superpositioned intensity refined structures of the calicheamicin g1I DNA hairpin duplex complex are plotted in Figure 4. The enediyne ring (in white) and the aryltetrasaccharide segment (in cyan) are positioned in the minor groove of the helix. The complex is well defined in the internal segment encompassing the drug binding site. The distribution of pairwise r.m.s.d. values calculated for individual nucleic acid

Figure 4. A stereo view in color of six superpositioned intensity refined structures of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex. The DNA backbone and base-pairs are shown in yellow and magenta, respectively. The drug is shown in cyan except for the enediyne ring which is shown in white with its C-3 and C-6 carbon atoms shown in green.

194

Calicheamicin g1 I-DNA Oligomer Solution Structure

Figure 5. Helical parameters deduced using the CURVES program for the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex. Distribution of (a) the sugar pucker pseudo-rotation angle P and (b) the glycosidic torsion angle x for each residue. Distribution of (c) the helical twist and (d) the axial rise at each step of the DNA sequence. The average values (open circles) are shown along with the standard deviations (vertical bars). The common range for these parameters are indicated along the right axis.

residues and individual calicheamicin g1I components between the six relaxation matrix refined structures of the complex are plotted in Figure 3(d). The sugar pucker pseudo-rotation and glycosidic torsion angles at individual nucleic acid residues in the six intensity refined structures are plotted in Figure 5(a) and (b), respectively. The corresponding base-pair twist and helical rise at individual steps

Figure 6. Two space filling views of one representative intensity-refined structure of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex. The color labeling is the same as outlined in the legend to Figure 4.

in the six intensity refined structures are plotted in Figure 5(c) and (d), respectively. Space-filling views of one representative intensity refined structure of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex that differ by a 90° rotation along the helix axis are shown in Figure 6. The DNA backbone and base-pairs are in yellow and magenta, respectively, while the calicheamicin g1I is in cyan with its enediyne ring in white in these views of the complex. These views emphasize the positioning of the aryltetrasaccharide segment in the minor groove and the burial of the enediyne ring within the minor groove of the helix (Figure 6). The orientation of the thio sugar B residue (in green), the hydroxlyamino sugar A residue (in orange) and the ethylamino sugar E residue (in cyan) of calicheamicin g1I relative to the sugar-phosphate backbone of the T4-C5-C6 strand (backbone in yellow) in one representative intensity-refined structure of the complex is shown in Figure 7(a). The relative penetration and positioning of thio sugar B residue (in green), thiobenzoate ring C (in yellow) and rhamnose sugar D residue (in blue) of the drug within the walls of the minor groove of the DNA duplex (backbone in yellow) in the complex are shown in Figure 7(b).

Calicheamicin g1 I-DNA Oligomer Solution Structure

195

Figure 8. The relative alignment of the thio sugar B residue (in green) and the thiobenzoate ring C (in orange) of calicheamicin g1I with respect to the G18-G19 step (in magenta) on the DNA in one representative intensityrefined structure of the complex. Intermolecular contacts are detected between the iodine atom of the thiobenzoate ring C and the exocyclic exposed amino proton of G18 (involved protons shown in white along with color-coded meshed surfaces) and between the sulfur atom of the thio sugar B residue and the exposed amino proton of G19 (involved protons shown in white along with color-coded meshed surfaces).

Figure 7. Two views from one representative intensity-refined structure of the calicheamicin g1I DNA hairpin duplex complex. (a) The alignment of the enediyne ring (in white), the hydroxylamino sugar A molecule (in orange), the thio sugar B residue (in green) and the ethylamino sugar E residue (in cyan) of the drug in the minor groove of the DNA helix. (b) The alignment of the thio sugar B residue (in green), the thiobenzoate ring C (in orange) and the rhamnose sugar D residue (in cyan) within the walls of the DNA minor groove (sugar-phosphate backbone in yellow).

The orientation of the thio sugar B molecule (in green) and thiobenzoate C (in orange) segment of the drug relative to the G18-G19 segment of the DNA (in magenta) in one representative intensityrefined structure of the complex is shown in Figure 8. This view emphasizes the intermolecular contacts between the iodine atom of the thiobenzoate ring C and the exposed exocyclic amino proton of G18 and between the sulfur atom of the thiocarbonyl linker and the exposed amino proton of G19 (involved protons shown in white along with color-coded meshed surfaces) in the complex.

Discussion
Complex formation and sequence specificity We have been able to generate a one drug per duplex complex for calicheamicin g1I bound to the

(T-C-C-T)·(A-G-G-A) containing 23-mer DNA hairpin duplex in aqueous solution. There are also minor broad peaks in the imino proton spectrum of the complex that are of unknown origin at this time. We have not observed exchange cross-peaks in NOESY spectra indicative of a conformational equilibrium between the predominant species of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex and alternate conformations. This observation contrasts with the research of Paloma et al. (1994) who found evidence for a conformational equilibrium between a major and minor component which was interpreted to reflect an equilibrium between two alternate alignments of the enediyne ring in the minor groove of the calicheamicin u1I-DNA oligomer complex. Both structural investigations bound calicheamicin to a common (T-C-C-T)·(A-G-G-A) segment but differed in that this tetranucleotide duplex sequence was flanked by A·T base-pairs in the Paloma et al. (1994) study while it was flanked by G·C base-pairs in our investigations (Ikemoto et al., 1995; this study). The consequences of replacing the C3·G21 base-pair on the 5' side of the (T4-C5-C6-T7)·(A17G18-G19-A20) tetranucleotide binding segment (Figure 1(b)) by other base-pair combinations was investigated in the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex in our laboratory. Replacement of C3·G21 by C3·I21, I3·C21 and A3·T21 base-pairs resulted in the formation of a heterogeneous mixture of two or more complexes which were not characterized further.

196 Quality of refined structures The large number of intramolecular and intermolecular restraints were sufficient to define the structure of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex to high resolution as defined by the convergence characteristics and R-factors (Tables 1 and 2). Our current structural studies on the complex using intensity based refinements in a water box have extended our earlier preliminary report of distance based refinements in vacuum on the same complex (Ikemoto et al., 1995). Specifically, the quality of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex structures improved on proceeding from the distance refined calculations in vacuum to the intensity refined calculations in a water box as reflected in both the r.m.s.d. values and R-factors outlined in Table 1. These differences should be viewed as conformational adjustments rather than changes since the same local and global features are observed for the structures of the complex deduced by distance and intensity refinement approaches. Several important distinctions differentiate our NMR structural studies from earlier contributions on the structural characterization of the calicheamicin-DNA complexes in solution. First, we detected separate resonances for the enediyne H4 (6.08 ppm) and H5 (6.23 ppm) protons in our complex (Ikemoto et al., 1995; this study) in contrast to closely spaced or superpositioned resonances for these protons in the contributions from the other laboratories (Walker et al., 1993; Paloma et al., 1994). These olefinic protons are critical for positioning the two edges of the enediyne ring relative to the partner strands of the duplex in the complex. Second, we placed a greater emphasis on exchangeable proton data in our studies of the complex (Ikemoto et al., 1995; this study) while earlier investigations primarily focused on non-exchangeable proton data of the complex (Walker et al., 1993; Paloma et al., 1994). This emphasis in turn provided important intermolecular restraints involving exchangeable protons that contributed to a higher resolution structural characterization of the complex in solution. Third, our structure of the calicheamicin-DNA complex (Ikemoto et al., 1995; this study) was based on a greater number of intermolecular restraints (70 restraints) when compared to earlier contributions (15 restraints) (Walker et al., 1993; Paloma et al., 1994) allowing us to define the structure at higher resolution. Finally, the current structural characterization of the calicheamicin-DNA complex using intensity based refinements in a water box expands on earlier efforts at manual docking (Walker et al., 1993) and distance based refinements in vacuum (Paloma et al., 1994; Ikemoto et al., 1995). Global features of the complex The directional alignment of the aryltetrasaccharide of calicheamicin deep in the minor groove

Calicheamicin g1 I-DNA Oligomer Solution Structure

centered about the oligopyrimidine·oligopurine tract (Figure 7) in turn orients the attached enediyne ring to span both strands of the duplex in the intensity refined structures of the complex (Figure 4). The enediyne ring which is tilted relative to the helix axis adopts an orientation deep in the minor groove which allows abstraction of DNA sugar-phosphate backbone protons following activation by the exposed trisulfide trigger and cycloaromatization resulting in DNA strand cleavage. All the NMR structural studies place the aryltetrasaccharide segment of the calicheamicin with the iodine containing edge of the thiobenzoate ring C directed towards the floor of the minor groove of the helix (Walker et al., 1993; Paloma et al., 1994; Ikemoto et al., 1995; this study). These results contrast with the favored structure deduced from hydrated molecular dynamics calculations in the absence of restraints where the iodine containing edge of the thiobenzoate ring C was postulated to be directed outwards towards solvent (Langley et al., 1994). There is a close complementarity at the interface between the drug and the DNA minor groove which spans the entire binding-site in the refined structures of the complex (Figure 4 and 6). This result contrasts with an earlier claim of a hydration layer between the drug and the DNA based on hydrated molecular dynamics calculations in the absence of restraints (Langley et al., 1994). Saccharide-DNA recognition The aryltetrasaccharide segment of calicheamicin g1I targets the (T-C-C-T)·(A-G-G-A) duplex segment in an extended conformation with the thio sugar B residue and thiobenzoate ring C embedded deep within the minor groove in the complex (Figure 7(b)). The unusual NH-O linkage between the sugar molecules A and B adopts an eclipsed conformation (-128.4(22.6)° in the refined structures) and sets the relative orientations of the A and B sugar residues in the minor groove of the helix in the complex. The thiocarbonyl linker connecting the thio sugar B residue and the thiobenzoate ring C is aligned orthogonal to the aromatic plane of ring C and contacts opposing walls of the minor groove in the complex. The hydroxylamino sugar A residue interacts primarily with the oligopyrimidine strand and is aligned in a face down orientation over the sugar ring of T4 in the complex (Figure 7(a)). This alignment is anchored through hydrogen-bond formation between the hydroxyl proton of the sugar A residue and the phosphate group (C6 O1P) ° at the C5-C6 step (distance 2.89(20.99) A in the refined structures) in the complex. The thio sugar B residue in an edgewise orientation is positioned deep within the walls of the minor groove with extensive hydrophobic contacts made by its inwardly pointing H-1, germinal H-2 and H-3 protons with the floor of the

Calicheamicin g1 I-DNA Oligomer Solution Structure

197 ment of iodine by bromine, chlorine, flourine, methyl and hydrogen resulted in progressive reduction in binding affinity, as did replacement of the 5'-guanine in the (A-G-G-A) segment by inosine which lacks a 2-amino group (Li et al., 1994). The sulfur atom of the thiocarbonyl linker between the thio sugar B residue and thiobenzoate ring C of calicheamicin g1I is directed towards the floor of the minor groove and potentially hydrogen° bonds (3.13(20.24) A in the refined structures) to the exposed exocyclic amino proton of G19 of the (A17-G18-G19-A20) segment in the complex (Figure 8). A similar intermolecular interaction has been observed in the structure of the related esperamicin A1-DNA complex solved in our laboratory (Ikemoto et al., 1994; Kumar et al., 1996). The participation of the exposed amino protons of G18 and G19 in intermolecular contacts explains, in part, the sequence specificity of calicheamicin g1I for the minor groove of (A-G-G-A)·(T-C-C-T) duplex segments. These intermolecular interactions may also explain the unusually upfield shift for the exposed amino protons of G18 and G19 in the complex. Enediyne alignment The enediyne ring is very well defined ° ° (0.59(20.22) A for heavy atoms and 1.15 (0.39) A for all atoms, including the trisulfide side-chain) in the refined structures of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex. It is buried deep in the minor groove and tilted relative to the helix axis with the triple bond connecting the C-2 and C-3 carbon atoms directed towards the C3-T4-C5 containing strand and the triple bond connecting the C-6 and C-7 carbon atoms directed towards the G21-T22-G23 containing strand in the complex. The C-3 pro-radical carbon center is approximately ° colinear with and close (3.07(20.003) A) to the H-5' (pro-S) proton of C5 while the C-6 pro-radical carbon center is approximately colinear and close ° (3.43(20.05) A) to the H-4' proton of T22 in the refined structures of the complex. This alignment is anchored further by an intermolecular hydrogenbond between the OH-8 hydroxyl proton on the enediyne ring and the phosphate (G23 O1P) at the ° T22-G23 step (3.14(20.44) A in the refined structures) in the complex. Our observation that the pro-radical carbon centers on the enediyne are approximately equidistant from their radical abstraction sites on the DNA sugar-phosphate backbone in the complex investigated in our laboratory (this study) are in strong contrast with an earlier structural study where the distance between the C-6 pro-radical center and the abstractable H-4' proton on the A-G-G-A containing strand was much shorter than the corresponding distance between the C-3 pro-radical center and the abstractable H-5' (pro-S) proton on the T-C-C-T containing strand in the predominant conformation of the complex (Paloma et al., 1994).

minor groove spanning the T4·A20 and C5·G19 base-pairs in the complex (Figure 7(b)). In addition, hydrophobic contacts are also observed as a result of the two faces of the B sugar ring of the drug being sandwiched between the sugar rings of C6 and G21 on partner strands of the duplex in the complex (Figure 7(a)). The B sugar residue is also anchored in the minor groove through hydrogen bond formation between its hydroxyl group and ° the N-3 atom of the A20 residue (2.20(20.97) A in the refined structures) in the complex. The thiobenzoate ring C is positioned deep in the minor groove with its methyl and iodine substituents directed towards the floor of the minor groove and spanning the C5·G19 and C6·G18 base-pairs in the complex. The sugar rings of residues T7 and A20 stack directly over opposing faces of the aromatic ring of thiobenzoate residue C (Figure 7(b)) which accounts for the large upfield shifts observed for the H-4' protons of T7 and A20 on complex formation. The rhamnose sugar D residue does not penetrate into the minor groove to the same extent as the thio sugar B residue and thiobenzoate ring C in the intensity refined structures of the complex. It primarily interacts with the DNA minor groove through intermolecular hydrogen-bond contacts between its OH-2 hydroxyl proton and the backbone phosphate group (G19 O3'P) at the ° G19-A20 step (3.00(20.28) A in the refined structures) and between its OH-4 hydroxyl proton and the phosphate group (G9 O1P) at the G8-G9 step ° (3.60(20.97) A in the refined structures) in the complex. The hydroxylamino sugar A residue serves as a linker to the ethylamino sugar E residue which is directed up and out of the minor groove and, by virtue of its axial anomeric linkage, lies over the phosphate backbone at the T4-C5 step in the complex (Figure 7(a)). The E sugar is anchored in position as a result of interactions between its positively charged ethylamino group and the backbone phosphate at the C3-T4 step in the complex. The importance of this electrostatic interaction to binding affinity has been questioned since salt-dependent studies of binding energetics suggest that the association is dominated by nonionic rather than electrostatic forces (Krishnamurthy et al., 1995). Intermolecular contacts involving iodine and sulfur atoms of the drug The iodine atom on thiobenzoate ring C of calicheamicin g1I is directed towards the exposed exocyclic amino proton of G18 of the (A17-G18G19-A20) segment in the complex with their van ° der Waals surfaces in contact (3.43(20.33) A in the refined structures) as shown in Figure 8. The importance of such an intermolecular interaction had been anticipated in modeling studies (Hawley et al., 1989) and supported by modification experiments (Li et al., 1994). Specifically, replace-

198 DNA structure in the complex The 23-mer hairpin duplex adopts a right-handed helix with all Watson-Crick base-pairs in the refined structures of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA complex (Figure 4). The glycosidic torsion angles are all in the anti range (Figure 5(b)) while the ° x-displacement values (-1.13(20.49) A in the refined structures) are typical of those characteristic of B-DNA helices in the complex. The helical twist values at base steps excluding the termini cover the range 28.5° to 38.8°. The minor groove widens in the segment spanning the enediyne ring (cross-strand T4pC5T22pG23 separation) as reflected in an average ° width of 7.5(20.2) A measured as the shortest P-P ° separation across the groove less 5.8 A) in the structure of the complex (Figure 6). By contrast, the minor groove is essentially unperturbed at the aryltetrasaccharide B-C-D segment binding-site (cross-strand C5pC6-G21pT22, C6pT7-A20pG21, T7pG8-G19pA20 and G8pG9-G18pG19 separations) ° with average values of 5.4(20.9) A in the structure of the complex (Figure 6). This conclusion contrasts with earlier suggestions that the minor groove widens at the calicheamicin aryltetrasaccharide binding site on the DNA helix (Walker et al., 1993; Paloma et al., 1995). The imino protons of T7 and G18 of the central (T4-C5-C6-T7)·(A17-G18-G19-A20) binding segment undergo large upfield and downfield shifts, respectively, on complex formation. This result may be indicative of a change in overlap geometries between adjacent C6·G18 and T7·A17 base-pairs associated with complex formation. The upfield shift in the imino proton of T22 at the enediyne binding site on complex formation may be associated with the enediyne ring being positioned at this widened minor groove site in the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex since this complexation shift is much reduced in the related aryltetrasaccharide-DNA hairpin duplex complex (Ikemoto et al., 1995). The observation of resolved guanine amino protons separated by approximately 4 ppm for G18 (9.10, 4.34 ppm) and G19 (8.28, 3.68 ppm) in our complex (this study) is quite unprecedented. Indeed, Paloma et al. (1994) state that resolved guanine amino protons are detected for the 5'-guanine (9.69, 8.98 ppm) in the A-G-G-A segment of their complex but that the chemical shift difference is 0.7 ppm. We have attributed the large upfield shifts of the exposed amino protons of G18 and G19 to the observed intermolecular interactions with the thiocarbonyl and iodine functionalities in the structure of our complex (Figure 8). The non-exchangeable base H-6 and/or H-1' proton of C5 is broad in the spectrum resulting in weak cross-peaks in NOESY contour plots of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex (Figure 2a). The origin of this line broadening is not well understood at this time but may reflect some local conformational fluctu-

Calicheamicin g1 I-DNA Oligomer Solution Structure

ations in the vicinity of this proton marker in the complex. Overall, the DNA helix is regular at the global level with local perturbations in the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex. We have not found evidence for bending or kinking of the DNA helix for the short duplex segment used in the current structural study (Figure 4). The NMR technique for structure determination provides ° short range restraints (<5 A), which are not ideally suited to define features such as DNA helical bending and kinking which optimally require longer distance restraints. Molecular recognition of the DNA minor groove by enediyne antibiotics The structural research on complexes formed between the preactivated enediyne antibiotics esperamicin A1 and calicheamicin g1I with their high affinity DNA target sites have provided a wealth of information on molecular recognition events associated with the targeting by saccharide containing antitumor agents of the DNA minor groove. Both antibiotics function by positioning their enediyne chromophores deep within the minor groove and oriented for cleavage across the groove. The exact positioning of the enediyne in the minor groove between the two complexes has both elements of commonality and differences. Specifically, for both antibiotics the C-3 pro-radical carbon center is positioned close to the H-5' (pro-S) proton on one strand of the duplex. By contrast, the C-6 pro-radical carbon center is positioned close to the H-1' proton in the esperamicin A1 complex and close to the H-4' proton in the calicheamicin g1I complex on the partner strand across the minor groove of the duplex. These structural differences in the preactivation complexes could contribute to differences in the cleavage pattern and chemistry associated with these two antibiotics. Sequence specificity of enediyne antibiotic complex formation with their DNA targets is associated with the arylsaccharide components of the drug. The enediyne in esperamicin A1 is bridged by a trisaccharide and arylmonosaccharide functionalities. The latter intercalates and the former binds in the minor groove so that the enediyne is rigidly positioned deep in the minor groove by anchoring elements on either side. This rigidity in the preactivation complex may contribute to the predominant single-strand cleavage chemistry that is observed experimentally in esperamicin A1-DNA complexes. By contrast, the enediyne in calicheamicin g1I is linked to an aryltetrasaccharide in only one direction and is likely to be anchored less rigidly in the minor groove. This may account for the facile double-strand cleavage observed experimentally in calicheamicin g1I-DNA complexes. The DNA helix appears to be reasonably regular in both preactivation complexes. The observed unwinding at the intercalation site in the esperamicin A1 complex is similar to what has been

Calicheamicin g1 I-DNA Oligomer Solution Structure

199 between two distinct alignments in the minor groove of the DNA and that this is required for sequential hydrogen abstraction from partner strands on the DNA duplex. Our own structural studies on the calicheamicin g1I DNA complex in the (C-T-C-C-T-G)·(C-A-G-G-A-G) sequence context have found no such evidence for a conformational equilibrium between two orientations of the enediyne in the minor groove (this study). The two carbon pro-radical centers are approximately equidistant from their hydrogen abstraction sites in the solution structures of our complex. Further structural studies of calicheamicin complex formation on a range of DNA binding sequences are necessary to resolve these contradictory conclusions related to the alignment of the enediyne ring in the minor groove of the helix. It should also be remembered that the calicheamicin species involved in hydrogen abstraction is the cycloaromatized diradical version of the enediyne ring rather than the parent enediyne ring system and that there is no structural information on complexes involving this highly reactive species.

observed for other intercalation complexes. The minor groove does widen locally at the enediyne binding-site but its width is similar to that of B-form DNA at the saccharide binding-site in both complexes. Segments of arylsaccharide are positioned deep within the walls of the minor groove and form hydrogen-bonds and hydrophobic interactions stabilising both complexes.

Conclusions
Our structural study of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA duplex complex to high resolution provides the data base to address two issues in the field related to recognition and cleavage of DNA by this antitumor antibiotic. It has been postulated that sequence-selective recognition in the calicheamicin g1I-DNA complex may be associated with the ability of oligopyrimidine·oligopurine tracts to distort in order to accommodate this relatively inflexible drug in the minor groove of the DNA helix (Walker et al., 1993). The emphasis of this proposal (Walker et al., 1993) is that sequence specific binding between calicheamicin g1I and its DNA target site is not due to the formation of specific intermolecular contacts but rather is primarily an induced fit effect associated with distortion of the oligopyrimidine strand and widening of the DNA minor groove on complex formation. This concept, though novel remains unproven, since Walker et al. (1993) have not quantitatively analyzed their NMR data to deduce a solution structure of the complex. Thus, they have not identified in molecular terms what is the nature of the conformational perturbation in the oligopyrimidine strand on complex formation nor have they identified the postulated change in minor groove width on complex formation. Our quantitative structural study has identified the specific intermolecular hydrophobic and hydrogen-bonding contacts in the intensity-refined solution structures that contribute to sequencespecific recognition in the calicheamicin g1I-DNA complex. It is our position that the conformational transitions in the DNA associated with calicheamicin complex formation (Krishnamurthy et al., 1994) reflect local adjustments to accommodate the drug in the DNA minor groove but is not the sole determinant in sequence specific recognition. The second issue concerns the positioning of the enediyne of the bound calicheamicin in the DNA minor groove and the alignment of the pro-radical carbon centers on the drug relative to the hydrogen abstraction sites on the DNA. Paloma et al. (1994) in their study of the calicheamicin u1I-DNA complex in the (A-T-C-C-T-A)·(T-A-G-G-A-T) sequence context concluded that the C-6 pro-radical center was close to the H-4' DNA proton abstraction site while the C-3 pro-radical center was further from the H-5' (pro-S) DNA proton abstraction site in the major conformation of the complex. This implies that the enediyne interconverts in slow exchange

Experimental Methods
Sample preparation Calicheamicin g1I was obtained from Dr George Ellestad of Wyeth-Ayerst Research, Pearl River, NY and used without further purification. The 23-mer DNA hairpin sequence (Figure 1(b)) was synthesised on a 10 mM scale on an Applied Biosystems 391 DNA synthesiser using solid phase b-cyanophosphoramidite chemistry as described (Sastry & Patel, 1993). Calicheamicin g1I in methanol-d4 was titrated into a solution of the DNA hairpin duplex (480 l260 ) in NMR buffer (0.1 M NaCl, 10 mM phosphate (pH 7.0), 0.1 mM EDTA) solution. Only one major set of imino proton resonances were observed on drug-DNA complex formation, indicating that the calicheamicin g1I bound predominantly at a single site on the DNA hairpin duplex. Some precipitation was observed during the titration of calicheamicin g1I. After lyophilization, the sample for exchangeable proton NMR spectra was prepared by dissolving the complex in 90% H2 O 10% 2H2 O buffer solution and adjusting the pH to 7.0. The sample for non-exchangeable proton spectra of the complex was prepared by lyophilizing three times with 99.6% 2H2 O and redissolving in 99.996% 2H2 O. The sample of the complex was centrifuged before transfer to the NMR tube.

NMR experiments NMR data collection and processing for the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex were undertaken in a manner similar to what has been previously described for the esperamicin A1-DNA complex (Kumar et al., 1996). A point of detail concerns the NOE buildup data set on the complex in 2H2 O buffer at 10°C which was collected at 40, 80, 120 and 160 ms mixing times with a five seconds repetition delay.

200
Input restraints Input distance and torsion restraints for the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex were derived using the same protocol used for the esperamicin A1-DNA complex described previously (Kumar et al., 1966).

Calicheamicin g1 I-DNA Oligomer Solution Structure

Acknowledgements
We thank Dr George Ellestad for providing a generous sample of calicheamicin g1I for the structural studies and to Dr Samuel Danishefsky for his continued encouragement of our structural efforts on enediyne antibioticDNA complexes. This research was supported by NIH grant CA 46778 (to D.J.P.). R.A.K. is a postdoctoral fellow of the Miriam and Benedict Wolf Cancer Research Fund.

Starting structures of the complex The initial model for the DNA duplex was generated in standard B-helical conformation. The five residue thymine loop was not included in the computations since this end of the DNA hairpin shows no NOE contacts to the drug. A starting model of calicheamicin g1I was built with QUANTA (version 3.3, Molecular Simulations Inc., Burlington, MA). Bad contacts in each molecule were independently removed by conjugate gradient energy minimization without any NMR restraints. The drug was ° placed greater than 6 A outside the minor groove of the DNA hairpin duplex in an extended conformation with its orientation relative to the DNA duplex defined by the available intermolecular restraints in the complex.

References
Aiyar, J., Hitchcock, S. A., Denhart, D., Liu, K. K., Danishefsky, S. J. & Crothers, D. M. (1994). On the DNA recognition role of the carbohydrate sector of calicheamicin: a comparision of DNA cleaving capacity of enantiomeric calicheamicinones. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Eng. 33, 855­858. Dedon, P. C., Salzberg, A. A. & Xu, J. (1993). Exclusive production of bistranded DNA damage by calicheamicin. Biochemistry, 32, 3617­3622. De Voss, J. J., Townsend, C. A., Ding, W. D., Morton, G. O., Ellestad, G. A., Zein, N., Tabor, A. B. & Schreiber, S. L. (1990). Site specific atom transfer from DNA to a bound ligand defines the geometry of a DNA-calicheamicin g1I complex. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 112, 9669­9670. Ding, W. & Ellestad, G. A. (1991). Evidence for hydrophobic interaction between calicheamicin and DNA. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 113, 6617­6620. Drak, J., Iwasawa, N., Danishefsky, S. & Crothers, D. M. (1991). The carbohydrate domain of calicheamicin g1I determines its sequence specificity for DNA cleavage. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 88, 7464­7468. Golik, J., Clardy, J., Dubay, G., Gronewold, G., Kawaguchi, H., Konishi, M., Krishnan, B., Ohkuma, H., Saitoh, K. & Doyle, T. W. (1987). Esperamicins, a novel class of potent antitumor antibiotics. 2. Structure of esperamicin X. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 109, 3461­3462. Hangeland, J. J., De Voss, J. J., Heath, J. A., Townsend, C. A., Ding, W. D., Ashcroft, J. S. & Ellestad, G. A. (1992). Specific abstraction of the 5'(S)- and 4'-deoxyribosyl hydrogen atoms from DNA by calicheamicin g1I. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 114, 9200­9202. Hawley, R. C., Kiessling, L. L. & Schreiber, S. L. (1989). Model of the interactions of calicheamicin g1I with a DNA fragment from pBR322. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 86, 1105­1109. Hinman, L. M., Hamann, P. R., Wallace, R., Menendez, A. T., Durr, F. E. & Upeslacis, J. (1993). Preparation and characterisation of monoclonal antibody conjugates of the calicheamicins: a novel and potent family of antibiotics. Cancer Res. 53, 3336­3342. Ikemoto, N., Kumar, R. A., Ling, T. T., Ellestad, G. A., Danishefsky, S. J. & Patel, D. J. (1995). CalicheamicinDNA complexes: Warhead alignment and saccharide recognition of the minor groove. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 92, 10506­10510. Krishnamurthy, G., Ding, W., O'Brien, L. & Ellestad, G. A. (1994). Circular dichroism studies of calicheamicin-DNA interaction: evidence for calicheamicin induced DNA conformational change. Tetrahedron, 50, 1341­1349. Krishnamurthy, G., Brenowitz, M. D. & Ellestad, G. A. (1995). Salt dependence of calicheamicin-DNA site-specific interactions. Biochemistry, 34, 1001­1010. Kuduvalli, P. N., Townsend, C. A. & Tullius, T. D. (1995). Cleavage by calicheamicin g1I of DNA in nu-

Distance restrained molecular dynamics The restrained molecular dynamics calculations on the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex were undertaken using the same protocols described for the esperamicin A1-DNA complex (Kumar et al., 1996).

Solvation protocol Six of the eight structures of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex obtained from distance restrained molecular dynamics simulations were placed in a water box using the protocol described previously for the espeamicin A1 DNA complex (Kumar et al., 1996).

Relaxation matrix refinement The six solvated distance refined structures of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex were subjected to relaxation matrix based NOE intensity refinement using the protocol described for the esperamicin A1-DNA complex (Kumar et al., 1996).

Structure analysis The helicoidal parameters for the DNA in the final structures were analyzed using the program CURVES (Lavery & Sklenar, 1988). Figures of all structures were prepared using Insight II (Biosym Technologies, Inc., San Diego CA).

Coordinates deposition The coordinates of the calicheamicin g1I-DNA hairpin duplex complex (accession number: not yet available) have been deposited with the Protein Data Bank, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11923, USA and are available from the authors until they have been processed and released.

Calicheamicin g1 I-DNA Oligomer Solution Structure

201
Sastry, M. & Patel, D. J. (1993). Solution structure of the mithramycin dimer-DNA complex. Biochemistry, 32, 6588­6604. Walker, S., Yang, D., Kahne, D. & Gange, D. (1991). Conformational analysis of the N-O bond in the calicheamicin oligosaccharide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 113, 4716­4717. Walker, S., Landovitz, R., Ding, W. D., Ellestad, G. A. & Kahne, D. (1992). Cleavage behaviour of calicheamicin g1I and calicheamicin T. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 89, 4608­4612. Walker, S., Murnick, J. & Kahne, D. (1993). Structural characterisation of a calicheamicin-DNA complex by NMR. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 115, 7954­7961. Walker, S., Andreotti, A. H. & Kahne, D. E. (1994). NMR characterisation of calicheamicin g1I bound to DNA. Tetrahedron, 50, 1351­1360. Yu, L., Salzberg, A. A. & Dedon, P. C. (1995). New insights into calicheamicin-DNA interactions derived from a model nucleosome system. Bioorgan. Med. Chem. 3, 729­741. Zein, N., Sinha, A. M., McGahren, W. J. & Ellestad, G. A. (1988). Calicheamicin g1I: an antitumor antibiotic that cleaves double-stranded DNA site-specifically. Science, 240, 1198­1201. Zein, N., Poncin, M., Nilakantan, R. & Ellestad, G. A. (1989a). Calicheamicin g1I and DNA: molecular recognition process responsible for sequence specificity. Science, 244, 697­702. Zein, N., McGahren, W. J., Morton, G. O., Ashcroft, J. & Ellestad, G. A. (1989b). Exclusive abstraction of nonexchangeable hydrogens from DNA by calicheamicin g1I. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 111, 6888­ 6890.

cleosome formed on the 5 S RNA gene of Xenopus borealis. Biochemistry, 34, 3899­3906. Kumar, R. A., Ikemoto, N. & Patel, D. J. (1996). Solution structure of the esperamicin A1-DNA complex. J. Mol. Biol. 265, 173­186. Langley, D. R., Doyle, T. W. & Beveridge, D. L. (1994). Probing the underlying basis for the binding specificity of calicheamicin g1I. A molecular dynamics study. Tetrahedron, 50, 1379­1396. Lavery, R. & Sklenar, H. (1988). The definition of generalized helicoidal parameters and axis of curvature for irregular nucleic acids. J. Biomol. Struct. Dynam. 6, 63­91. Lee, M. D., Dunne, T. S., Siegel, M. M., Chang, C. C., Morton, G. O. & Borders, D. B. (1987a). Calicheamicins, a novel family of antitumor antibiotics 1. Chemistry and partial structure of calicheamicin g1I. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 109, 3464­3466. Lee, M. D., Dunne, T. S., Chang, C. C., Ellestad, G. A., Siegel, M. M., Morton, G. O., McGahren, W. J. & Borders, D. B. (1987b). Calicheamicins, a novel family of antitumor antibiotics 2. Chemistry and structure of calicheamicin g1I. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 109, 3466­3468. Li, T., Zeng, Z., Estevez, V. A., Baldenius, K. U., Nicolaou, K. C. & Joyce, G. F. (1994). Carbohydrate-minor groove interactions in the binding of calicheamicin g1I to duplex DNA. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 116, 3709­3715. Li, Y., Salzberg, A. & Dedon, P. C. (1995). New insights into calicheamicin-DNA interactions derived from a model nucleosome system. Bioorgan. Med. Chem. 3, 729­741. Mah, S. C., Townsend, C. A. & Tullius, T. D. (1994). Hydroxyl radical footprinting of calicheamicin. Relationship of DNA binding to cleavage. Biochemistry, 33, 614­621. Nicolaou, K. C. & Dai, W. M. (1991). Chemistry and biology of enediyne antitumor antibiotics. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Eng. 30, 1387­1416. Nicolaou, K. C., Tsay, S. C., Suzuki, T. & Joyce, G. F. (1992). DNA-carbohydrate interactions. Specific binding of calicheamicin g1I oligosaccharide with duplex DNA. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 114, 7555­7557. Nicolaou, K. C., Smith, A. L. & Yue, E. W. (1993). Chemistry and biology of natural and designed enediynes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 90, 5881­5888. Paloma, L. G., Smith, J. A., Chazin, W. J. & Nicolaou, K. C. (1994). The interaction of calicheamicin with duplex DNA: role of the oligosaccharide domain and identification of multiple binding modes. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 116, 3697­3708. Radhakrishnan, I. & Patel, D. J. (1994). DNA triplexes: solution structures, hydration sites, energetics, interactions and function. Biochemistry, 33, 11405­11416.

Edited by P. E. Wright (Received 5 July 1996; received in revised form 4 October 1996; accepted 8 October 1996)

Supplementary material, comprising four Tables and two Figures, is available on JMB Online.

