Protein Expression and Purification 32 (2003) 246­251 www.elsevier.com/locate/yprep

Purification of Fab fragments from a monoclonal antibody papain digest by Gradiflow electrophoresis
Lynette Coleman and Stephen M. Mahler*
Bioengineering Centre, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia Received 11 June 2003, and in revised form 25 July 2003

Abstract Fab fragments isolated from papain digests of monoclonal antibodies have a wide variety of uses in analytical and in both in vivo and in vitro diagnostic applications. A novel, non-affinity method which uses the Gradiflow to purify Fab fragments from the papain digest of a mouse IgG1 anti-c-myc monoclonal antibody is described. The Gradiflow is a preparative electrophoresis instrument that uses polyacrylamide membranes of known pore size to separate proteins in solution in their native state under mild pH conditions by charge or size. The Fab and Fc fragments from the papain digestion were characterized using isoelectric focusing (IEF) and non-reducing SDS­PAGE in conjunction with IEF and Western blot. There were three Fab isoforms with pI between pH 6.5 and 7.4 while the Fc had a range of isoforms between 6.1 and 6.3. Both Fab and Fc fragments had similar Mr of 50 kDa. A charge-based purification strategy was developed to obtain a high purity Fab preparation after 10 min, confirmed by Western blot and chemiluminescence analyses. A small quantity of residual undigested IgG1 remained and was removed using a size-based separation. The efficiency of the separation despite the narrow pH range between Fab and Fc suggests that this technique may be an alternative to protein A or G affinity separation of Fc and Fab monoclonal antibody fragments from papain digests of monoclonal antibodies. Ó 2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Fab antibody fragments; Purification; Preparative electrophoresis

Many applications in protein chemistry require the Fab fragment (Fabs) of an immunoglobulin molecule rather than the whole monoclonal antibody (mab) molecule [18]. For example, their small molecular size, rapid clearance from the circulation, and low immunogenicity allow them to be used therapeutically for the specific binding and excretion of small toxic molecules [9]. They have also been used in the treatment of snake bite [13] and as a potential treatment for thrombosis and tumors [1]. In addition to therapeutic uses, Fabs can be used to aid in protein structure determination through co-crystallization. Furthermore, radiolabelled Fabs have been used extensively as in vivo diagnostic reagents; for example, Fabs have been used for imaging colorectal tumors in conjunction with CT scans [12]. Many in vitro immunologically based assay systems such as biosensors also use Fabs rather than whole antibodies. One exam* Corresponding author. Fax: +61293136710. E-mail address: s.mahler@unsw.edu.au (S.M. Mahler).

ple is the ion channel switch, whereby Fabs are conjugated to an outer membrane leaflet mobile ion channel component and selected membrane spanning lipids in an immobilized lipid bilayer. The matching ion channel component is immobilized in the inner leaflet. Addition of the analyte cross-links the Fabs in the outer membrane leaflet and prevents the lining up of ion channel components, lowering the electrical conductivity of the membrane [2]. Fabs are central to creating broad applications for the biosensor and potentially any analyte may be measured provided Fab fragments specific for analyte are available. Fabs are traditionally produced from monoclonal antibodies by enzymatic digestion using papain or pepsin [16] and can be purified from the digestion mix using a number of techniques. These include ion exchange, protein A or G affinity, antigen affinity, and gel filtration chromatographies [10]. Often a combination of these techniques may be required to purify Fabs from the digestion mix. There are a number of disadvantages

1046-5928/$ - see front matter Ó 2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.pep.2003.07.005

L. Coleman, S.M. Mahler / Protein Expression and Purification 32 (2003) 246­251

247

associated with these techniques including poor affinity of protein A and protein G for antibodies produced in hosts such as rat [10]. Incomplete separation of Fc and Fab fragments from undigested antibody, when the pI of the fragments and antibody are too close to resolve using ion-exchange chromatography, has also proved to be problematic. Immunoaffinity techniques do not separate Fabs from undigested antibody as both contain antigen binding sites; furthermore, where the affinity of the Fab for antigen is high ðKD < 10À9 Þ, separation of antigen and Fabs may be difficult. Also antigen binding techniques rely on the availability of appropriate antigen, which may be expensive if available commercially, problematic to purify from its natural source, or time consuming to produce as a recombinant protein. This study describes an alternative technique to chromatography for the purification of Fabs from papain digests in which a preparative electrophoretic instrument, the Gradiflow, is used to separate the Fab from the Fc antibody fragments and undigested mab based on their differences in pI. The Gradiflow uses electrophoretic movement of proteins in an electric field in conjunction with thin polyacrylamide membranes with defined pore sizes to separate proteins on the basis of size or charge under native conditions. To date, the Gradiflow has been used to separate a number of proteins from complex biological solutions including proteins from egg white [11], plasma, and algal extracts [6] as well as proteins from milk and a recombinant protein expressed in Dictyostelium discoideum [4]. Notably, the Gradiflow has also been used to separate monoclonal antibodies from ascitic fluid [8] as well as immunoglobulin G from sheep serum [17].

digestion buffer (250 ll), and a mixture of digestion buffer (250 ll) and mab (250 ll) was added to the papain gel. The tube was placed in a rotary incubator at 37 °C for 8 h. The digest was separated from the immobilized papain using Ultrafree MC separators (Amicon) by centrifuging at 8000 rpm for 2 min. The papain gel was washed with binding buffer (250 ll), and the digest and washing were combined and stored at 4 °C. Fragment characterization The fragments produced by papain digestion were characterized to determine their Mr and pI. The fragments were dialyzed against 20 mM disodium hydrogen phosphate (Sigma). The pI of the fragments was determined by isoelectric focusing (IEF) using the PhastSystem (Amersham Pharmacia) followed by IEF blot. The Mr of each of the Fab and Fc fragments was determined by Western blot of a non-reducing SDS­PAGE gel, probed sequentially with the anti-mouse Fc and antimouse Fab conjugates. Between probing with each conjugate, the membrane was stripped by placing it in stripping buffer (62.5 mM Tris/HCl, pH 6.8, 2% SDS, and 100 mM b-mercaptoethanol) and heating to 50 °C for 30 min. Anti-mouse Fc and anti-mouse Fab antibodies (Dako) conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (HRP) were used to probe for the Fc and Fab fragments on both Western and IEF blots, which were visualized using HRP Chemiluminescence Reagent (Amersham Pharmacia). Gradiflow technology The electrophoresis-based Gradiflow technology for the separation of macromolecules by size and/or charge has previously been described [3,4,6,11]. Briefly, the system consists of four separate compartments; two inner streams (S1 and S2) and two outer chambers. The inner streams and outer buffer chambers are separated by a polyacrylamide restriction membrane of pore size Mr 5 kDa, which allows the movement of small molecules, water, and ions between the inner streams and outer chambers. The two inner streams are separated by a polyacrylamide separation membrane cartridge [14], which vary in pore size up to Mr 1000 kDa depending on the concentration of acrylamide and cross-linker. S1 and S2 are connected to separate reservoirs of sample solution and buffer, and a two-channel peristaltic pump housed within the apparatus circulates the streams. The outer chambers house the electrodes and a centrifugal pump circulates cooled buffer through the chambers. Sample solution and buffer are loaded into either of the two reservoirs and circulated through the two streams prior to application of an electric field. Separation of proteins is achieved depending on the size and charge of the proteins in solution. A schematic of the operation of the Gradiflow is shown in Fig. 1.

Materials and methods Mouse mab and antibody fragments The 9E10 hybridoma cell line was cultured in hybridoma serum free media (Life Technologies) and the IgG1/j anti-c-myc [5] mab was purified from the culture supernatant using protein A­Sepharose Fast Flow chromatography (Amersham Pharmacia). This was followed by concentration and buffer exchange using a Vivaspin 6 ml concentrator (Vivascience) with a 10 kDa Mr cut-off. The concentration of the antibody after protein A purification and concentration using the Vivaspin was determined by ELISA to be 13 mg/ml. Antibody fragments were generated using an Immunopureâ Fab Preparation Kit (Pierce). Immobilized papain (250 ll) was equilibrated in digestion buffer (1 ml, 20 mM cysteine monohydrochloride in phosphate buffer, pH 10) for 10 min and centrifuged for 3 min at 6000 rpm. The supernatant was removed and the process was repeated. The equilibrated papain gel was resuspended in

248

L. Coleman, S.M. Mahler / Protein Expression and Purification 32 (2003) 246­251

At the completion of the separation run, the charge was reversed for approximately 5 s to desorb proteins adsorbed to the surface of the separation membrane prior to collecting the samples from both streams. To complete the run, 10 ml of MES/Histidine buffer was circulated through S1 and S2 to wash any adsorbed proteins from the separation and restriction membranes, and the wash was pooled with the S1 harvest for subsequent size-based separation. As a final polishing step, a size-based separation of the S1 harvest was conducted using a Tris/borate separation buffer, pH 8.4, and 100 kDa separation membrane for 1 h.

Results
Fig. 1. Gradiflow preparative electrophoresis; charge- and size-based protein separation.

Isoelectric point and Mr profiles of antibody fragments The IgG1 anti-c-myc mouse antibody derived from the 9E10 hybridoma cell line has a range of pI values, with the major isoforms between pI 6.2 and 6.5 (Fig. 2). Fab and Fc antibody fragments were generated by papain digestion of the IgG1/j anti-c-myc antibody preparation (13 mg/ml) in the presence of the reducing agent cysteine. Under these conditions the papain enzyme hydrolyzes the whole antibody in the hinge region to form two Fab fragments containing disulfide bonds and an Fc as shown in Fig. 3. The characteristics of the antibody fragments produced using this method were determined by IEF blot and Western blot of a non-reducing SDS­PAGE gel. Fig. 4 shows the IEF blot of the antibody digest probed sequentially with anti-Fc- and anti-Fab HRP conjugates, adjacent to a silver stained IEF gel showing the pI profile of the components in the antibody digestion mix. The IEF blot of the fragments shows three charge iso-

Experiments were performed on the BF200 Gradiflow, which has recently been superseded by the BF400 model. Typically these instruments allow for a minimum load of 8­250 ml through the streams. Disposable separation cartridges were obtained from Gradipore (Australia). As for protein purification by conventional chromatography, Gradiflow separations are scalable. Analogous to ultrafiltration, capacity is proportional to membrane surface area. Increased surface area is achieved by incorporating larger membranes within the separation cartridge, and by placing repeating sets of separation and restriction membranes in a stacked plate and frame configuration [7]. The current prototype for Gradiflow separations allows for a 250 time scale-up. Gradiflow separations A charge-based separation was used to separate the Fabs from the Fc fragments, partially digested antibody, and undigested antibody. The separation was conducted over 90 min using a separation cartridge with Mr cut-off of 1000 kDa and 20 mM MES (Sigma) with 30 mM Histidine (Calbiochem), pH 6.2, as the separation buffer. The sample was diluted 1:100 using the MES/Histidine buffer to a final volume of 10 ml prior to placement in the S1 reservoir of the Gradiflow. The dilution was required to provide enough sample volume for the Gradiflow, which requires a minimum of 7 ml to operate, and to adjust the pH of the sample prior to applying the electric current. The MES/Histidine buffer (10 ml) was placed in the S2 reservoir, and the separation run was started once the sample buffer and bulk buffer had cooled to below 10 °C. Samples (100 ll) were collected from both streams at regular intervals throughout the 90 min separation run and analyzed by non-reducing SDS­PAGE followed by Western blot.

Fig. 2. Coomassie stained IEF gel. Lane 1, IEF markers; Lane 2, 9E10 mab.

L. Coleman, S.M. Mahler / Protein Expression and Purification 32 (2003) 246­251

249

Fig. 3. Schematic representation of mab papain digestion products Fab and Fc antibody fragments.

Fig. 4. IEF blot of 9E10 mab digestion probed sequentially with antiFc probe (lanes 1 and 2) and anti-Fab probe (lanes 3 and 4); IEF markers (lane 5); and silver-stained IEF gel showing papain digestion mix (lane 6).

forms for the Fab (pI 6.7, 7.1, and 7.4) and a range of pI values for the Fc between 6.1 and 6.3, with the Fabs being the more basic of the two fragments. Multiple charge isoforms for the Fab may indicate that the light chain is glycosylated, where charge variants for the fragments are due to two glycosylation sites on the Fc and occasionally sites on the hypervariable region of the Fab. The number and type of sugars present and the degree of sialic acid capping at these glycosylation sites affect the overall charge of the antibody and lead to a range of pI values [15]. The Fc and Fab fragments in their native state have approximately the same Mr ($ 50 kDa); however, the apparent Mr estimated by SDS­PAGE for the Fc is 25 kDa, as SDS disrupts the Fc into its two constituent heavy chains (Fig. 5A). Table 1 summarizes the Mr and pI of each of the components within the papain digestion mix. Fig. 5A (lane 1) shows digestion was not complete, and some undigested antibody is present. Charge-based separation As the Mr of the native Fab and Fc fragments are both approximately 50 kDa, a charge-based strategy was

used for the separation of Fab from Fc. The separation was conducted using a Mr 1000 kDa cut-off separation membrane and a MES/Histidine buffer with a pH of 6.2, between the pI of each of the fragments. At this pH, the Fc and Fab are expected to be negatively and positively charged, respectively, and the Fc would therefore move toward the anode (S2) while the Fabs remain at the cathode (S1). A Western blot of a non-reducing SDS­ PAGE gel probed with anti-Fc was used to follow the transfer of Fc from S1 to S2 (Fig. 5A). As can be seen in Fig. 5A, lane 1, there are a number of antibody fragments of various sizes and also undigested antibody in the starting material. Papain digestions of whole antibodies result in a mixture of Fab fragments, Fc fragments, some undigested antibody, and partially digested antibody. The extra bands in Fig. 5A represent these antibody entities. The Fc moves across to S2 within the first 10 min of the separation run, with almost complete transfer occurring within this time. Undigested antibody also transfers across the membrane, albeit not as rapidly as the Fc fragment, with minimal residual undigested antibody being detected in S1 after 10 min. The same Western blot was stripped and re-probed with an antiFab polyclonal antibody preparation (Fig. 5B), and the results show the separation of Fab from Fc to be complete after 10 min. The Fab is detected in relatively small quantities in S2 after 60 min, indicating that the Fab is adsorbing to the membrane, with a small amount subsequently moving through the membrane. As the pH of the separation buffer is close to the measured pI of the Fab, Fc, and intact antibody, incremental differences in measured and actual pI of the antibody isoforms, and slight pH drift of the buffer brought about by changing ionic strengths of the buffer during the course of separation may account for the eventual movement of Fab and intact antibody across the membrane. However clearly, the transfer of Fab to S2 is retarded compared to the Fc, and harvesting of S1 after 10 min results in a high purity Fab preparation with trace amounts of partially digested and undigested antibody contaminant. Size-based separation To remove residual partially digested and undigested mab from the Fab preparation, a size-based separation was performed for 1 h with a separation membrane of Mr 100 kDa cut-off in a Tris/borate separation buffer (pH 8.4). At this pH, the Fab and residual antibody are negatively charged and would move to S2 provided their size is not restricted by the pore size of the membrane. A Western blot of a non-reduced SDS­PAGE gel (Fig. 6) shows the Fab transfers to S2, while residual partially digested/undigested antibody remains in S1 as it is restricted from transfer through the membrane.

250

L. Coleman, S.M. Mahler / Protein Expression and Purification 32 (2003) 246­251

Fig. 5. Western blot of a non-reducing SDS­PAGE gel probed with anti-Fc conjugated HRP (A), then stripped and re-probed with anti-Fab conjugated HRP (B) showing the transfer of Fc and Fab fragments across a 1000 kDa cut-off separation membrane as a function of time. Lanes 1­5 (Stream 1): 1, 0 min; 2, 10 min; 3, 30 min; 4, 60 min; and 5, 90 min. Lanes 7­10 (Stream 2): 7, 10 min; 8, 30 min; 9, 60 min; and 10, 90 min.

Table 1 9E10 mab and antibody fragment pI and Mr Fragment type 9E10 mab Fc Fab pI 6.2­6.5 6.1­6.3 6.7, 7.1, and 7.4 Mr (kDa) 150 50 50

Discussion Protein A or G may be used to separate Fab and Fc antibody fragments; however, there may be circumstances where the use of these affinity separations is not

preferred or is not feasible. For example, there is variability in the strength of binding to protein A or G of some species-specific antibodies and also with specific isotypes within species. Thus, some antibodies do not bind with requisite affinity to protein A or G. For example, rat antibodies bind weakly to protein A, while chicken antibodies exhibit weak binding to both proteins A and G. Mouse IgG1 and human IgG3 also bind only weakly to protein A. If the Fabs are to be used for in vivo diagnostics (i.e., tumor imaging), the Fab preparation must be of clinical grade. Thus the preparation must be shown to be free of leached protein A or G, and the bioprocess must be validated to show it is capable of

L. Coleman, S.M. Mahler / Protein Expression and Purification 32 (2003) 246­251

251

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8] Fig. 6. Western blot of non-reduced SDS­PAGE gel probed with anti-Fab conjugated HRP. Lane 1, undigested mab in S1; lane 2, Fab antibody fragment in S2.

[9]

removing the affinity ligand to an acceptable level. Thus, alternatives to the use of protein A or G affinity chromatography may have advantages in some instances. Combinations of conventional chromatographic techniques such as ion exchange, immunoaffinity, and gel filtration may be used with variable success; however, the Fab and Fc fragments produced from the 9E10 mab pose a challenge for separation, as the pI of the fragments are within 0.5 pH units, and the Fab and Fc fragments have approximately the same Mr . The results from the charge-based separation of the Fab and Fc by the Gradiflow show that the two fragments can be separated on the basis of charge, despite these small differences. To remove the residual partially digested and undigested antibody, a size-based separation resulted in a highly pure Fab preparation. Thus, the Gradiflow is an alternative method to conventional and affinity chromatographic techniques for the purification of antibody fragments. Furthermore, the Gradiflow is directly scalable, thus small laboratory scale separations may be scaled up if larger quantities of Fab are required. References
[1] S.A. Cohen, M. Trikha, M.A. Mascelli, Potential future clinical applications for the GPIIb/IIIa antagonist, abciximab in

[10]

[11] [12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16] [17]

[18]

thrombosis, vascular and oncological indications, Pathol. Oncol. Res. 6 (2000) 163­174. B.A. Cornell, V.L.B. Braach-Maksvytis, L.G. King, P.D.J. Osman, L. Raguse, L. Wieczorek, R.J. Pace, A biosensor that uses ion-channel switches, Nature 387 (1997) 580­582. G.L. Corthals, J. Margolis, K.L. Williams, A.A. Gooley, The role of pH and membrane porosity in preparative electrophoresis, Electrophoresis 17 (1996) 771­775. G.L. Corthals, B.M. Collins, B.C. Mabbutt, K.L. Williams, A.A. Gooley, Purification by reflux electrophoresis of whey proteins and a recombinant protein expressed in Dictyostelium discoideum, J. Chromatogr. A 773 (1997) 299­309. G.I. Evan, G.K. Lewis, G. Ramsay, J.M. Bishop, Isolation of monoclonal antibodies specific for human c-myc proto-oncogene product, Mol. Cell. Biol. 5 (1985) 3610­3616. Z.S. Horvath, G.L. Corthals, C.W. Wrigley, J. Margolis, Multifunctional apparatus for electrokinetic processing of proteins, Electrophoresis 15 (1994) 968­971. G. Li, R. Stewart, B. Conlan, A. Gilbert, P. Roeth, H. Nair, Purification of human immunoglobulin G: a new approach to plasma purification, Vox Sanguinis 82 (2002) 332­338. S. Lim, H.P. Manusu, A.A. Gooley, K.L. Williams, D.B. Rylatt, Purification of monoclonal antibodies from ascitic fluid using preparative electrophoresis, J. Chromatogr. 827 (1998) 329­ 335. M. Mage, Preparation of Fabs from IgGs of different animal species, in: H.V. Van Vunakis, J.J. Langone (Eds.), Methods in Enzymology, vol. 70, Academic Press, New York, 1980, pp. 142­ 150. M. Mage, E. Lamoyi, Preparation of Fab and F(abÕ) fragments from monoclonal antibodies, in: L.B. Schook (Ed.), Monoclonal Antibody Production Techniques and Applications, Marcel Dekker Inc, New York, 1987, pp. 79­97. J. Margolis, G. Corthals, Z.S. Horvath, Preparative reflux electrophoresis, Electrophoresis 16 (1995) 98­100. F.L. Moffatt Jr., S.A. Gulac, A.N. Sarafini, G.N. Sfakanckis, R. Dop, D.S. Robinson, D. Fransceschi, J. Boggs, A.S. Livingstone, A thousand points of light or just a dim light bulb? Radiolabeled antibodies and colorectal cancer imaging, Cancer Investigation 17 (1999) 322­334. H. Persson, Envenoming by European vipers antivenom treatment--influence on morbidity, Prezeglad Lekarski 58 (2001) 223­ 225. D.B. Rylatt, M. Napoli, D. Ogle, A. Gilbert, S. Lim, C.H. Nair, Electrophoretic transfer of proteins across polyacrylamide membranes, J. Chromatogr. 865 (1999) 145­153. P.M. Rudd, R.J. Leatherbarrow, T.W. Redemacher, R.A. Dwek, Diversification of the IgG molecule by oligosaccharides, Mol. Immunol. 28 (1991) 1369­1378. R.R. Porter, The hydrolysis of rabbit c-globulin and antibodies with crystalline papain, Biochem. J. 73 (1959) 119­126. T.M. Thomas, E.E. Shave, I.M. Bate, S.C. Gee, S. Franklin, D.B. Rylatt, Preparative electrophoresis: a general method for the purification of polyclonal antibodies, J. Chromatogr. A 944 (2002) 161­168. Y. Yamaguchi, H. Kim, K. Kato, K. Masuda, I. Shimada, Y. Arata, Proteolytic fragmentation with high specificity of mouse immunoglobulin G, J. Immunol. Methods 181 (1995) 259­267.

