J. Mol. Biol. (1998) 275, 795±809

Interaction of Monomeric and Dimeric Kinesin with Microtubules
M. Thormahlen1, A. Marx1, S. A. Muller2, Y.-H. Song1, E.-M. Mandelkow1 È È 2 1 U. Aebi and E. Mandelkow *
Max-Planck-Unit for Structural Molecular Biology Notkestraûe 85 D-22603, Hamburg, Germany
2 1

È M. E. Muller Institute for High-Resolution Electron Microscopy at the Biozentrum University of Basel Klingelbergstraûe 70 CH-4056, Basel, Switzerland

The binding stoichiometry of kinesin to microtubules was determined using several biochemical and biophysical approaches (chemical crosslinking, binding assays, scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), image reconstruction, and X-ray scattering). The results show that each tubulin dimer associates with one kinesin head, irrespective of whether kinesin occurs in a monomeric or dimeric form in solution. Moreover, these heads appear to align along the proto®lament axis generating a 16 nm periodicity of successive kinesin dimers. This is consistent with a ``tightrope'' model of movement where the ®rst head of the dimer provides a guiding signal for the following one.
# 1998 Academic Press Limited

*Corresponding author

Keywords: molecular motors; kinesin; microtubule; tubulin

Introduction
Kinesin is a motor protein that moves along microtubules in an anterograde fashion (Brady, 1995; Goodson et al., 1997). Most motors of the kinesin family occur naturally in the form of dimers, containing two motor ``heads'' which can bind to microtubules and hydrolyze ATP, linked via an a-helical coiled-coil stalk. Microtubules are built from dimers formed from a and b-tubulin. Therefore, to understand microtubule-based motility it is important to determine how the two dimeric proteins interact with one another. Speci®cally, one needs to know the stoichiometry of the interaction. There are currently two con¯icting views of the issue. The ®rst maintains that each tubulin heterodimer binds only one kinesin head; this implies that the two heads of a dimeric kinesin bind to two different tubulin dimers. In this case the stoichiometry is one kinesin head per tubulin dimer. Another view is that each tubulin dimer is capable of binding an entire kinesin dimer, with one head attached properly, and the other only indirectly and loosely bound. Here the overall stoiAbbreviations used: sK, squid kinesin; rK, rat kinesin; TEM, transmission electron microscopy; STEM, scanning transmission electron microscopy; PC-tubulin, phosphocellulose puri®ed tubulin; LB medium, LuriaBertani medium; RB, reassembly buffer; AMP-PNP, 5H -adenylylimidodiphosphate; DTT, dithiothreitol; PMSF, phenylmethylsulfonyl¯uoride.
0022±2836/98/050795±15 $25.00/0/mb971503

chiometry would be two heads per tubulin dimer. The question can be addressed experimentally by making different recombinant forms of kinesin which occur either in a monomeric or dimeric form, and observing their interaction with microtubules. The motor domain itself contains about 340 residues and exists as a monomer in solution; its X-ray structure has been determined (Kull et al., 1996; Sack et al., 1997). The tendency to dimerize increases with increasing length of the stalk, and kinesin constructs of 380 or more residues are effectively dimeric (Jiang et al., 1997). For monomeric kinesins there is general agreement that the stoichiometry is one head per tubulin dimer. This stoichiometry is consistent with the following observations: (1) microtubules decorated with kinesin exhibit an axial periodicity of 8 nm, the same as that of the tubulin dimer (Song & Mandelkow, 1993; Harrison et al., 1993); (2) chemical crosslinking results predominantly in a complex of the kinesin head with b-tubulin (Song & Mandelkow, 1993; Kikkawa et al., 1995), with only a minor contribution from a-tubulin (Walker, 1995; Tucker & Goldstein, 1997); (3) the step size of kinesin moving along microtubules is around 8 nm, equivalent to a tubulin dimer (Svoboda et al., 1993; Inoue et al., 1997); (4) image reconstructions of iceembedded or negatively stained microtubules decorated with monomeric kinesin reveal one head per tubulin dimer (Hoenger et al., 1995; Kikkawa et al., 1995; Hirose et al., 1995b).
# 1998 Academic Press Limited

796 In these studies, dimeric kinesin constructs behaved similarly to monomeric ones in most respects, supporting the notion that each head of a kinesin dimer could interact with a different tubulin dimer. However, for dimeric kinesins there are also arguments favoring a stoichiometry of two kinesin heads per tubulin dimer, based on kinetic experiments, image reconstructions, and binding studies. For example, nucleotide exchange experiments have shown two heads of a kinesin dimer to react at different rates, arguing for a half-site reactivity or ``alternating head catalysis'' (Hackney, 1994; Gilbert et al., 1998; Ma & Taylor, 1997). In contrast, monomeric kinesin exchanges ATP at a uniform rate. The data were interpreted in terms of a model where each kinesin dimer associated with one tubulin dimer, with one head ®rmly bound (and thereby releasing ADP), and the other head largely unbound (exchanging ADP slowly). Secondly, image reconstructions of microtubules decorated with dimeric kinesin have revealed two unequal regions of density per tubulin dimer (Arnal et al., 1996; Hirose et al., 1996; for recent reviews see Amos & Hirose, 1997; Wade & Hyman, 1997). The larger one was considered equivalent to the monomeric kinesin head, the smaller one was interpreted as the second head, loosely bound and therefore partly disordered. Finally, binding studies of kinesin co-pelleting with microtubules have been interpreted in terms of a stoichiometry of two kinesin heads per tubulin dimer (Huang et al., 1994; Lockhart et al., 1995). Each of the methods used to date has its strengths and weaknesses and depends on interpretations. Our own earlier results suggested that kinesin monomers and dimers behaved quite similarly with respect to tubulin and microtubules, as if each head carried an unconstrained interaction site. Since the issue is crucial to models of microtubule-dependent motility, we have now attempted to clarify it systematically by using several independent methods and by comparing a set of kinesin constructs, ranging from 338 residues (monomeric) to 498 residues (dimeric). In all cases chemical crosslinking with EDC generated complexes mainly with b-tubulin rather than a-tubulin. Binding assays yielded a stoichiometry of approximately one kinesin head per tubulin dimer, both in the presence of ADP and AMP-PNP (a non-hydrolyzable ATP analog). This stoichiometry was also obtained on direct mass determination by scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). The image reconstructions of microtubule walls decorated with these constructs were consistent with one binding site per tubulin dimer. X-ray scattering showed that the effective diameter of microtubules increased by about 10% upon kinesin binding, consistent with the mass of one head per tubulin dimer attached to the outside. In short, under all experimental conditions our results indicate a

Interaction of Kinesin with Microtubules

stoichiometry of one kinesin head per tubulin dimer.

Results
Expression of kinesin constructs We have generated several constructs of squid and of rat kinesin heavy chain, one of them (sK338) containing only the minimal motor domain, the others containing in addition successively larger portions of the adjacent a-helical coiled-coil regions: rK354, rK379, sK395, sK411, and sK498 (Figure 1). The squid kinesin constructs sK338 and sK395, and the two rat kinesin constructs could be easily recovered as soluble protein from Escherichia coli after expression in the bacteriophage T7-system (Studier et al., 1990), whereas sK411 and sK498 were insoluble when expressed under the same conditions. Since solubility clearly seemed to correlate with increasing lengths of amphiphatic sequence forming the coiled-coil of the stalk, we searched for a means to suppress hydrophobic interactions which might cause aggregation during protein biosynthesis. As it has recently become clear that many eukaryotic proteins, including tubulin and actin use cellular chaperones during biosynthesis (Lewis et al., 1996), we reasoned that expression of kinesin in the presence of elevated concentrations of E. coli chaperonin GroEL/GroES might decrease non-speci®c interactions of kinesin heavy chains and favor productive protein folding pathways. In fact, using a bacterial system in which GroEL/GroES was over-

Figure 1. Diagram showing the domain structure of the kinesin heavy chain (khc), a schematic representation of the khc dimer and of the constructs that were used in this study after expression in E. coli. Constructs that had 379 residues or more were dimeric in solution.

Interaction of Kinesin with Microtubules

797

expressed to a level of 20% to 30% of total E. coli protein even the kinesin heavy-chain fragment containing 498 amino acid residues could be puri®ed in soluble form in milligram amounts. Overproduction of E. coli GroEL/GroES has recently been used to increase the yield of recombinantly expressed protein (e.g. Amrein et al., 1995; Yasukawa, 1995). Here we show that the method can also be employed for the expression of coiledcoil proteins. These recombinant kinesin fragments could then be used to investigate the interaction between kinesin monomers (sK338, rK354) or kinesin dimers (rK379, sK395, sK498) and microtubules. Chemical crosslinking We used chemical crosslinking to ascertain which of the tubulin monomers, a or b-tubulin, binds to the kinesin head. We have shown previously that construct sK395 can be chemically crosslinked to b-tubulin with EDC, and that it binds with an 8 nm periodicity to microtubules (Song & Mandelkow, 1993). This ®nding was later con®rmed in a similar experiment using a 340 amino acid residue fragment of the motor domain of mouse kinesin (Kikkawa et al., 1994). However, chemical crosslinking depends on the vicinity of certain reactive groups on the proteins and on the reagent used. We therefore wanted to con®rm the results using different kinesin constructs, i.e. dimeric, in combination with different chemical crosslinkers. Relatively high concentrations of EDC were used in both previous studies (2 and 5 mM, respectively), resulting in a possible loss of crosslinking speci®city, and we asked whether lower concentrations of the crosslinking reagent would modify the results. Moreover, we were interested whether in the presence of an extended portion of the stalk, additional crosslinking products could be obtained and whether other crosslinkers with different spacer lengths and speci®cities would render different crosslinking products. However, none of the ®ve additional reagents MBS, SPDP, DSP, EGS, and PDM (see Materials and Methods for details) could produce speci®c covalent bonds between tubulin and kinesin molecules. At low concentrations (comparable to those that worked with EDC) there was little reaction, while higher concentrations generated unspeci®c products which were mainly complexes between tubulin subunits. Reproducible crosslinks between kinesin and tubulin were only obtained with EDC (Figure 2). With each construct the crosslinking occurred mainly with b-tubulin (con®rming the data of Song & Mandelkow, 1993), although there was also a low reactivity with a-tubulin (<10%, as con®rmed by densitometry of the blots; see also Walker, 1995, and Tucker & Goldstein, 1997). This indicates that the reactive groups are all within the minimal motor domain of kinesin (sK338), and that the stalk up to residue 498 neither contributes to

Figure 2. Crosslinking by EDC of microtubules saturated with monomeric and dimeric kinesin constructs. (a) PAGE. The ®rst three lanes show the reaction mixture after 30 minutes of crosslinking. The other three lanes show the unreacted mixture. The disappearance of the original bands and the appearance of higher mass species in the ®rst three lanes indicates that kinesin can be crosslinked by EDC with high ef®ciency. (b) Blot identifying the reaction products. Kinesin can be found in all distinct bands (left panel), suggesting that few crosslinked species are generated. The same bands as with kinesin are stained with the b-tubulin antibody (middle panel), the a-tubulin antibody reacts only weakly with these bands (right panel).

the contacts with tubulin (as seen by crosslinking), nor alters the binding site speci®city of the motor domain. Altogether, the crosslinking data are compatible with the view that there is a preferential interaction between kinesin heads and b-tubulin. Weak crosslinking with the adjacent a-tubulin is in agreement with results obtained from image reconstruction (see below), showing that the area of contact between the bound kinesin head and the adjacent a-tubulin is small.

798 Binding of kinesin to microtubules Our next question concerned the stoichiometry of kinesin's binding to microtubules. While earlier microtubule binding and electron microscopy data support one kinesin head per tubulin dimer (Song & Mandelkow, 1993; Harrison et al., 1993) more recent image reconstructions have suggested that a kinesin dimer uses only one of its heads to bind to the microtubule surface, while the other remains in an unemployed state piggy-backing on the ®rst one (Hirose et al., 1996; Lockhart et al., 1995), which would lead to a stoichiometry of one kinesin dimer per tubulin dimer. To clarify these matters we quantitatively assessed the binding of kinesin constructs to microtubules, ®rstly, by analyzing kinesin-microtubule pellets by gel densitometry and, secondly, by direct mass measurement using STEM. The densitometric data were obtained with monomeric (rK354) as well as with dimeric (sK395, sK498) kinesins, both in the presence of AMP-PNP and in the presence of ADP. Representative

Interaction of Kinesin with Microtubules

examples of the binding assays are illustrated in Figure 3. SDS-PAGE of a binding experiment with sK498 (Figure 3(a)) shows the pellets of the kinesin-tubulin complex at 2 mM tubulin dimer and different kinesin concentrations in the presence of AMP-PNP and ADP, respectively. The stoichiometry was the same for both nucleotides. The graphs showing the ®tted binding isotherms for both the two dimeric kinesins (Figure 3(b) and (c)) and the monomeric rK354 (Figure 3(d)) indicate that in all cases saturation of the 2 mM tubulin (a,b) dimers was reached at a concentration slightly above 2 mM kinesin heads. Similar results were obtained with sK498/ADP (n  1.2), sK395/ ADP (n  0.7), and rK354/AMP-PNP (n  1.6). In other words, each kinesin dimer bound to two separate b-tubulins. This result was con®rmed by the STEM measurements described below. Mass measurement by STEM is a well established technique (Engel, 1978) applicable to particulate, ®lamentous and layered biological È samples (Muller et al., 1992). The results from mass-per-area (MPA) measurements on microtu-

Figure 3. Determination of the kinesin-microtubule binding stoichiometry. (a) SDS-containing gel showing an experiment with sK498 in the presence of AMP-PNP (left) and with ADP (right). Concentrations are 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8 or 12 mM of kinesin heads. Tubulin heterodimers are 2 mM. Binding is similar with AMP-PNP and with ADP. As seen from the gel, quantitative retention of the pellet can be variable. However, this does not affect the ratio of kinesin to tubulin. To correct for loss of pellet, all calculations were performed with values adjusted to the nominal tubulin concentration. This also adjusted the kinesin concentration. As a control the sum of kinesin found in the pellet and in the supernatant, respectively, was compared to the kinesin added to the experiment. These values were generally found to be in good correlation. (b) to (d) Graphs showing the results of binding experiments with (b) sK498, (c) sK395, (d) rK354. For both dimeric and monomeric constructs the binding curves ®t a stoichiometry of 1 mM kinesin heads rather than 2 mM kinesin heads per mM tubulin dimer, regardless of whether AMP-PNP or ADP was used. Note that 1 mM kinesin heads correspond to 0.5 mM kinesin dimer. (n  kinesin heads per tubulin dimer).

Interaction of Kinesin with Microtubules Table 1. Mass data for decorated and undecorated microtubules and sheets determined by STEM measurements
Single layer mass per 8 nm Â 5 nm (kDa) 126 123 130 164 164 191 185 179 164 Increasea in mass per 8 nm Â 5 nm (kDa)

799

Sample Sheet, undecorated Tubule, undecorated Tubule, undecorated rK354/Sheet rK354/Tubule sK395/Sheet sK395/Tubule sK498/Sheet sK498/Tubule

Layers 1 2 2 1 2 1 2 1 2

Zero dose MPA (ÆSD) (kDa/nm2) 3.14(Æ0.29) 6.13(Æ0.41) 6.52(Æ0.48) 4.11(Æ0.59) 8.22(Æ0.52) 4.78(Æ0.43) 9.23(Æ0.53) 4.48(Æ0.43) 8.22(Æ0.66)

n 27 853 746 44 1289 928 823 220 1156

Mass of 1 kinesin head (kDa)

Heads per tubulin dimer

38 38 65 59 53 40

38.0 38.0 44.5 44.5 57.0 57.0

1.0 1.0 1.5 1.3 0.9 0.7

Mass-per-area (MPA) values for microtubules (two layers) are about twice as high as for sheets (one layer), indicating a high degree of ¯attening during the freeze-drying procedure. As the spatial resolution of the STEM image did not allow us to see single tubulin dimers, a dimer lattice spacing of 8 nm Â 5 nm was used to calculate masses for decorated and undecorated tubulin. Note that the È mass observed for tubulin is about 25% larger than expected, probably due to glutaraldehyde ®xation prior to freeze-drying (Muller et al., 1992). a Calculated relative to the average undecorated sample result, 126 kDa per 8 nm Â 5 nm.

bules and their opened up walls (sheets), after decoration with rK354, sK395, or sK498 in the presence of AMP-PNP are shown in Table 1. The experimental values were corrected for beam È induced loss, which was directly measured (Muller et al., 1992). The correction was minimal, ranging from 1.9% to 2.2% for the different experiments, depending on the recording dose used. Measurement of the MPA allows the number of kinesin heads bound on one tubulin dimer to be directly calculated. As noted in the Table, microtubules were treated as two-layered sheets. For rK354 and sK498 a stoichiometry of one kinesin head is clearly indicated (Table 1). The somewhat higher values measured for sK395 may simply be explained by unspeci®c association of this construct. Image reconstruction When incubating microtubules or tubulin sheets with stoichiometric concentrations of the constructs one generates a new axial periodicity of 8 nm, equivalent to the spacing of the tubulin dimers. The additional kinesin density forms bright striations across the particles which are best seen in the opened-up microtubule walls (Figure 4). The inclination is $10 , the same as that of the 3-start helix of microtubules, indicating that the underlying microtubule wall has the asymmetric B-lattice arrangement (for details see Song & Mandelkow, 1995). Since kinesin binds on microtubules in a highly regular fashion the electron images can be analyzed by Fourier methods. The microtubule sheets are good objects for this approach, as they represent a single layer of the microtubule wall, are ¯at and stain more evenly than microtubules (Erickson, 1974). Figure 4 shows examples of microtubules and sheets decorated with constructs sK338, sK395, sK411 and sK498 in the presence of AMP-PNP, and their reconstructions.

In the reconstructions (Figure 4) we show four proto®laments, each about three tubulin dimers long, and in standard orientation (microtubule viewed from the outside, plus end up). Without kinesin decoration the tubulin subunits (black contour lines) are rather globular, and the distinction between a and b-tubulin is absent or very weak. This map served as a reference for the decoration with kinesin. After decoration the added protein (the kinesin head) is most prominently seen as additional density extending from every other subunit (shaded). The difference maps indicate the position of the kinesin head on the proto®lament. The constructs behave similarly in several respects: Kinesin is primarily in contact with one type of tubulin subunit (presumably b-tubulin), but also to some extent touches the neighboring one (a-tubulin). The apparent center of the kinesin constructs is not at the ridge of a proto®lament but shifted midway to the groove between two proto®laments. The rough shape of the kinesin constructs in negative stain agrees fairly well with those obtained by Hoenger & Milligan (1997) and by cryo-EM (Amos & Hirose, 1997). However, the detailed shape of the area representing the kinesin depends on scaling and cutoff. The cutoff was adjusted so that the apparent size of the kinesin constructs corresponded roughly to their masses, consistent with the stoichiometry of one kinesin head per tubulin dimer. In agreement with the polarity of microtubules (see below), the position of the kinesin heads (mostly over b-tubulin) implies that the outermost level of subunits at the plus end is dominated by the b-tubulin-kinesin complexes (bright striations, see arrowheads in Figure 4(a) and (b)) while the outermost level at the minus end contains undecorated a-tubulin subunits (darker striations). This is consistent with the end labeling of microtubules showing that b-tubulin-GTP is at the plus end

800

Interaction of Kinesin with Microtubules

Figure 4. Tubulin sheets decorated with kinesin heads in the presence of AMP-PNP: (a) sK338, (b) sK395, (c) sK411, and (d) sK498, together with reconstructed two-dimensional images. The mass difference of decorated and undecorated tubulin sheets was calculated and overlaid on a contour plot of an undecorated sheet to show the position of the kinesin heads on the microtubule lattice (black contour lines). Kinesin decorates every other tubulin subunit, thereby emphasizing the 8 nm periodicity. The apparent center of mass of the kinesin head (shaded) is not on the ridge of the proto®lament, but slightly displaced to the left side. The standard orientation is chosen such that the plus ends are up, the minus ends are down on the page. Note the brighter striations at the plus ends, corresponding to b-tubulin decorated with kinesin (arrowheads in (a), (b) and (c)). Scale bars represent 50 nm.

(Mitchison, 1993) and that a-tubulin antibodies decorate the minus end (Fan et al., 1996). Pairing of tubulin-kinesin complexes The predominant axial periodicity induced by labeling microtubules with kinesin is 8 nm, the tubulin dimer repeat. However, in certain cases we have observed higher periodicities of 16 nm (Figure 5(a) and (b)). This feature occurs only with the dimeric constructs and becomes more pronounced with increasing construct size (e.g. 30% of all particles for sK498). An example of the 16 nm periodicity is shown in Figure 5(a). Compared to the micrographs shown in Figure 4, we observe that the label on b-tubulin is not uniform. Seen from the free minus end of the sheet, there is a pronounced dark band of stain after every second row of b-tubulin (the one oriented towards the plus end of the sheet), which generates a 16 nm periodicity. This is consistent with a difference in the appearance of the a-tubulin, which can be shown by scan-

ning along the proto®lament axis. The a-tubulin situated in the center of the 16 nm unit (aH in Figure 5(a)) is generally slightly larger in mass than the one positioned towards the minus end. The 16 nm periodicity gives rise to a prominent signal in the diffraction pattern (Figure 5(b)). As sK498 possesses a stalk containing about 300 residues (150 from each monomer), the additional mass on a-tubulin is likely to identify the location of the kinesin stalk. The fact that periodicity doubling occurs along the proto®lament and not across proto®laments indicates that the kinesin heads are paired in an axial direction. This is consistent with ``handover-hand'' or ``tightrope'' models of motility (see Discussion). Polarity and sidedness of tubulin dimers and protofilaments Owing to the globular shape of tubulin it is usually impossible to distinguish the polarity and sidedness of tubulin proto®laments in negative

Interaction of Kinesin with Microtubules

801

Figure 5. (a) Example of a 16 nm pairing within a sheet decorated with sK498. The plus end is oriented towards the top. The pairing is clearly visible from the image and can also be shown by scanning along the proto®lament axis. In addition to elevated protein densities on every second tubulin subunit (b-tubulin, 8 nm spacing), above every second b-tubulin there is a pronounced gap at 16 nm intervals. In this picture the a-tubulin next to the gap appears slightly lower in density than the a-tubulin in the center of a 16 nm block. The minus end of the sheet consists of an undecorated a-tubulin (see arrowhead). This implies that the a-tubulin which is closest to the plus end would be in the center of a 16 nm block, as shown in Figure 9: the scale bar represents 50 nm. (b) Diffraction pattern of the sheet shown in (a).

stain. With kinesin decoration the polarity becomes visible because kinesin labels only every other tubulin monomer, which was identi®ed as b-tubulin (Song & Mandelkow, 1993; Kikkawa et al. 1994). Thus, this subunit appears brighter than the other, a-tubulin. Song & Mandelkow (1995) have shown that kinesin can be used as a marker to differentiate the tubulin subunits on the free ends of sheets polymerized onto ¯agellar axonemes. From this analysis it was concluded that the plus end terminated with a crown of a-tubulin subunits. However, subsequent studies by other groups (Hirose et al., 1995a; Hoenger & Milligan, 1996) showed the opposite result. Consequently, we have reinvestigated this issue using axonemes from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii which, in contrast to sea urchin axonemes, show an additional intrinsic polarity by fraying out at their plus end (Murray, 1991). These axonemes were used as seeds for the nucleation of microtubules and sheets which were then labeled by sK395. The results of these decoration experiments agree with those of Hirose et al. (1995a) and Hoenger & Milligan (1996) and can be seen in Figure 6. The plus end of the axoneme seen in Figure 6(a) is distinctly identi®ed by its frayed appearance. The sheet within the outlined area (Figure 6(a) inset) is shown in Figure 6(b) at higher magni®cation and its reconstructed image Figure 6(c) shows that after orienting it with the plus end pointing to the top of the page the kinesin head protrudes to the left of the proto®lament. The minus end visible in this specimen terminates with an undecorated a-tubulin indicated by the arrow (Figure 6(a) inset, (b)). The same result can be obtained with rK354 decorated sheets nucleated

from centrosomes (Figure 6(d)). The centrosome is at the minus end of a microtubule with the plus end pointing away from it. The outlined area in Figure 6(d) contains the sheet shown at higher magni®cation in Figure 6(e). As described above, image reconstruction reveals that kinesin protrudes to the left of a proto®lament when the plus end points towards the top (Figure 6(f)), i.e. the left edge of a sheet is rough, the right edge is smooth when seen in standard orientation. This sidedness correlates with the axial polarity of the proto®laments mentioned above. The discrepancy between our earlier conclusions (Song & Mandelkow, 1995) and the current consensus opinion can be explained by the effects of dynamic instability of microtubules (see Discussion). X-ray scattering of microtubules decorated with kinesin The small angle scattering patterns obtained from sK395-decorated and undecorated microtubules are shown in Figure 7 (curves a and b) together with the results of model calculations (curves aH , bH and bHH ). The main maximum around 0.05 nmÀ1 is typical for undecorated microtubules and corresponds to the ®rst side maximum of the J0-term in the helical diffraction pattern of microtubules. Its position depends on the mean diameter of the microtubules. The peak shift from 0.052 nmÀ1 for plain microtubules (curve a) to 0.0475 nmÀ1 for decorated microtubules (curve b) indicates an increase in the mean diameter by about 10%. The second maximum B in the scattering of undecorated microtubules is reduced upon decoration with kinesin, consistent with the

802

Interaction of Kinesin with Microtubules

Figure 6. Determination of structural polarity within microtubules. (a) Axonemes from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii were elongated in vitro with puri®ed tubulin from porcine brain and decorated with sK395. The plus end of the axoneme is frayed and can thus be easily identi®ed. The scale bar represents 2 mm. (b) Highlighted area from (a) at higher magni®cation showing a sheet oriented with its plus end towards the top of the page. Polarity can be determined directly from the electron micrograph by looking at the minus end of the sheet which is formed by a-tubulin (see arrowhead), and also the distribution of the stain, which generates a typical banding pattern of (from plus to minus) bright-medium-dark. The scale bar represents 50 nm. (c) Image reconstruction of the sheet shown in (b). The kinesin (shaded) is shown on the proto®lament (contours) as in Figure 4. Note that it protrudes to the left when the plus end is at the top. Its shape differs slightly from that in Figure 4(b), most likely due to the fact that Figure 4(b) shows an average of several sheets. (d) Determination of structural polarity within microtubules polymerized on centrosomes, decorated with rK354. A microtubule opening up to a sheet is emerging from the centrosome where it is nucleated. The end pointing away from the centrosome is the plus end. The scale bar represents 200 nm. (e) Outlined sheet from (d) shown at higher magni®cation. The scale bar represents 50 nm. (f) Image reconstruction of the sheet from (d). The kinesin (shaded) is shown on the proto®lament (contours).

increase in wall thickness. The shallow maximum at $0.14 nmÀ1 (C) is also reduced and a new feature appears at about 0.125 nmÀ1 as a consequence of the 8 nm axial periodicity of kinesin decoration. Theoretical scattering curves for undecorated microtubules were calculated by modeling them as hollow cylinders of constant electron density. Curve aH in Figure 7 was obtained by assuming an

inner radius of 9.5 nm and an outer radius of 14 nm. With these parameters, the calculated scattering curve agrees well with the observed scattering of undecorated microtubules (curve a). Series of scattering curves of decorated microtubules were calculated for stoichiometries of one kinesin monomer (curve bH ) or one kinesin dimer (curve bHH ) per tubulin dimer, as described in Materials

Interaction of Kinesin with Microtubules

803 acts with tubulin proto®laments. We have shown that kinesin could be crosslinked mainly to b-tubulin and that it bound with a stoichiometry of one kinesin head per tubulin dimer (assayed by microtubule pelletting assays, STEM, image reconstruction, and X-ray scattering), irrespective of whether the kinesin construct was monomeric or dimeric in solution. How do these results relate to con¯icting models in the literature? We believe that the apparent half site reactivity of nucleotide exchange (Hackney, 1994; Gilbert et al., 1998; Ma & Taylor, 1997) does not refer directly to the question of stoichiometry. The fact that the two heads of a kinesin molecule exchange nucleotide at different rates has been cast into a model of one head bound, one free (equivalent to a stoichiometry of two kinesin heads per tubulin dimer), but this is a convenient picture rather than a rigorous interpretation, since two kinesin heads could react differently for a variety of reasons. A more direct discrepancy exists between our binding studies and those by Huang et al. (1994), who formally used a similar approach. We note that the authors' interpretation of a stoichiometry of one kinesin dimer per tubulin dimer is entirely dependent upon the ®t of the supernatant fraction concentrations to a predicted straight line. Yet, the distribution of the data points indicates that a hyperbolical ®t might be more appropriate. In addition, in our opinion the pellet fractions should be considered more reliable than the supernatant fractions, since they show the stoichiometry of the two proteins directly. Therefore, we consider the data shown by Huang et al. (1994) to be more compatible with a stoichiometry of one kinesin head per tubulin dimer. It is possible that different kinesin-like motors bind to microtubules in different ways, depending on nucleotide conditions. This is suggested by the different appearances of kinesin and ncd dimers in image reconstructions (Hirose et al., 1996; Arnal et al., 1996). Other published data support this notion. Recent results by Crevel et al. (1996) show that although ncd seems to bind with only one of its heads, the behavior of kinesin is much more complex and that at least under certain conditions two tubulin dimers are required to bind one kinesin dimer. Furthermore, due to the negative charge of the microtubule surface, unspeci®c protein binding can occur and rigorous washing of decorated microtubules (as with EM preparations) might be needed. Saturation beyond a level of one head per tubulin was found by Huang & Hackney (1994) with their monomeric construct DKH340. The stoichiometry under saturating conditions has implications for the interpretation of image reconstruction data (see below). But in any case, image reconstructions will only reveal a static picture of kinesin's mechanochemistry. Both a singleheaded or a double-headed interaction of kinesin with its track might occur during some part of the motor's mechanochemical cycle. In order to move, kinesin must at least transiently dissociate one

Figure 7. Solution small angle scattering (I Á s) of decorated and undecorated microtubules versus Bragg spacing, s (s  2 sin(y)/l). a, aH : plain microtubules, b, bH ,bHH : decorated microtubules; dotted lines (a, b) represent experimental results corrected for background scattering, continuous lines (aH , bH , bHH ) are calculated scattering curves. A, B, C: ®rst three subsidiary maxima of the J0 Bessel term. The small peak near 0.125 nmÀ1 (1/8 nm) is a consequence of the $8 nm axial repeat assumed for microtubules. It is visible in decorated microtubules only, since the differences between a and b-tubulin are too small to be detected by small angle scattering without contrast enhancement. The model structures are: aH , hollow cylinder of inner and outer radius ri  9.5 nm and ra  14.0 nm. bH and bHH , hollow cylinder as in aH with cylindrical segments (ri 14.0 nm) added to the outer surface in order to model kinesin monomers (bH ) or dimers (bHH ). The curves were calculated with an assumed axial repeat of 8 nm and with the positions of the kinesin segments corresponding to the B-lattice type. The axial dimension of the kinesin segments is 4 nm, which gives the best overall agreement with the observed data. Changing the tubulin lattice type or the axial dimension of the kinesin segments at constant molecular volume has little effect on the main maximum A.

and Methods, with varying axial and radial dimensions of the kinesin blocks. The curves shown in Figure 7, calculated with an axial dimension of 4 nm, represent the best results in terms of overall similarity with the observed data. The effect of increasing wall thickness, as measured by the position of the ®rst maximum (A in Figure 7) and by the relative intensities of the ®rst and second maximum (A and B) is best reproduced by the assumption of one kinesin monomer per tubulin dimer. This result is independent of the axial or azimuthal position of kinesin and also of the tubulin lattice (A or B-lattice).

Discussion
Kinesin-microtubule binding and stoichiometry We have used several bacterially expressed monomeric or dimeric kinesin heavy-chain constructs to address questions on how kinesin inter-

804 head (or both) from the microtubule. Our own data argue against a model where a second unbound head sits on top of a bound one. In contrast, they indicate that a stable interaction of both heads with separate tubulin dimers occurs. This interaction might explain why dimeric kinesin molecules are able to keep track along a proto®lament while monomers are not (Berliner et al., 1995).

Interaction of Kinesin with Microtubules

Decoration of microtubule walls with kinesin Even though there is no simple correlation regarding the morphology, on comparing the reconstructions obtained for the different constructs, the overriding impression is their similarity (Figure 4). In all cases, decoration with kinesin generates the new periodicity of 8 nm, corresponding to the spacing of tubulin dimers, which is very faint or absent in undecorated microtubules. Kinesin heads have a somewhat elongated shape (their detailed appearance depends on the density cutoff chosen for the representation), their centers of mass in the two-dimensional projection are displaced somewhat to the left and up with respect to the main underlying tubulin subunit. This assignment is based on our standard orientation of microtubules, i.e. viewed from the outside (so that the shallow 3-start helix of microtubule subunits runs to the left and up), and with the fast-growing (plus) end up (for a discussion of polarity see below). The 8 nm periodicity provided the initial strong indication that one head of kinesin is bound per tubulin dimer (Song & Mandelkow, 1993). In addition, the disposition of the kinesin mass along the 3-start helix showed that the underlying tubulin was arranged in a ``B-lattice'' where adjacent proto®laments are shifted axially by about 0.9 nm. We have now shown that increasing the size of the kinesin head decorating the tubulin lattice also increased its apparent mass, but it did not shift its center of mass signi®cantly. In particular, dimeric kinesin constructs showed a greater density, due to their increased chain length. However, there was no evidence of a second head lying over a tubulin dimer. The observed changes in the contours in Figure 4(a) to (d) are partly due to changes in construct mass, and partly to a non-linear increase in stain accumulation with construct size. In other words, monomeric and dimeric constructs appear very similar in the image reconstructions if one disregards the increase in molecular mass. We conclude that the dimeric constructs have their two heads bound to two different tubulin dimers, consistent with the stoichiometry of one kinesin per tubulin dimer. The similarity of appearance of the different constructs in Figure 4 could mean that the two heads of a kinesin dimer come apart when interacting with the tubulin lattice as suggested by Amos & Hirose (1997). This possibility must be considered

in light of our recent X-ray structure analysis of the kinesin dimer showing a disposition of the two heads that is not compatible with the tubulin lattice (Kozielski et al., 1997b) and with the ®nding that the N-terminal half of the neck might be designed to allow uncoiling during movement (Tripet et al., 1997; Morii et al., 1997). If each head of a kinesin dimer bound to a different tubulin dimer one could envisage different arrangements (Figure 8(a) side-by-side on adjacent proto®laments, (b) on top of one another on a single proto®lament, or (c) diagonally across two adjacent proto®laments). The pairing of heads should, in principle, give rise to higher order periodicities. In most diffraction patterns this is not visible, probably because the mass of the non-equivalent part (the neck helix) is only a small fraction of the dimer. However, for all dimeric constructs and especially for sK498 there is a fraction of particles which show a new axial periodicity of 16 nm along the proto®laments. This indicates that the monomers of a dimer are paired in an axial direction, consistent with the above model (Figure 8(b) or (c)). For the 16 nm periodicity to become visible the dimers have to be arranged in a highly regular way, lined up along the 3-start helix. This could be explained by a two-dimensional crystallization of kinesin heads and would account for the fact that the 16 nm repeat is not observed in all particles because the growth of two-dimensional kinesin crystals on the surface of microtubules would strongly depend on small variations in the conditions of the preparation.

Figure 8. Model showing three possible pairing modes of the heads of dimeric kinesin on a microtubule surface. Only models (b) and possibly (c) are compatible with the observed 16 nm axial periodicity.

Interaction of Kinesin with Microtubules

805 which we measure, but are in con¯ict with threedimensional reconstructions (Arnal et al, 1996; Hirose et al., 1996). In these, the difference in mass distribution between microtubules decorated with monomeric and dimeric kinesin is interpreted as a second unbound head, which is, however, consistently much smaller than the bound head. Interestingly, the size of this presumed unbound head is smaller with a shorter dimeric construct than with a longer one (Amos & Hirose, 1997). This can be explained if one assumes that the size difference is due to different lengths of the stalk, which contributes to the overall image. Amos & Hirose (1997) proposed that the differences in the image reconstructions might reveal an important structural difference between kinesin and ncd. Alternatively, this difference might be caused by a different binding mechanism of the two dimeric motors. While the motors appear to bind similarly in their monomeric form, there seem to be differences in the stoichiometry at saturation as suggested by Crevel et al. (1996). In this respect it is worth noting, that ncd does not possess the neck sequence which is typical of kinesin from different sources and which has been postulated to allow unwinding of the coiled-coil (Tripet et al., 1997; Morii et al., 1997). Thus, ncd heads might not be physically able to span the distance between two b-tubulin subunits. A ®nal point concerns the choice of polarity. As noted in a previous study (Song & Mandelkow, 1995), the different growth rates of microtubules seeded from axonemes can be combined with the decoration by kinesin to determine the polarity of the tubulin dimer. The microtubules projecting from the axoneme are long at one end and shorter at the other which is usually equated to fast and slow growth, or plus and minus ends (Binder et al., 1975; Bergen & Borisy, 1980). From this analysis we concluded that the plus end terminated with a crown of a-tubulin subunits. However, studies by other groups (Hirose et al., 1995a; Hoenger & Milligan, 1996) con®rmed by us here, showed that under the conditions used previously the identi®cation of long and short ends as plus and minus ends was ambiguous. The reason is that the fast growing end (plus) is also more dynamic (Walker et al., 1989). It is, therefore, more prone to breakage during the time required for kinesin decoration and EM preparation, resulting in an apparent reversal of long and short microtubules. Thus, the polarity described in the present work is now in agreement with the accepted view that the plus ends of microtubules terminates with b-tubulin, the minus end with a-tubulin. This choice of polarity is also consistent with Mitchison's (1993) observation that the exchangeable GTP on b-tubulin is found on the plus end and with the observation that the minus end can be labeled with an antibody speci®c to a-tubulin (Fan et al., 1996).

Figure 9. Pattern of contrast generation by binding of kinesin on the microtubule lattice. Kinesin binds on every b-tubulin subunit, emphasizing the 8 nm periodicity of the tubulin dimer (left panel). This illustration corresponds to microtubules decorated with monomeric kinesin and to most images obtained with short dimeric kinesin. The right panel gives a representation of the situation in Figure 5. An additional protein density can be seen on every second a-tubulin, beginning with the uppermost a-tubulin at the plus end (below the crown of b-subunits).

The analysis of the repeats and the stain distribution near the ends of the microtubule sheets is summarized in the model of Figure 9: The motor domains of kinesin lie mostly over b-tubulin (outermost level of subunits on the plus end, next-tolast level on the minus end). Counting down from the plus end, successive pairs of kinesin heads share part of their necks; this common region adds to the apparent mass of the intervening a-tubulin subunit (the next-to-last layer on the plus end), but is absent from the following a subunit (the fourth layer from the top). The alternation of a subunits of higher and lower apparent density creates the 16 nm periodicity. Formally, this distribution of kinesin heads would be consistent with the ``tightrope'' walking model of motility (Lockhart et al., 1995), where the heads must step alternatively by 16 nm along a proto®lament, generating a center of mass displacement of 8 nm, as observed by laser trap experiments (Svoboda et al., 1993). A periodicity of 16 nm would also result from the two heads binding in different orientations, as discussed by Kozielski et al., 1997b), although these differences might be too small to be detected in the negative-stain images. Our reconstructions are consistent with the stoichiometry of one kinesin head per tubulin dimer

806

Interaction of Kinesin with Microtubules Mandelkow (1993), or by ion exchange chromatography on phosphocellulose and MonoQ (sK498) followed by gel ®ltration (rK354, rK379) on a G-200 Hiload 16/60 column (Pharmacia) as described by Kozielski et al. 1997a).

Materials and Methods
Preparation of tubulin Tubulin was prepared by phosphocellulose chromatography preceded by a MAP-depleting step as described (Mandelkow et al., 1985). Microtubules were polymerized in reassembly buffer (0.1 M Pipes (pH 6.9), 1 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT , 20 mM taxol) and 1 mM GTP from a solution containing 6 to 15 mg/ ml of PC-tubulin on incubation at 37 C for 20 minutes. Open microtubule walls (sheets) reassembled from a solution of 0.5 mg/ml PC-tubulin on incubation at 30 C for 10 to 20 minutes, with the addition of 10% (v/v) glycerol. Recombinant kinesin head protein (see Figure 1) Generation of different constructs. The squid kinesin gene originally obtained from K. Kosik (Kosik et al., 1990) was cloned into a derivative of the pET-3a vector (Studier et al., 1990). The cloning of squid kinesin constructs containing the head and part of the stalk was performed using the initial pET-3a derivative containing the NcoI-EcoRI fragment of the kinesin gene, which was described by Song & Mandelkow (1993). Plasmid pEsK498 was generated by deleting the sequence from the BclI to the EcoRI site and blunt end religation after ®lling in with Klenow DNA-polymerase. Plasmid pEsK411 was generated in the same way by deleting the sequence from the BstEII to the EcoRI site. The plasmid coding for sK395 was cloned as described by Song & Mandelkow (1993). Plasmids coding for rat kinesin constructs were cloned as described by Kozielski et al. 1997a). Brie¯y, to obtain pErK379 the BamHI-SauI fragment of the rat kinesin gene obtained from S. Brady (unpublished) was inserted into a pET-3a vector modi®ed to contain the same sites with a stop codon. Plasmid pErK354 was cloned by PCR using plasmid pErK379 as a template. Plasmid psK338 was cloned by insertion of an oligonucleotide containing a STOP-codon as described by Kozielski (1997). Expression and isolation of kinesin constructs. All recombinant kinesin heavy-chain fragments were expressed in E. coli BL21 (DE3) cells. Recombinant sK338, sK395, rK354 and rK379 could be obtained in soluble form from the bacterial extracts. The longer constructs sK411 and sK498, however, initially formed insoluble aggregates. To overcome this problem a second plasmid pGroESL obtained from A. Wittinghofer (Dortmund, FRG) containing the E. coli GroESL operon (Chandrasekhar et al., 1986) in control of an isopropyl-bD-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) inducible promoter and a gene for chloramphenicol resistance was introduced into the cells. As the overproduction of the GroEL/ GroES complex enhanced the yield of soluble sK395, this protein was also expressed in the presence of the pGroESL plasmid. E. coli cells were grown in LB medium and expression of kinesin as well as overexpression of GroEL and GroES protein was induced with 0.4 mM IPTG at a cell density corresponding to A600  0.6 to 0.8. Cells were harvested after 16 hours of induction at 25 C, resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Pipes (pH 6.9), 60 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM EGTA, 2 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF) and lysed with a French press. Further puri®cation was done either by af®nity puri®cation on microtubules followed by ion exchange chromatography on a MonoQ column (sK338, sK395, sK411, sK498) as described by Song &

Chemical crosslinking Chemical crosslinking was performed with microtubules saturated with kinesin in the presence of AMPPNP and after removing unbound protein by centrifugation. The kinesin-microtubule pellet was resuspended in RB and the reaction was started by addition of 0.5 mM of the crosslinking reagent. The crosslinkers used were EDC/NHS (1-ethyl-3-[3-(dimethylamino)-propyl]carbodiimide/N-hydroxysuccinimide), MBS (metamaleimidobenzoyl-N-hydroxysuccinimideester), SPDP (N-succinimidyl 3-(2-pyridyldithio)propionate), DSP (dithiobis(succinimidylproprionate)), EGS (ethylene glycol-bis(succinimidylsuccinate)), and PDM (N,NH -(1,2-phenylene)dimaleimide). After 30 minutes incubation at room temperature the reaction was quenched by addition of SDS sample buffer. Proteins were then separated by SDS-PAGE and blotted onto a PVDF membrane (Immobilon, Pharmacia) after LeGendre & Matsudaira (1988). Kinesin and crosslinking products were detected by the anti-LAGSE-peptide antibody (Sawin et al., 1992), and a and b-tubulin by the monoclonal antibodies DM1A and DM1B (Amersham), respectively. The bound antibody was detected by peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG, DAKO, Hamburg, FRG). Bands were visualized by DAB staining.

Preparation of specimens for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and image processing Microtubules and tubulin sheets were prepared as described above. To obtain decorated sheets extended on axonemes from C. reinhardtii (kindly provided by J. Rosenbaum, Yale University) the axonemes were ®rst allowed to adsorb to the carbon surface of an electron microscopy (EM) grid. Unadsorbed axonemes were washed off, and a drop of 2 mg/ml tubulin, with 1 mM GTP, was added. Polymerization was started by transferring the sample into a 37 C chamber for three minutes. The supernatant was then removed, and the grids were ¯oated immediately on a drop of buffer containing 50 mM taxol to stop elongation and to stabilize existing polymers. For decoration the grids were transferred to a drop of 0.5 mg/ml kinesin and incubated for ®ve minutes at 20 C. They were then washed several times in buffer and stained with 1% (w/v) uranyl acetate. Specimens using centrosomes (kindly provided by R. Heald, EMBL, Heidelberg) were prepared similarly (at a centrosome concentration of 1 Â 108/ml), except that the tubulin concentration was 0.5 mg/ml and polymerization proceeded for one to two minutes. Optical diffraction, negative stain electron microscopy (using a Philips CM12), and computer processing by Fourier methods was done following standard methods (for a review, see Amos et al., 1982). Selected areas were Fourier transformed, ®ltered, and back transformed to obtain the electron density. Since the diffraction spots extended to only $2 nm, no correction for the contrast transfer function was necessary. A standard view was used for the image reconstructions where the microtu-

Interaction of Kinesin with Microtubules bule wall was seen from the outside, with plus end up. Polarity and sidedness were de®ned from asymmetrical features in the microtubule lattice, or from the phases of the diffraction patterns (see the text). Difference maps of the decorated and the undecorated sheets were calculated after aligning both reconstructions with respect to the undecorated part of a-tubulin and after rescaling the reconstructed undecorated sheet to compensate for the difference in the protein masses of decorated and undecorated sheets. Small angle X-ray scattering

807

Kinesin-microtubule binding assays Taxol-stabilized microtubules at a concentration of 2 mM were incubated with either monomeric or dimeric kinesin, within a concentration range of 0.5 mM to 12 mM kinesin heads, in the presence of either 2 mM AMP-PNP or 2 mM ADP, respectively. Microtubules together with bound kinesin were sedimented in a Beckman TL100 Ultracentrifuge at 67,000 g and 22 C for ten minutes. The upper layer of the supernatant was kept for analysis and the rest discarded. The pellets were carefully rinsed with RB containing 2 mM AMP-PNP (a subsequent analysis showed that no kinesin was released by this procedure), the wash solution removed, and the pellets resuspended in SDS sample buffer. Equal aliquots of pellets and supernatants, together with control samples of kinesin and tubulin, were ®nally analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Coomassie blue stained dried gels were scanned using a Hewlett Packard Scan Jet 4C, and the scanned images were evaluated by using the software TINA (Raytest, Straubenhardt, Germany). To compensate for a possible loss of pellet the measured protein concentrations were corrected by a factor to set the tubulin concentration to 2 mM, the concentration used in the experiment. This correction reduced the error of data points for the ®t of the binding isotherm, but had no in¯uence on the ratio of bound kinesin versus tubulin in a given experiment.

Experiments were performed on the small angle scattering instrument X33 of the EMBL Outstation at the Hamburger Synchrotronstrahlungslabor HASYLAB at DESY, Hamburg (Koch & Bordas, 1983). X-ray scattering intensities of microtubule solutions were recorded as described (Marx et al., 1990). For comparison with model calculations, an exponential function was ®tted through the minima of the scattering curve, s Á I(s) versus s, and then subtracted. The corrected scattering curve of undecorated microtubules was modeled by calculating the theoretical scattering of a hollow cylinder with inner and outer radius of 9.5 nm and 14 nm and a length of 320 nm, corresponding to 40 tubulin dimers with an axial dimension of 8 nm. The scattering of decorated microtubules was calculated by adding hollow-cylindrical segments to the surface of the hollow cylinder of the undecorated microtubule, each segment representing one kinesin molecule (monomer or dimer). The inner radius of the curved kinesin blocks equals the outer radius of the microtubule. The outer diameter of the kinesin blocks was adjusted so that the ratio of the model volumes, Vkin:Vtub, corresponds to the relative molecular masses. The kinesin blocks were shifted in axial direction as appropriate for a 3-start helical microtubule with a B-lattice.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Bettina Wolpensinger and Markus È Haner (Biozentrum, Basel, Switzerland) for excellent technical assistance with the STEM experiments, Dr Ken Kosik (Harvard Medical School) for the squid kinesin gene, Dr Scott Brady (University of Texas, Dallas) for the rat kinesin gene, Dr Frank Kozielski (IBS, Grenoble, France) for sK338 plasmid and protein, Dr Alfred Wittinghofer (MPI, Dortmund, FRG) for the pGroESL plasmid, Dr Rebecca Heald (EMBL, Heidelberg, FRG) for the centrosomes, Dr Joel Rosenbaum (Yale University) for Chlamydomonas axonemes, Dr Tim Mitchison (UCSF, San Francisco) for the anti-LAGSE antibody and Dr Michel Koch (EMBL, Hamburg) for the use of the X33 beamline. This work was supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (to E.M.M.), the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant 31-39691.93), the Canton È Basel-Stadt, and the M.E. Muller Foundation of Switzerland.

Determination of mass by STEM measurements Decoration of microtubules for STEM and measurements were basically done as described above. Taxolstabilized microtubules were diluted to 2 mM in RB and decorated by adding a ®ve to tenfold molar excess of the respective kinesin construct. After incubating for ten minutes at 20 C the decorated microtubules were sedimented for 15 minutes at 15,000 g and washed twice by resuspension in buffer and sedimentation as before. The samples were checked by TEM to make sure that decoration was complete, then 2 to 5 ml aliquots were pipetted onto STEM grids (gold-coated copper grids covered with a thick perforated carbon layer and thin carbon support ®lm), and allowed to adsorb for one minute. The grids were then washed with buffer (RB diluted ®vefold with water), ®xed for ten minutes with 0.5% (v/v) glutaraldehyde, washed ®ve times with quartz bi-distilled water and freeze-dried in the microscope. Air-dried TMV and È HPI samples to be used as mass standard (Muller et al., 1992), were loaded simultaneously. The Vacuum Generators HB5-STEM was operated at 80 kV accelerating voltage. Series of low dose images (approximately 300 e/ nm2) were recorded from the unstained specimens. In addition, beam-induced mass loss was assessed. The È analysis was carried out as outlined by Muller et al. (1992).

References
Amos, L. A., Henderson, R. & Unwin, P. N. (1982). Three-dimensional structure determination by electron microscopy of two-dimensional crystals. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 39, 183± 231. Amos, L. A. & Hirose, K. (1997). The structure of microtubule-motor complexes. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 9, 4 ±11. Amrein, K. E., Takacs, B., Stieger, M., Molnos, J., Flint, N. A. & Burn, P. (1995). Puri®cation and characterization of recombinant human p50csk protein-tyrosine kinase from an Escherichia coli expression system overproducing the bacterial chaperones GroES and GroEL. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 92, 1048± 1052.

808
Arnal, I., Metoz, F., DeBonis, S. & Wade, R. H. (1996). Three-dimensional structure of functional motor proteins on microtubules. Curr. Biol. 6, 1265± 1270. Bergen, L. G. & Borisy, G. G. (1980). Head-to-tail polymerization of microtubules in vitro. Electron microscope analysis of seeded assembly. J. Cell Biol. 84, 141± 150. Berliner, E., Young, E. C., Anderson, K., Mahtani, H. K. & Gelles, J. (1995). Failure of a single-headed kinesin to track parallel to microtubule proto®laments. Nature, 373, 718 ± 721. Binder, L. I., Dentler, W. L. & Rosenbaum, J. L. (1975). Assembly of chick brain tubulin onto ¯agellar microtubules from Chlamydomonas and sea urchin sperm. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 72, 1122± 1126. Brady, S. T. (1995). A kinesin medley: biochemical and functional heterogeneity. Trends Cell Biol. 5, 159± 164. Chandrasekhar, G. N., Tilly, K., Woolford, C., Hendrix, R. & Georgopoulos, C. (1986). Puri®cation and properties of the GroES morphogenetic protein of Escherichia coli. J. Biol. Chem. 261, 12414 ±12419. Crevel, I. M., Lockhart, A. & Cross, R. A. (1996). Weak and strong states of kinesin and ncd. J. Mol. Biol. 257, 66± 76. Engel, A. (1978). Molecular weight determination by scanning transmission electron microscopy. Ultramicroscopy, 3, 273 ± 281. Erickson, H. P. (1974). Microtubule surface lattice and subunit structure and observations on reassembly. J. Cell Biol. 60, 153 ± 67. Fan, J., Grif®ths, A. D., Lockhart, A., Cross, R. A. & Amos, L. A. (1996). Microtubule minus ends can be labelled with a phage display antibody speci®c to alpha-tubulin. J. Mol. Biol. 259, 325±330. Gilbert, S., Moyer, M. & Johnson, K. A. (1998). Alternating site mechanism of the kinesin ATPase. Biochemistry, in the press. Goodson, H. V., Valetti, C. & Kreis, T. E. (1997). Motors and membrane traf®c. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 9, 18± 28. Hackney, D. D. (1994). Evidence for alternating head catalysis by kinesin during microtubule-stimulated ATP hydrolysis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 91, 6865± 6869. Harrison, B. C., Marchese-Ragona, S. P., Gilbert, S. P., Cheng, N., Steven, A. C. & Johnson, K. A. (1993). Decoration of the microtubule surface by one kinesin head per tubulin heterodimer. Nature, 362, 73± 75. Hirose, K., Lockhart, A., Cross, R. A. & Amos, L. A. (1995b). Nucleotide-dependent angular change in kinesin motor domain bound to tubulin. Nature, 376, 277± 279. Hirose, K., Fan, J. & Amos, L. A. (1995a). Re-examination of the polarity of microtubules and sheets decorated with kinesin motor domain. J. Mol. Biol. 251, 329± 333. Hirose, K., Lockhart, A., Cross, R. A. & Amos, L. A. (1996). Three-dimensional cryoelectron microscopy of dimeric kinesin and ncd motor domains on microtubules. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 9539± 9544. Hoenger, A. & Milligan, R. A. (1997). Motor domains of kinesin and ncd interact with microtubule proto®laments with the same binding geometry. J. Mol. Biol. 265, 553± 564.

Interaction of Kinesin with Microtubules Hoenger, A. & Milligan, R. A. (1996). Polarity of 2-D and 3-D maps of tubulin sheets and motor decorated sheets. J. Mol. Biol. 263, 114± 119. Hoenger, A., Sablin, E. P., Vale, R. D., Fletterick, R. J. & Milligan, R. A. (1995). Three-dimensional structure of a tubulin-motor-protein complex. Nature, 376, 271± 274. Huang, T. G. & Hackney, D. D. (1994). Drosophila kinesin minimal motor domain expressed in Escherichia coli. Puri®cation and kinetic characterization. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 16493± 16501. Huang, T. G., Suhan, J. & Hackney, D. D. (1994). Drosophila kinesin motor domain extending to amino acid position 392 is dimeric when expressed in Escherichia coli. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 16502± 16507. Inoue, Y., Toyoshima, Y. Y., Iwane, A. H., Morimoto, S., Higuchi, H. & Yanagida, T. (1997). Movements of truncated kinesin fragments with a short or an arti®cial ¯exible neck. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 94, 7275± 7280. Jiang, W., Stock, M. F., Li, X. & Hackney, D. D. (1997). In¯uence of the kinesin neck domain on dimerization and ATPase kinetics. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 7626± 7632. Kikkawa, M., Ishikawa, T., Nakata, T., Wakabayashi, T. & Hirokawa, N. (1994). Direct visualization of the microtubule lattice seam both in vitro and in vivo. J. Cell Biol. 127, 1965± 1971. Kikkawa, M., Ishikawa, T., Wakabayashi, T. & Hirokawa, N. (1995). Three-dimensional structure of the kinesin head-microtubule complex. Nature, 376, 274± 277. Koch, M. J. H. & Bordas, J. (1983). X-ray diffraction and scattering on disordered systems using synchrotron radiation. Nucl. Instrum. Methods, 208, 461 ± 469. Kosik, K. S., Orecchio, L. D., Schnapp, B., Inouye, H. & Neve, R. L. (1990). The primary structure and analysis of the squid kinesin heavy chain. J. Biol. Chem. 265, 3278± 3283. È Kozielski, F. (1997). Die Rontgenstrukturanalyse des È Motorproteins Kinesin. PhD thesis, Universitat Hamburg, Germany. È È Kozielski, F., Schonbrunn, E., Sack, S., Muller, J., Brady, S. T. & Mandelkow, E. (1997a). Crystallization and preliminary X-ray analysis of the single-headed and double-headed motor protein kinesin. J. Struct. Biol. 119, 28± 34. È Kozielski, F., Sack, S., Marx, A., Thormahlen, M., È Schonbrunn, E., Biou, V., Thompson, A., Mandelkow, E.-M. & Mandelkow, E. (1997b). The crystal structure of dimeric kinesin and implications for microtubule-dependent motility. Cell, in the press. Kull, F. J., Sablin, E. P., Lau, R., Fletterick, R. J. & Vale, R. D. (1996). Crystal structure of the kinesin motor domain reveals a structural similarity to myosin. Nature, 380, 550± 555. LeGendre, N. & Matsudaira, P. (1988). Direct protein from Immobilon-P transfer microsequencing membrane. Biotechniques, 6, 154± 159. Lewis, S. A., Tian, G., Vainberg, I. E. & Cowan, N. J. (1996). Chaperonin-mediated folding of actin and tubulin. J. Cell Biol. 132, 1± 4. Lockhart, A., Crevel, I. M. & Cross, R. A. (1995). Kinesin and ncd bind through a single head to microtubules and compete for a shared MT binding site. J. Mol. Biol. 249, 763± 771.

Interaction of Kinesin with Microtubules Ma, Y. Z. & Taylor, E. W. (1997). Interacting head mechanism of microtubule-kinesin ATPase. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 724± 30. Mandelkow, E. M., Herrmann, M. & Ruhl, U. (1985). Tubulin domains probed by limited proteolysis and subunit-speci®c antibodies. J. Mol. Biol. 185, 311± 327. Marx, A., Jagla, A. & Mandelkow, E. (1990). Microtubule assembly and oscillations induced by ¯ash photolysis of caged-GTP. Eur. Biophys. J. 19, 1 ±9. Mitchison, T. J. (1993). Localization of an exchangeable GTP binding site at the plus end of microtubules. Science, 261, 1044± 1047. Morii, H., Takenawa, T., Arisaka, F. & Shimizu, T. (1997). Identi®cation of kinesin neck region as a stable alpha-helical coiled coil and its thermodynamic characterization. Biochemistry, 36, 1933± 1942. È È È Muller, S. A., Goldie, K. N., Burki, R., Haring, R. & Engel, A. (1992). Factors in¯uencing the precision of quantitative scanning transmission electron microscopy. Ultramicroscopy, 46, 317±334. Murray, J. M. (1991). Structure of ¯agellar microtubules. Int. Rev. Cytol. 125, 47± 93. Sawin, K. E., Mitchison, T. J. & Wordeman, L. G. (1992). Evidence for kinesin-related proteins in the mitotic apparatus using peptide antibodies. J. Cell Sci. 101, 303± 313. È È Sack, S., Muller, J., Marx, A., Thormahlen, M., Mandelkow, E.-M., Brady, S. T. & Mandelkow, E. (1997). X-ray structure of motor and neck domains from rat brain kinesin. Biochemistry, 36, 16155± 16165. Song, Y. H. & Mandelkow, E. (1993). Recombinant kinesin motor domain binds to beta-tubulin and dec-

809
orates microtubules with a B surface lattice. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 90, 1671± 1675. Song, Y. H. & Mandelkow, E. (1995). The anatomy of ¯agellar microtubules: polarity, seam, junctions, and lattice. J. Cell Biol. 128, 81± 94. Studier, W. F., Rosenberg, A. H., Dunn, J. J. & Dubendorff, J. W. (1990). Use of T7 RNA polymerase to direct the expression of cloned genes. Methods Enzymol. 185, 60± 89. Svoboda, K., Schmidt, C. F., Schnapp, B. J. & Block, S. M. (1993). Direct observation of kinesin stepping by optical trapping interferometry. Nature, 365, 721± 727. Tripet, B., Vale, R. D. & Hodges, R. S. (1997). Demonstration of coiled-coil interactions within the kinesin neck region using synthetic peptides ± implications for motor activity. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 8946± 8956. Tucker, C. & Goldstein, L. S. B. (1997). Probing the kinesin ± microtubule interaction. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 9481± 9488. Wade, R. H. & Hyman, A. A. (1997). Microtubule structure and dynamics. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 9, 12± 17. Walker, R. A. (1995). Ncd and kinesin motor domains interact with both alpha- and beta-tubulin. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 92, 5960± 5964. Walker, R. A., Inoue, S. & Salmon, E. D. (1989). Asymmetric behavior of severed microtubule ends after ultraviolet-microbeam irradiation of individual microtubules in vitro. J. Cell Biol. 108, 931± 937. Yasukawa, T., Kanei-Ishii, C., Maekawa, T., Fujimoto, J., Yamamoto, T. & Ishii, S. (1995). Increase of solubility of foreign proteins in Escherichia coli by coproduction of the bacterial thioredoxin. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 25328± 25331.

Edited by M. F. Moody (Received 8 August 1997; received in revised form 18 October 1997; accepted 23 October 1997)

