T I B T E C H - MAY 1991 [Vol. 9] 158

II li ii
The prospects for therapy with tumour necrosis factors and their antagonists
Alan G. Porter
T u m o u r necrosis factors (TNFs) 0 and 15 a r e capable of c a u s i n g d r a m a t i c necrosis of solid turnouts. TNF-oc has undergone clinical tr" ~Is as an anti-cancer drug. F i n d i n g a role for TNFs in the t r e a t m e n t of c a n c e r will depend on suppressing severe side effects and targeting the drug. Conversely, due to the p a r t i c i p a t i o n of TNFs in i n f l a m m a t o r y responses, antagonists of TNF-ot are

The majority of the biological studies, and all of the clinical studies have been performed with TNF-oc, and this is reflected in the following discussion.

Physiological roles
It is clear from the many studies describing biological activities of TNFs that they have the potential to play several physiological and pathophysiological roles. An understanding of these roles is essential in order to evaluate whether they may be useful for treating disease. TNF-c~ and, to a lesser extent, TNF-~, display activities consistent with important roles in immune defence, il~flammation, and vascular, metabolic and growth regulation 1'2. It is important to realise that although TNFs can exert protective or beneficial effects, when overproduced, they are likely to cause deleterious effects which may be life-threatening (see Table 2). The activities of TNFs relating to immune defence and regulation, inflammation and growth regulation are, in general, beneficial, while the metabolic and vascular effects described in this section are mostly deleterious.
Immune defence and regulation The idea that the immune system exerts 'immune surveillance' against cancer is widely accepted, but the role of cytokines, including TNFs, in preventing the development of cancers is unclear. Cytokines can influence tumour progression, for example, in the rapid, haemorrhagic necrosis of tumours by LPS-induced TNF-oc1. TNF-o~ can also mediate autocrine growth inhibition of chronic myelogenous leukaemic cells, which may contribute to the maintenance of the stable, chronic phase of the disease 4. In laboratory animal models, TNF-o~ antibody blocks LPS-induced tumour regression 5. TNF-oc is a potent effector molecule for tumour-cell killing by activated macrophages 6 - cells essential to the early phase of immune defence. TNF-oc has an immunostimulatory function; it induces the expression of additional TNF receptors on primary T lymphocytes, and increases the expression of HLA-DR histocompatibility antigen, ?-interferon and the high affinity interleukin 2

being considered for the treatment of several conditions, especially septic shock.
Human tumour necrosis factors ot (TNF-0c) and 13 (TNF-[3 or lymphotoxin) are related 1-3 members of a broad class of polypeptide mediators, which includes the interferons, interleukins and growth factors; collectively called cytokines. The discovery of TNF-o resulted from two independent lines of investigation 1. In the mid-1970s, it was observed that rabbits infected with Trypanosoma brucei became anorexic and developed a profound wasting condition, known as cachexia. This was found to be related to a lipid-clearing defect, resulting from a systemic deficiency of the enzyme lipoprotein lipase (LPL). A substance acting to suppress LPL was subsequently identified as a secretory product of macrophages stimulated with bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS or endotoxin), and it was termed cachectin. Independently, it was shown that a soluble factor in the serum of animals treated with LPS was able to cause a dramatic haemorrhagic necrosis of certain transplantable tumours ~. This was termed tumour
A. G. Porter is at the Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National University of Singapore, 10 Kent Ridge Crescent, Singapore 0511, Republic of Singapore.

necrosis factor (TNF). cDNA derived from TNF mRNA (now named TNF-o0 was cloned and sequenced. It was established later that cachectin and TNF-ot are identical, based on their amino acid sequences and by serological and biological criteria. Lymphotoxin, also known as TNF-~, is 28% identical and --52% homologous with TNF-0~ in amino acid sequence. TNF-I3 was discovered as a substance produced by T lymphocytes that was associated with the 24-hour inflammatory response known as delayed-type hypersensitivity z. TNF-[3, like TNF-ot, is able to cause dramatic necrosis of tumours. TNF-o and TNF-I3 share many biological activities which can probably be explained by their ability to act through common cellular receptors. However, there are some distinct differences in their physicochemical and biological properties 3. Some of the most important of these are listed in Table 1. TNF-[3 appears to have a narrower range of physiological activities than TNF-ot, and TNF-[3 can, in some cases, antagonize the action of TNF-ot3. The mRNA-derived cDNAs for both TNF-oc and TNF-[3 have been cloned, and their mature forms have been expressed intraceUularly in g. coli, and purified to homogeneity.

~) 1991,ElsevierScience Publishers Ltd (UK) 0167-9430/91/$2.00

TIBTECH - MAY 1991 [Vol. 9]
--Table I

159

(IL-2) receptor 7, thus enhancing the T-cell proliferative response to ILo2. TNF-o~ and TNF-[3 both enhance the T-cell-mediated response to antigenic challenge through a direct effect on T cells ~'2. TNF-o~ appears to play a role in resistance to a variety of parasites. The antimalarial effect of TNF-o~ in vitro is well documented s. While it is evident that macrophage-derived TNF-oc can initiate a chain of events that lead to the destruction of malaria parasites, it is not clear whether this also operates in vivo. TNF-o~ can protect mice against Trypanosoma, Toxoplasma and Leishmania parasites 8. TNF-I~, and to a lesser extent TNF-oc, can induce platelet-induced killing of the larvae of the multicellular parasite, Schistosoma mansoni, and macrophagederived TNF-oc has been shown to enhance the toxicity of eosinophils towards Schistosoma in vitro8. TNF-o~ also appears to be involved in mediating resistance to the bacteria Listeria monocytogenes and Mycobacterium avium 9. TNFs can exert an antiviral protective effect in some cell lines which is reminiscent of interferon action. In addition, TNF-o~ and TNF-I3 secreted by natural killer (NK} cells leads to selective killing of vitally infected cells in vitro ~. Paradoxically, the replication of human immunedeficiency virus (HIV-1) has been reported to be both enhanced ~ and inhibited 12 by TNF-oc, but the response perhaps depends on the particular cell line used as. In mice, TNF-o~ exerts a protective effect against experimental infection with herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 by an unknown mechanism involving neither interferons nor NK cell killing 14.

The physicochemical and biological properties of human TNF-ocand TNF-/3
TNF-odcachectin PhysiGochemical Cellular origin
A m i n o acids (mature) (prepeptide) Carbohydrate M.W. a (matu re,

TN F-I~ Principally T lymphocytes
171 34 Single site 18 800

Refs 1,2
1,2

Many types, principally macrophages
157 76 None 17 356

1,2

naturally occurring) Cysteines Two residues, forming one disulphide bridge Membrane-bound Yes form Soluble, Yes extracellular form
Biological

None Not known Yes 1,2

Induction of +++ GM-CSF, M-CSF and G-CSFa Induction of IL-1 and +++ neutrophil adhesion
proteins

(+)1(+)

3 3

Antiproliferative effect: myelogenous leukaemic ceils mouse L-929 cells Induction of hypercalcaemia

+++
+++

+++

3
3

-

++ +

3

aAbbreviations: M.W. -- molecular weight; GM-, M- and G-CSF - granulocyte-macrophage-, macrophage- and granulocyte-colony stimulating factor, respectively; IL-1 - interleukin-1; + + + --- strong inducer; (+) - weak inducer; - = no induction.

Growth regulation In general, TNF-o~and TNF-~ exert a growth-inhibitory effect on some tumour cell lines, but not on untransformed cells is. Normal vascular endothelial cells are growth inhibited by TNF-oc and undergo morphological changes; and both TNF-oc and TNF-J3 interact with haemopoietic cells at many stages of Inflammation Agents that non-specifically differentiation, inhibiting prolifersuppress inflammation pre-dispose ation of various types of haemoan animal to infection, thus illus- poietic precursor cells, and inducing trating the importance of inflam- proliferation of immature myelomation in immunity. TNF-oc induces monocytic cells. It is possible that TNFs are ininflammatory activities in neutrophils and vascular endothelium 1, volved in the turnover and remodeland appears to be a major mediator ling of tissues. TNFooc can induce of neutrophil activation and ad- reactive oxygen radicals and various hesion to endothelial cells. It also proteases (e.g. collagenase) which induces the production of, and acts help break down tissues, as well as in concert with other pro-inflam- growth factors which stimulate the matory cytokines, such as Lc;~er- laying down of new tissues 1'2. TNF-o~ stimulates the resorption of leukin 1 (IL-1).

proteoglycan in cartilage a6, and TNF-oc and TNF-[3 both stimulate bone resorption in vitro ~7'18. TNF-I~ is strongly implicated in the hypercalcaemia associated with epithelial carcinomas and haematological malignancies ~9. Vascular effects TNF-o~ is an important mediator of the shock syndrome observed in bacterial septicaemia, producing classic shock symptoms when injected into rats and dogs 2. The shock-promoting effects of TNF-oc, and its ability to induce haemorrhagic tumour necrosis in vivo zl appear to be mediated by multiple vascular effects. For example, in addition to inducing the various inflammatory activities referred to earlier, TNF-oc causes the elaboration of pro-coagulant activities and the inhibition of anticoagulant activitiesL

160

TIBTECH - MAY 1991 [Vol. 9]

.--Table2

Likely roles of TNFs in physiological and disease processes
Role
 , i

W h i c h TNF
i n

Refs

Beneficial or protective Immune surveillance against cancer Resistance to parasites and viruses Resistance to bacteria Activation of inflammatory activities in neutrophils, macrophagesandendothelium Turnover and remodelling of tissues Prevention of autoimmune diabetes Deleterious Mediation of endotoxic shock Metabolic derangements leading to cachexia Progression of cerebral malaria Activation of some viruses (e.g. HIV-1 ) Inflammation in arthritis !nvolva~ent in graft-versus-host disease Rejection of renal allografts Resorption of proteoglycan in cartilage Bone resorption Hypercalcaemia in cancer

o~, o~, o~

j3(?) j3

4-~7, 24 8,10,14 9

o~, j5 ~(?), J3(?)

1,2 1 36 20,21,37 1,22 8,24 11,13 40 41 42 16 17,18 19

oc o< o~

oc
(x oc 0~ o~,

Metabolic effects

One of the principal actions of TNF-oc is catabolic. By its potent effect on the lipid-clearing enzyme LPL, TNF-0c contributes to the wasting (cachexia) associated with many chronic diseases zz, including some cancers, parasitic infections and AIDS. The source of TNF-o~ may either be monocytes and lymphocytes invading inflamed tissue, or tumour cells themselves 22.

Therapeutic potential of TNFs
e. Cancer The concept of natural anti-tumour factors originated at the end of the last century when William Coley, impressed by the regression of tumours observed in some patients with streptococcal infections, attempted to reproduce this phenomenon by injection of intact bacteria or crude bacterial extracts 23. Because the results were variable and the toxicity was, not surprisingly, immense, this approach was discontinued. Interest was reawakened many decades later with the discovery that bacterial LPS can induce TNF-c~ and tumour necrosis activity. There are at least three ways in which TNFs could exert their antitumour action z4. (I) A direct cytotoxic or cytostatic action. (2) A pro-coagulant effect on tumour vasculature leading to necrosis.

(3] Activation of host immune responses 24. All three mechanisms are likely to operate to varying extents. In particular, starvation of tumour blood supply occurs as a result of intravascular coagulation, but the mechanism whereby the tumour is selectively destroyed is not known. It is possible that tumour cells produce a polypeptide 25 which sensitizes the tumour vasculature m the pro. coagulant action of TNF-oc. How strong, then, is the rationale for entering TNF-o~ into clinical trials against cancers? Alleviation of a disease by administration of a hormone is usually effective only when a deficiency of the hormone exists. It is not known whether patients who respond well to TNF-0~, do so because they have an inherent defeet in their own endogenous TNF.c~ production, nor whether patients whose cancers are unaffected by TNF-~ have a defect in their capacity to respond to TNF-c~. A direct cytotoxic/cytostatic effect of TNF-c~ against tumours in vivo is unlikely for several reasons. (1) Most tumour cells are resistant to the cytotoxic action of TNF-oc and TNF-{3 in vitro 15.z6 and some tumour-cell lines become sensitive only in the presence of metabolic inhibitors such as cycloheximide z6. (2) Acquisition of resistance to TNFs by tumour cells is rather common, and a decrease in responsiveness to TNF-o~ may occur following

pre-exposure of the cells to a very low dose of TNF-oc27. (3) Paradoxically, tumour cell lines which constitutively secrete TNF-oc or TNF-~ are resistant to TNF cytotoxicity s. Since TNFs have pleiotropic effects, their toxicity will limit the doses which can be given. A number of phase I clinical trials to assess toxicity and tolerance of TNF-o~ in patiertts with advanced cancer have been completed zs. Some phase II trials to assess efficacy have also been completed. A maximum tolerated dose (MTD) range has been established, but dose-dependent and dose-limiting side effects (including fever, myalgia and hypotension) have been reported in most of the trials. Some routes of administration have achieved plasma levels of 10 ng m1-1 TNF-oc, but the level drops rapidly because the TNF-c~ half-life in plasma is short (<30 min) limiting the usefulness of this approach if a direct cytotoxic or procoagulant effect on the tumour were the aim. Approximately 30% of intravenously administered TNF-o~ may be recovered from skin, and, interestingly, the phenomenon of haemorrhagic tumour necrosis is observed mainly in tumours with a dermal blood supply. Direct intratumour injection of TNF-oc is often more effective than systemic delivery, and this may be due to a local concentration effect. In spite of these findings, overall tumour-reduction response rates in the phase I trials are low (2.7--4.3%), although they are similar to response rates achieved with single chemotherapeutic agents such as 5-fluorouracil and carboplatin 28. So far, trials of TNF-~ against cancer have been inconclusive, and it still remains to be determined which types of cancer will respond best to TNF-~ 28. Targeting TNF-o~ to the tumour may maximize haemorrhagic necrosis and minimize toxic side effects. One such targeting approach, a form of immunotherapy using cloned TNF-o~, is currently being used for patients with metastatic melanoma 29. This technique makes use of tumour infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL), isolated directly from a tumour biopsy. The TIL are transformed with a retrovirus vector 3 bearing a human TNF-oc cDNA and grown in tissue culture, then re-

TIBTECH - MAY 1991 [Vol. 9]

161

turned to the patient where they infiltrate the tumour and express TNF-~, which should destroy the tumour. This approach has been successfully tested in an analogous gene-transfer experiment using neomycin-resistance gene (nee) as a marker a. The TIL express nee and persist for months in the tumour, but not in other tissues, and expression of nee does not result in detectable toxic side effects "~s. Expression of TNF-o~ inside the tumour may, however, give rise to shock and cachexia. Nude mice inoculated with tumours expressing TNF-ob consistently became profoundly cachectic, while control tumours without the TNF-c~ gene caused no weight loss 2z. There may be other ways of improving anti-tumour efficacy and suppressing the toxic side effects of TNF-ob. Preliminary evidence suggests that cyclooxygenase inhibitors, such as ibuprofen 3~ and indomethacin, can suppress the toxic side effects of TNF-c~ without affecting the anti-tumour action. Combination drug therapy, using TNF-oc in combination with chemotherapeutic drugs or cytokines, is being tried. Synergy between TNFs and chemotherapeutic drugs, and between TNFs and interferons ls'3~-, has been described, but synergy of toxic side effects may also occur and complicate these strategies. Attempts have been made, using site-directed mutagenesis, to engineer TNF-0b mutants with enhanced cytotoxicity and fewer side effects 33. However, success so far is limited since it is not yet known which amino acid residues should be targeted. Few studies of TNF-~ have been performed, and it is not yet ready to enter clinical trials for anti-cancer activity, nor has its capacity to cause toxic side effects been evaluated. TNF-~ is secreted by T cells, which are probably not involved in mediating septic shock 2, and bacterial endotoxin does not induce TNF-~ in macrophages. TNF-~) appears to have a narrower range of activities than TNF-c~3 (see above), so it will be important to determine whether TNF-~) will have fewer toxic side effects (than TNF-~) in cancer therapy.
 Parasitic, bacterial and viral infections TNF-~ has potent anti-

microbial properties In vitro and in animal models 8'9.14, and is extremely potent against malarial and other parasites. However, serum TNF-0~ is raised in patients with malaria, and the symptoms of Plasm e d i u m falciparum malaria and other parasitic diseases bear a close resemblance to the toxic side effects of TNF-~ 8. In addition, TNF-oc is associated with the progression of cerebral malaria 34. Proposals for the therapeutic application of TNF-~ to treat bacterial infections must take into consideration the possibility that TNF-~ acts synergistically with bacterial products to exacerbate the toxic side effects of TNF-~, especially shock and haemorrhagic necrosis 3a. TNF-c~ can protect cells against some virus infections, and can selectively lyse virus-infected cells in vitro1'14. However, TNF-~ may also enhance the replication of some viruses, as has been shown for
HIV-113.

It is, therefore, too early to tell whether TNFs will be useful in treating, or preventing, parasitic, bacterial and viral infections. In the case of TNF-~, much more needs to be understood about its toxic side effects, the timing of its action and its role in human infections.
 A u t o i m m u n e diseases TNF-~ can prevent type 1 diabetes in strains of animals which are prone to autoimmune diabetes such as non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice and BioBreeding (BB) rats 31. These animals may have a defect in TNF-mediated immunoregulation. Thus, TNF-c~ may help to prevent autoimmune responses, though the role of TNF-oc in human diabetes and other autoimmune diseases is an unexplored
area.

Therapeuticpotential of TNF-~
antagonists  Septic shock Pretreatment of mice or baboons with monoclonal antibodies to TNF-~ protects them fTom lethal doses of E. coil LPS 20'37. Antibodies to TNF-oc have, therefore, been considered as a treatment for sepsis. Glucocorticoids, which inhibit TNF-o~ synthesis and release have been used to treat sepsis, but with limited success. It remains to be determined whether antibodies have an advantage over other forms of

therapy for shock, such as glucocorticoids, which have to be administered to block TNF-oc very early in the disease (the same would be true for TNF-0~ antibodies), before shock is evident, when diagnosis may not be possible. What is needed is a simple and rapid 'bedside' test for TNF-~ when infection is suspected. The use of monoclonal antibodies to TNF-o~ is only one of several possible approaches to blocking the toxic side effects of excess TNF-oc production. An alternative would be the use of TNF-oc receptor antagonists. Engineered TNF-oc mutants, which lack biological activity but still bind to the receptor, may function as antagonists of TNF-~ (and TNF-~)) action 33. Alternatively, now that two TNF-od~3 receptors have been cloned 38'39 and free, soluble forms of these TNF receptors have been identified, it may be feasible to inject synthetic receptors which would circulate and absorb excess TNF-oc.  Cachexia Although TNF-o~ is involved in the pathogenesis of cachexia 2z, its role in relation to other possible mediators of this complex condition is unclear. Not all cancer patients have cachexia and raised serum levels of TNF-o~. Nonetheless, TNF-o~ antagonists may have a role in relieving cachecfic conditions where serum TNF-oL levels are raised, but there are no reports of attempts at this.  Cerebral malaria There is strong evidence that TNF-o~ may be involved in the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria. High levels of TNF-o~ are associated with a poor prognosis in children with cerebral malaria, and antibodies to TNF-~ protect mice from cerebral complications of Plasmodium berghei infection 34. The use of TNF-o~ antibodies in patients with cerebral malaria has not yet been reported.  Arthritis In rheumatoid arthritis, antibodies to TNF-o~ reduced the production of the inflammatory cytokine, IL-1 in synovial cells 4. TNF-o~ is an inducer of collagenase, the major destructive protease in rheumatoid arthritis. Therefore, intra-articular injection of TNF-oc antibodies should be considered as a treatment for arthritis 4.  Graft rejection In transplantation, TNF-o~ has been implicated in the acute phase of graft-versus-host

162

TIBTECH- MAY 1991 [Vol. 9]

--Box I A summary of the therapeutic potential of TNF-a and its antagonists =
TNF-~

 Malignancies, including carcinomas, melanomas and haematological malignancies  Autoimmune diseases, e.g. diabetes  A range of parasitic, bacterial and virus diseases (?)     

22

TNF-~ antagonists

Endotoxic shock (septic shock) Cachexia in cancer Cerebral malaria Arthritis Graft-versus-host disease (?)  Renal allograft rejection (?)  Hypercalcaemia in cancer (?)  Bone and cartilage resorption (7) aThe therapeutic potential of TNF-~ and its antagonists is unknown or unclear, except possibly in the case of the last two entries (i.e. hypercalcaemia in cancer, and bone and cartilage resorption).

23

24 25

26 27

disease 41 and in renal allograft rejection 4~-. Antagonists of TNF-oc should be investigated for their ability to prevent these life-threatening conditions. Concluding remarks Even though the concept of treating a wide spectrum of diseases with cytokines or their antagonists has yet to be established, the prospect of treating certain diseases with TNF-cz or its antagonists exists {see Box 1}. Achieving successful therapies with TNFs and their antagonists is a challenge and will require an increased understanding of the complex interactions which occur in the human immune response and the pathophysiology of inflammation and many disease states, Acknowledgements I would like to thank Drs Cynthia Goh and Reiner Janicke for critical reading of this manuscript. I hope the many scientists whose work I have not cited will understand that this is because of space limitation. I am certainly aware of, and acknowledge, their contributions. References 1 Beutler, B. and Cerami, A. (1989) Annu. Rev. Immunol. 7, 625-655 2 Paul, N. and Ruddle, N. (1988) Annu. Rev. Biochem. 6, 407-438 3 Porter, A. (1990) FEMS Microbiol. lmmunol. 64, 193-200 4 Dunscombe, A. S., Heslop, H. E., Turner, M., Meager, A., Priest, R., Exley, T. and Brenner, M. K. (1989) J. lmmunol. 143, 3828-3834 5 North, R. J. and Havell, E. A. (1988) J. Exp. Mad. 167, 1086-1099 6 Urban, J. L., Shepard, H. M., Rothstein, J. L., Sugarman, B. J. and

7 8

9 10 11

12 13

14

15

16 17

18

19 20
21

Schreiher, H. (1986) Prec. Nat/Acad. ScL USA 83, 5233-5237 Scheurich, P., Thoma, B., Ocer, U. and Pfizenmaier, K. (1987) ]. Immuno/. 138, 1786--1790 Clark, I. A. and Cowden, W. B. hi Tumor Necrosis Factors: Structures, Regulation and Functions (Aggarwal, B. B. and Vilcek, J., ads), Marcel Dekker (in press) Havell, E. A. (1989) J. lmmunol. 143, 2894-2899 Paya, C. V., Kenmotsu, N., Schoon, R. A. and Leibson, P. J. (1988) J. lmmunol. 141, 1989-1995 Dub, E. J., Maury, W. J., Folks, T. M., Fanci, A. S. and Rabson, A. B. (1989) Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 86, 5974-5978 Wang, G. H. W., Krowka, J. F., Stites, D. P. and Goeddel, D. V. (1988) J. lmmunol. 140, 120-124 Matsuyama, T., Hamamoto, Y., Okamoto, T., Shimotohno, K., Kobayashi, N. and Yamomoto, N. (1988) Lancet 2, 1364 Rossol-Voth, R., Rossol, S., Schfitt, K. H., Corridori, S., de Clan, W. and Falke, D. (1991) J. Gen. Viral. 72, 143-147 Sugarman, B. J., Aggarwal, B. B., Hass, P. E., Figari, I. S., Palladino, M. A., Jr and Shepard, H. M. (1985) Science 230, 943-945 Saklatvala, J. (1986) Nature 322, 547-549 Garrett. I. R., Durie, B. G. M., Nedwin, G. E., Gillespie, A., Bringman, T., Sabatini, M., Bertolini, D. R. and Mundy, G. R. (1987) New Engl. J. Med. 317, 526-532 Bertolini, D. R., Nedwin, G., Bringrnan, T., Smith, D. and Mundy, G. R. (1986) Nature 319, 516-518 Mundy, G. R. (1988) ]. Clin. Invest. 82, 1-6 Beutler, B., Milsark, I. W. and Cerami, A. (1985) Science 229, 869-871 HaveN, E. A., Fiefs, W. and North,

28

29 30
31

32 33 34

35
36

37 38 39

40 41 42

R. J. (1988) J. Exp. Mad. 167, 1067-1085 Oliff, A., Defeo-Jones, D., Bayer, M., Martinez, D., Kiefer, D., Vuocolo, G., Wolfe, A. and Socher, S. H. (1987) Cell 50, 555-563 Coley, W. B. (1983) Am. J. Mad. ScL 105, 487-511 Malik, S. and Balkwill, F. (1988) Ann. Inst. Pasteur lmmunol. 139, 285-288 Clauss, M., Murray, J. C., Vianna, M., de Waal, R., Thurston, G., Nawroth, P., Gerlach, H., Gerlach, M., Bach, R., Familletti, P. C. and Stern, D. (1990) J. Biol. Chem. 265, 7078-7083 Seow, H-F., Goh, C. R., Krishnan, L. and Porter, A. G. (1989) Bio/Technology 7, 363-368 WaUach, D., Holtmann, H., Aderka, D., Rubinstein, M., Avni, Y. S., Sarov, I. and Engelman, H. (1989) Lymphokine Res. 8, 359-364 Spriggs, D. R., Sherman, M. L., Frei, E. and Kufe, D. W. (1990) in Tumor Necrosis Factor: Structure, Mechan. ism of Action, Role in Disease and Therapy (Bonavida, B. and Granger, G., eds), pp. 233-239, S. Karger Culliton, B. J. (1990) Science 249, 974-976 Rosenberg, S. A., Aebersold, P., Cornetta, K. et al. (1990) New Engl. J. Med. 323, 570-578 Kettlehut, I. C., Fiefs, W. and Goldberg, A. L. (1987) Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 84, 4273-4277 Balkwill, F. R., Ward, B. G., Moodie, E. and Fiers, W. (1987) Cancer Res. 47, 4755-4758 Goh, C. R. and Porter, A. G. Protein Eng. 4 (in press) Grau, G. E., Fajardo, I, F., Piguet, P. F., Allet, B., Lambert, P. H. and Vassalli, P. (1987) Science 237, 1210-1212 Rothstein, J. L. and Schreiber, H. (1988) Proc. Nail Acad. Sci. USA 85, 607-611 Satoh, J., Seino, H., Shintani, S,, Tanaka, S-I., Ohtehi, T., Masuda, T., Nobunaga, T. and Toyota, T. (1990) J. Immuno]. 145, 1395-1399 Tracey, K. J., Beutler, B., Lowry, S. F. et at. (1986) Science 234,470-474 Schall, T. J., Lewis, M., Koiler, K. J. et aL (1990) Cell 61,361-370 Smith, C. A., Davis, T., Anderson, D., So]am, L., Beckmann, M. P, Jerzy, R., Dower, S. K., Cosman, D. and Goodwin, R. G. (1990) Sc,~ence 248, 1019-1023 Brennan, F. M., Chantry, D., Jackson, A., Maini, R. and Feldmann, M. (1989) Lancet 2, 244-247 Piguet, P. F., Grau, G., Allot, B. and Vassalli, P. (1987) J. Exp. Mad. 166, 1280-1289 Maury, C. P. and Teppo, A. M. (1987) J. Exp. Mad. 166, 1132-1137

