doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2008.06.072

J. Mol. Biol. (2008) 381, 1292­1306

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Crystal Structures of Multiple GATA Zinc Fingers Bound to DNA Reveal New Insights into DNA Recognition and Self-Association by GATA
Darren L. Bates 1 , Yongheng Chen 2 , Grace Kim 1 , Liang Guo 1 and Lin Chen 1,2 
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309-0215, USA Departments of Biological Sciences and Chemistry, Norris Cancer Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-2910, USA Received 6 May 2008; received in revised form 11 June 2008; accepted 25 June 2008 Available online 2 July 2008
2 1

The GATA family of transcription factors (GATA1­6) binds selected GATA sites in vertebrate genomes to regulate specific gene expression. Although vertebrate GATA factors have two highly conserved zinc finger motifs, how the two fingers act together to recognize functional DNA elements is not well understood. Here we determined the crystal structures of the C-terminal zinc finger of mouse GATA3 bound to DNA containing two variously arranged GATA binding sites. Our structures and accompanying biochemical analyses reveal two distinct modes of DNA binding by GATA to closely arranged sites. One mode involves cooperative binding by two GATA factors that interact with each other through protein­protein interactions. The other involves simultaneous binding of the N-terminal zinc finger (N-finger) and the C-terminal zinc finger of the same GATA factor. Our studies represent the first crystallographic analysis of GATA zinc fingers bound to DNA and provide new insights into the DNA recognition mechanism by the GATA zinc finger. Our crystal structure also reveals a dimerization interface in GATA that has previously been shown to be important for GATA self-association. These findings significantly advance our understanding of the structure and function of GATA and provide an important framework for further investigating the in vivo mechanisms of GATA-dependent gene regulation.
© 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Edited by P. Wright

Keywords: GATA; zinc finger; DNA recognition; self-association; transcription

Introduction
Originally discovered as key regulators of erythroid-specific genes,1­3 the GATA family of proteins has now been established as an important class of eukaryotic transcription factors in a variety of cell types.4 Among the six vertebrate homologues, GATA1­3 play key roles in the development and
*Corresponding author. Department of Biological Sciences, Molecular and Computational Biology, University of Southern California, RRI 204C, 1050 Childs Way, Los Angeles, CA 90089-2910, USA. E-mail address: linchen@usc.edu. Abbreviations used: N-finger, N-terminal zinc finger; C-finger, C-terminal zinc finger; ChIP, chromatin immunoprecipitation; OPP, opposite; ADJ, adjacent; PDB, Protein Data Bank; EMSA, electrophoresis mobility shift assay.

maintenance of hematopoietic and immune cells,5 whereas GATA4­6 participate in transcriptional regulation in tissues such as the heart, liver, and gonads.6 The diverse roles of GATA proteins in the development of vertebrates are particularly interesting, as uncovering the molecular basis of these roles may offer insights into the epigenetic mechanisms of cell differentiation and lineage specification.4,7 GATA3, the subject of this study, is critical to the immune system and essential in the development of specific T-help-cell subset (Th2) from naïve T cells.8­10 The most notable features of GATA proteins at the sequence level are two highly conserved type IV zinc fingers11 referred to as N-terminal zinc finger (Nfinger) and C-terminal zinc finger (C-finger). The sequences immediately following the two zinc fingers are also conserved, whereas other sequence motifs, such as the putative transactivation domains, are less conserved in the GATA family. Overall,

0022-2836/$ - see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DNA Binding and Self-Association by GATA

1293 highly conserved nature of the zinc fingers, DNA binding by GATA proteins can be affected by subtle changes in amino acid sequences flanking the zinc core module, which may account for the different DNA binding properties of the N-finger and the C-finger, and between different GATA homologues.22,29,45,46 Such adaptability in DNA binding may allow GATA proteins to achieve diverse functions in specific cellular contexts. Although the N-finger and the C-finger can bind certain sequences with two GATA sites (e.g., the palindromic GATA motif) simultaneously, there is no defined pattern of double-GATA sites throughout vertebrate genomes. This raises another intriguing question as to why the two zinc fingers and their linker region are highly conserved in vertebrate GATA factors. It is possible that the N-finger and the C-finger interact with each other to determine specific DNA binding in a given genomic context,29 but exactly how the two zinc fingers of GATA bind DNA coordinately is not clear. To better understand the diverse DNA recognition mechanisms by GATA proteins and how these recognition mechanisms may be affected by protein­protein interactions and chromatin environments, it is important to first characterize the detailed DNA binding interactions by GATA zinc fingers at high resolution. So far, DNA binding by a single GATA zinc finger has been analyzed by NMR on the chicken GATA1 C-finger and on the fungal homologue AREA. 47,48 Although these studies revealed the structure fold of GATA zinc finger and its general framework of DNA binding, many details of protein/DNA interactions have not been fully defined.49 In the present study, we determined the crystal structure of mouse GATA3 C-finger bound to DNA containing two variously arranged GATA binding sites. These are the first crystal structures of GATA zinc finger bound to DNA. As discussed below, our studies extend previous NMR analyses and provide high-resolution details to define the DNA recognition mechanism by the GATA zinc finger. Our crystal structures also reveal the atomic details of a dimerization interface in GATA3 C-finger that has previously been shown to be required for GATA self-association.30 Finally, our structure-guided biochemical analyses suggest that full-length GATA factors can bind closely arranged GATA sites in diverse modes depending on the arrangement of the binding sites, and, more strikingly, on the protein concentration of the GATA factors. These findings have important implications for understanding and further studying the in vivo functions of GATA transcription factors.

GATA proteins have a relatively compact and conserved domain structure and yet are able to achieve diverse functions in a variety of cellular processes. The function of GATA depends critically on the two conserved zinc fingers and their flanking sequences, as suggested by mutagenesis in biochemical and transgenic animal studies, as well as disease-associated mutations found in humans.12­17 The C-finger and its adjacent C-terminal basic tail are necessary and sufficient for GATA to bind its cognate sequence (WGATAR: W = A/T; R = A/G).1,18­21 The N-finger, especially that of GATA2 and GATA3, can also bind DNA independently, but with a slightly different sequence preference (GATC). 22­24 On certain sequences with two proximal GATA sites, including the palindromic GATA motif (ATC(A/T)GATAAG) found in the promoter of GATA1, the N-finger can also participate in DNA binding together with the Cfinger, resulting in a GATA/DNA complex with markedly increased affinity.24­29 Both the N-finger and the C-finger can engage in protein­protein interactions, leading to self-association and binding to other transcription factors. GATA factors have been shown to form homo-oligomers or hetero-oligomers in vivo and in vitro, and this selfassociation is thought to play important roles in the combinatorial and synergistic transcription regulation by GATA factors and in the assembly of highorder protein/DNA complexes in locus control regions.30,31 Recent studies with transgenic mice have indeed shown that self-association of GATA1 is important for proper mammalian erythroid development in vivo,32 but the structural basis of GATA self-association remains unclear. In addition to selfassociation, the interaction between the N-finger and Friend of GATA has been shown to be essential in a broad range of GATA-dependent cellular functions,33­36 whereas the C-finger of GATA interacts with NFAT to regulate transcription synergistically in T cells and muscle cells.37­39 Finally, GATA factors have been shown to bind and to modulate chromatin structure, implicating a critical role of GATA in epigenetic control of chromosome structure during differentiation.4,40,41 The diverse cellular functions displayed by GATA may be attributed, at least in part, to its diverse biochemical modes of action in DNA binding, protein­protein interaction, and chromatin remodeling, but the molecular basis of these activities is not well understood. One of the most intriguing questions regarding the function of GATA factors is how they can locate and bind their functional sites in vivo given the high occurrence of the relatively small recognition motif (WGATAR).4 Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analyses reveal that GATA binds only a small fraction of its cognate sites in the genome.42­44 Flanking DNA sequences and cellular contextspecific factors, such as local chromatin structure and interacting proteins, may play important roles in binding site selection. The intrinsic DNA binding function of a given GATA member and its adaptability to environmental influences, however, also likely play key roles in this process. Despite the

Results
Crystallographic study of GATA3 C-finger bound to DNA Our crystallographic analyses focused on the mouse GATA3 C-finger (amino acid residues 308­

1294 370) bound to DNA. Together with the previous NMR analyses of the chicken GATA1 C-finger bound to DNA and the fungal AREA zinc finger bound to DNA,47,48 we hope to better understand the DNA binding mechanism of GATA zinc finger through comparison of structural data derived from different techniques and from different GATA homologues. Given the fact that vertebrate GATA factors contain two zinc fingers connected by a predicted loop and that GATA sites frequently occur as clusters in vertebrate genomes,29 another aim of our study is to explore how GATA binds closely arranged GATA sites, referred to as proximal GATA sites hereafter. We did so by using DNA sequences containing two GATA sites in our crystallization. Since GATA site clusters in genome have diverse orientations and spacings, there is no special design in the spacing and orientation of the two GATA sites on DNA. Instead, DNA fragments containing two GATA sites arranged differently were used for cocrystallization with the GATA3 C-finger. Two DNA fragments, each having a distinct arrangement of two GATA sites, crystallized successfully with the GATA3 C-finger. On one DNA fragment, the two GATA sites are located on the opposite face of the DNA, and the two bound zinc fingers make no direct contact with each other (Fig. 1a). This complex is solved at 2.7 Å resolution and referred to as OPP (opposite) hereafter. On the other DNA fragment, the two GATA sites are located on the same face of the DNA, and the two adjacently bound zinc fingers interact with each other directly (Fig. 1b). This structure is solved at 3.1 Å resolution and referred to as ADJ (adjacent) hereafter. In total, we have observed four independent GATA3 C-finger/DNA complexes in two different crystal forms. Data statistics for both crystals are presented in Table 1. Overall structure description The structure of the GATA3 C-finger consists of a core zinc module (amino acid residues Ser308Thr348) and a C-terminal basic tail (amino acid residues 349­365). The beginning of the C-terminal basic tail (residues 349­356) folds back onto the DNA binding  helix through numerous hydrogen bonds and van der Waals contacts (Supplemental Fig. 1). The rest of the C-terminal basic tail inserts into the minor groove, where Arg364 makes basespecific hydrogen bonds to DNA (discussed further below). In the ADJ complex (Fig. 1b), one copy of the GATA3 C-finger displays an alternative conformation wherein the second half of the C-terminal basic tail (amino acid residues 357­366) transverses the minor groove and reaches over to the major groove to interact with the C-terminal end of the  helix of the adjacently bound GATA3 C-finger (discussed further below). The overall structure of the GATA3 C-finger and its relative orientation to DNA are nearly identical in the four independent complexes observed in the crystal structures. The RMSD of C superposition is around 0.1­0.6 Å among the four GATA3 C-fingers. The DNA fragments in both

DNA Binding and Self-Association by GATA

Fig. 1. Overall structure of GATA3 C-finger bound to DNA. Crystal structures of GATA3 C-finger (purple, ribbon style) bound to the OPP (a) and ADJ (b) DNA (bluegray, stick model); the zinc atom is shown in gray sphere. The same color scheme is used throughout the illustration, unless noted otherwise. The sequence of the DNA in each crystal structure is shown below the figure. The sequence of the OPP DNA in (a) is numbered for discussion in the text. The N-terminus and the C-terminus of the protein are labeled by bold letters N and C, respectively. The alternative C-terminal end at the right side of the GATA3 C-finger in (b) is indicated by C. (c) C backbone superposition of the core zinc module between the GATA3 C-finger (purple), the chicken GATA1 C-finger (red), and the fungal AREA zinc finger (blue). The GATA3 C-finger bound to the consensus GATA site of the OPP DNA is used here. For clarity, only the DNA (stick model) from the GATA3 C-finger/DNA complex is shown.

DNA Binding and Self-Association by GATA Table 1. Statistics of crystallographic analysis
OPP SAD Data collection Resolution (Å) Rsym (%)a Completeness (%)b I/b Refinement Resolution (Å) R-factorc Rfree RMSD Bond lengths (Å) Bond angles (P) Average B-factor (Å2) OPP Nat ADJ Nat

1295 that may affect structural analyses by NMR and X-ray crystallography differently (discussed further below). A key limitation in structural analysis by NMR is the lack of restraints that can define long-range order. One way to overcome this problem is to use residual dipolar couplings. This was first demonstrated in the NMR analysis of the chicken GATA1 C-finger/DNA complex, wherein the orientation of the 34 loop and the  helix became much better defined when the residual dipolar couplings restraints were applied.49 Our crystal structures of the GATA3 C-finger/DNA complex superimpose much better with the chicken GATA1 C-finger/DNA complex refined with residual dipolar couplings [Protein Data Bank (PDB) code 2GAT; RMSD of 0.8 Å for 25 C atoms] than the one without (PDB code 1GAT; RMSD of 1.1 Å for 25 C atoms) (Supplemental Fig. 2), providing an independent confirmation for the utility of residual dipolar couplings in NMR structural analysis.49 Protein/DNA interactions Of the four independent GATA3 C-finger/DNA complexes observed in the crystal structures (Fig. 1a and b), three are bound to the consensus GATA site, whereas one is bound to a fortuitous GATT site (see Materials and Methods for details) that is known to bind GATA zinc finger in site-selection studies and is also found in natural promoters of GATA-regulated genes.18,19,50­53 Since the three complexes bound to the consensus GATA site are nearly identical, we will focus our description on one of them (the one bound to the consensus site in the OPP complex) and compare it with the one on the GATT site and with the previously characterized chicken GATA1 C-finger/DNA complex and the fungal AREA/ DNA complex.47,48 The GATA3 C-finger binds to DNA through the core zinc module in the major groove and the C-terminal basic tail in the minor groove. The N-terminal  hairpin loop, the 34 anti-parallel  sheet, and the  helix all contribute to the DNA binding surface in the major groove. Here a number of residues, including Thr326, Leu327, Arg329, Asn339, Leu343, and Leu347, make direct hydrogen bonds and van der Waals contacts with DNA bases (Fig. 2a and b). On the consensus site of the OPP complex, Arg329 interacts with Gua14 through bidentate hydrogen bonds. In addition, Arg329 also forms a hydrogen bond with Thy8. Asn339 forms a hydrogen bond with Arg339, as well as Ade7 (Fig. 2a), whereas Thr326 makes a hydrogen bond with Asn339 and van der Waals contact with Thy8. This network of interactions centers on the first three nucleotides (GAT) of the binding site (GATA) and plays a key role in sequence-specific recognition by GATA factors. The base-specific hydrogen bond interactions in the major groove are supplemented by numerous van der Waals contacts. In addition to the Th326/Thy8 interaction mentioned above, the C5 methyl group of Thy6 is sandwiched by Leu343

50­2.7 30­2.7 30­3.1 0.178 (0.472) 0.179 (0.475) 0.078 (0.164) 100 (100) 100 (100) 99.9 (100) 30.32 (6.22) 30.49 (6.15) 23.18 (7.75) 30­2.7 28 30 0.01 1.7 62.2 30­3.1 27.4 29.6 0.009 1.3 50.2

OPP SAD: single wavelength anomalous diffraction data collected on the OPP complex at the zinc edge; OPP Nat: native data set of the OPP complex; ADJ Nat: native data set of the ADJ complex. a Rsym = |I - I|/I, where I is the observed intensity and I is the statistically weighted average intensity of multiple observations of symmetry-related reflections. b Numbers in parentheses are for the outer shell (2.70­2.87 Å for OPP SAD, 2.70­2.87 Å for OPP Nat, and 3.29­3.10 Å for ADJ Nat). c R = | Fo|-|Fc| /|Fo|, where Fo and Fc are observed and | | calculated structure factor amplitudes, respectively. Rfree is calculated for randomly chosen (10%) reflections.

crystal forms are in approximately a straight B-form conformation. Comparing the crystal structure of the mouse GATA3 C-finger bound to DNA with the corresponding NMR structure of chicken GATA1 (RMSD of 1.1 Å for 25 C atoms) and the fungal AREA (RMSD of 0.9 Å for 25 C atoms) reveals many common structural features of DNA binding by the GATA zinc fingers. The fold of the core zinc module, the trajectory of the C-terminal basic tail, and the orientation of protein with respect to DNA are very similar in the three superimposed structures (Fig. 1c).47,48 The detailed interactions underlying the folding of the core zinc module, including the zinc coordination and the packing of numerous buried hydrophobic residues, are highly conserved (data not shown).47 The backbone conformation and sidechain orientation of the C-terminal basic tail, however, show marked differences in the three structures (Fig. 1c). The differences between the AREA zinc finger and the chicken GATA1 C-finger were thought to be due to different sequences in the C-terminal basic tail.48 However, our crystal structures showed that the conformation of the Cterminal basic tail is most likely determined by Tyr344, Tyr345, His348, Arg352, and Met356, which interact with each other and with the DNA backbone (Supplemental Fig. 1). Most of these residues are conserved in AREA and in the chicken GATA1 C-finger. Moreover, GATA1 and GATA3 have nearly identical sequences in the C-terminal basic tail. Thus, the apparent structural differences between GATA1 and GATA3 in the C-terminal basic tail are likely due to the inherent flexibility of this region

1296

DNA Binding and Self-Association by GATA

Fig. 2. DNA recognition by the GATA3 C-finger. (a) Hydrogen bonding interactions between the conserved Arg329 and Asn339 and the first three nucleotides (GAT) in the binding site. Shown here is the consensus site in the OPP complex where the DNA base is numbered according to Fig. 1a. Potential hydrogen bonds are indicated by dashed lines with corresponding distances. (b) Van der Waals contacts between conserved hydrophobic residues (Thr326, Leu327, Leu343, and Leu347) and DNA bases in the major groove. Several contacts are indicated by dashed lines to give a distance scale. Arg329 and Asn339 are omitted in this view for clarity. (c) DNA binding interactions by Arg364 in the minor groove. The electron density of Arg364 is calculated from simulated omit map and contoured at 2 level. Several short distances are shown as potential hydrogen bonds and van der Waals contacts. (d) Titration of the ADJ DNA with the wild-type GATA3 DF (lanes 1­5) and the Arg364Ala (lanes 6­10) showing that Arg364 is important for DNA binding (see Materials and Methods for details). (e) Schematic summary of key DNA contacts by GATA3 C-finger. The region shown corresponds to the consensus site of the OPP complex. Solid lines to bases indicate hydrogen bond interactions; dashed lines to bases indicate van der Waals contacts; and solid lines to DNA backbone denote contacts with the sugar phosphate backbone by residues from the core zinc module (blue font) and the C-terminal basic tails (red font), respectively.

and Leu347, which may explain the preference for adenine at the fourth position of the GATA binding site (Fig. 2b). Moreover, Leu327 makes van der Waals contacts with Ade13 and Gua14 (not shown), suggesting that flanking sequences outside the core recognition site (GATA) may affect DNA binding by GATA. In addition to contacts with bases, numerous residues of the core zinc module, including Arg312, Thr326, Arg330, Asn339, Ala340, Tyr344, Lys346,

and His348, interact with the sugar phosphate backbone of the DNA extensively (not shown). Residues from the first half of the C-terminal basic tail, including Arg352, Met356, Lys358, and Ile361, also contribute to the backbone binding (not shown), while Arg364 from the second half inserts deeply into the minor groove to form a hydrogen bond with the carbonyl of Thy6. The aliphatic side chain of Arg364 makes extensive van der Waals contacts

DNA Binding and Self-Association by GATA

1297 display nearly identical DNA binding interactions on three GATA sites and one GATT site, indicating that the observed protein/DNA interactions are maintained in different crystal packing environments (Fig. 2e). Most of the DNA binding interactions observed here, especially those mediated by the core zinc module to the major groove and to the sugar phosphate, are shared by the chicken GATA1 C-finger/DNA complex and the fungal AREA/ DNA complex.47,48 But our structure and biochemical analyses also reveal new insights into the detailed DNA binding mechanism by the C-terminal basic tail, especially on the role of the conserved Arg364. Binding of proximal GATA sites by the GATA3 C-finger The vertebrate GATA factors (GATA1­6) contain two highly conserved zinc fingers connected by a linker region that is also conserved. The N-finger and the C-finger share a homologous core zinc module and, hence, similar preference in the first three nucleotides in their binding sites (GATN; italicized).19 The specificity for the fourth position and the overall affinity appear to be modulated by sequences flanking the core zinc module, especially the C-terminal basic tail following the zinc core.1,18­24,46­48 While the C-finger of GATA factors binds the cognate site (GATA) with a high affinity (Kd, nM) throughout the family, the N-fingers of different GATA members show different DNA binding activities. The N-finger of chicken GATA1 binds DNA weakly (Kd,  M) but shows a preference for the GATC site, whereas the N-finger of GATA2 and GATA3 binds DNA with an affinity (Kd,  nM) similar to that of the C-finger, but prefers GATC, GATT, and GATG to GATA.22 However, the base identity at the fourth position (GATN; italicized) seems to have only limited discriminative power on the DNA binding specificity by the C-finger and by the N-finger. For example, the GATA1 C-finger binds a GATA site threefold better than a GATC site, whereas the N-finger of GATA2 binds a GATC site fivefold better than a GATA site.22 These observations suggest that the N-finger and the C-finger of a given GATA factor could simultaneously bind proximal consensus sites or sites containing the core GAT recognition motif. Although both zinc fingers are required to bind certain doubleGATA sites with high affinity,16,25,27­29 there is no defined pattern of double-GATA sites found in vertebrate genomes that would suggest a singular mechanism of DNA binding by the two zinc fingers of GATA factors. Instead, paired GATA sites found in many GATA-regulated promoters occur with various spacings and orientations, suggesting that GATA factors may bind proximal sites in a variety of modes to regulate specific transcription in distinct promoter contexts. Our two crystal structures represent two distinct arrangements of double-GATA sites on DNA. In the OPP complex, the two sites point away from each

with neighboring bases and sugar rings (Fig. 2c). But it is the hydrogen-bonding ability of the guanidino group of Arg364 that seems to enhance the sequence specificity at the fourth position of the GATA site (see below). On the GATT site in the OPP complex, the base change at the fourth position (GATA versus GATT) does not seem to affect the overall protein/DNA interaction. Binding in the major groove is conserved as Leu343 and Leu347 maintain van der Waals contacts with the major groove, although with different bases. In the minor groove, Arg364 donates a hydrogen bond to the N3 position of the adenine paired with the fourth thymine (GATT; italicized), which is similar to the hydrogen bond between Arg364 and the O2 position of thymine on the GATA site (see above). Our structural analyses suggest that GATA factors should bind GATT similarly to GATA, which is consistent with previous biochemical and functional studies.18,19,50 Our crystal structures suggest that Arg364 from the C-terminal basic tail of the GATA3 C-finger plays a key role in DNA binding. It inserts deeply into the minor groove and forms a hydrogen bond with an A/T or a T/A base pair in the fourth position of the binding site and may thus contribute to the stability of DNA binding by GATA factors (Fig. 2c). Arg364 apparently also plays a role in discriminating against guanine or cytosine at the fourth position in the GATA site, since the guanidine group of Arg364 may clash with the exocyclic amino group (N2) of guanine in the minor groove. Arg364 is highly conserved in the C-terminal basic tail of GATA factors. However, in the chicken GATA1 C-finger/DNA complex,47 the equivalent arginine (Arg54) does not insert into the minor groove, but instead binds to the phosphate backbone. In the fungal AREA/DNA complex,48 the corresponding arginine residue (Arg59) projects toward the minor groove, but not deep enough to make hydrogen bonds to bases. Whether the different structural roles of the conserved arginine in the three complexes reflect different DNA binding mechanisms by GATA3, GATA1, and AREA, or uncertainty from different experimental studies is not clear. However, the same DNA binding interaction by Arg364 in the minor groove is observed four times in our crystallographic analyses here. To further examine the functional role of Arg364, we introduced a specific mutation (Arg364Ala) in the DNA binding domain of GATA3 and analyzed its effect on DNA binding (see Materials and Methods for details). The mutant behaved similarly to the wild-type protein in expression and purification, but disrupted DNA binding to a consensus GATA site (Fig. 2d). Although the C-terminal basic tail is known to be important for DNA binding by GATA factors,20,46­48 our structural and biochemical analyses here reveal its detailed DNA binding interactions and identify Arg364 as one of the key DNA binding residues in the minor groove. Overall, the four independent GATA3 C-finger/ DNA complexes observed in the two crystal forms

1298 other and are separated by 3 bp (AATCAGAGATA). This arrangement is reminiscent of the palindromic site (TATCAGATA) found in the promoter of GATA1, but with two additional bases in the spacer region.28 The two zinc fingers in the OPP structure are located on the opposite faces of the DNA and make no direct contact with each other. These structural features are consistent with the fact that GATA3 C-finger binds the two sites of the OPP DNA independently (Supplemental Fig. 5). However, in the OPP complex (Fig. 1a), the C-terminus of one finger is only 19 Å away from the N-terminus of the other, and there is no structural hindrance in between. Given the length and apparent flexibility of the linker between the N-finger and the C-finger, it is possible that double-GATA sites resembling the OPP DNA may favor simultaneous DNA binding by the N-finger and the C-finger of the same GATA factor (see below). Dimerization of GATA3 C-finger In the ADJ complex (Fig. 1b), the two GATA sites point toward each other and are separated by 5 bp (TGATAAGACTTATCT). This arrangement of double-GATA sites is taken from the mouse GATA1 promoter and also found in other promoter contexts.28 In this configuration, the two zinc fingers bind adjacent major grooves on the same side of DNA, making direct protein­protein contacts that form an intimate dimer (Fig. 3a). The protein­ protein interaction is mediated mainly by a conserved motif consisting of Asn351, Arg352, Pro353, Leu354, and Thr355, also known as the NRPL motif30 (Fig. 3b). Although the contacting surface (buried surface area, 169 Å2) is smaller than that seen in several higher-order transcription factor complexes,54­57 this region of the C-terminal basic tail (amino acid residues His348-Lys358) of both fingers interacts with the DNA backbone and minor groove extensively, thus forming an extended protein/DNA and protein­protein interaction interface (Fig. 3a). The stabilization of the flexible C-terminal basic tail by DNA may contribute to the protein­protein interaction through reduced entropy cost of binding. In the ADJ complex, the C-terminal basic tail of one zinc finger shows an alternative (minor) conformation, wherein the second half of the C-terminal basic tail (amino acid residues Lys357-Arg366) crosses over the minor groove and interacts with the zinc finger bound to the adjacent major groove. Here residues from the C-terminal basic tail of one finger, including Lys357, Lys358, Glu359, and Gln362, interact with residues at the end of the recognition helix of the other finger, including Leu347, His348, Asn349, and Ile350 (Fig. 3c). The GATA3 C-finger dimer interface observed in our crystal structure is in excellent agreement with biochemical data showing that residues in the C-terminal basic tail and near the end of the recognition helix are critical to GATA1 self-association.30 Most notably, mutations in the NRPL motif of GATA1, which corresponds to the major protein­

DNA Binding and Self-Association by GATA

Fig. 3. Structural basis of GATA3 C-finger dimerization. (a) Surface model of the GATA3 C-finger dimer bound to the ADJ DNA showing the extended protein/DNA and protein­protein interaction interfaces. The transparent surfaces are colored according to the underling ribbon/ stick/atom model. The orientation is similar to that of Fig. 1b. (b) Detailed view of the main dimerization interface formed by the NRPL motif. Here Pro353 and Thr355 engage in extensive van der Waals contacts, while Arg352 interacts with the DNA backbone to stabilize the conformation of the NRPL motif. Several contacts are indicated by dashed lines to give a distance scale. (c) Close contacts between the C-terminal basic tail of one zinc finger in alternative conformation (cyan) with the recognition helix of another zinc finger bound to the adjacent major groove.

protein interaction interface observed in the GATA3 C-finger dimer (Fig. 3a), substantially reduced GATA1 self-association.30 Although we cannot rule out crystal packing effects, the observation that the C-terminal basic tail

DNA Binding and Self-Association by GATA

1299 DNA (DNA in the ADJ complex) with GATA3 DF yields only one complex throughout the entire concentration range (Fig. 4a, lanes 1­5). The titration stoichiometry obtained at concentrations above the Kd (N 10 nM) suggests that the complex corresponds to two GATA3 DFs bound to the ADJ DNA (Fig. 5a). Similar to the binding of GATA3 C-finger to the ADJ DNA (Supplemental Fig. 5), no monomer complex was observed under low protein/DNA ratio (protein:DNA molar ratio b2), suggesting that the binding of the ADJ DNA by GATA3 C-finger and DF are highly cooperative. Titration of the OPP DNA (DNA from the OPP complex, with the GATT site substituted by the GATA site) with GATA3 DF yields a fast mobility complex first (Fig. 4a, lanes 6­ 8) and then a slow mobility complex when excess GATA3 DF is added (Fig. 4a, lanes 9 and 10). This titration behavior seems to be similar to the independent binding of the GATA3 C-finger to the two GATA sites on the OPP DNA (Supplemental Fig. 5). However, close examination of the EMSA data reveals that GATA3 DF can shift all of the DNA at about a 1:1 molar ratio (Fig. 4a, lane 8) as if both the N-finger and the C-finger of GATA3 DF bind the two GATA sites in the OPP DNA (Fig. 5b). This is likely the case, since the GATA3 N-finger can bind the GATA site with reasonable affinity (Kd  28 nM), although weaker than its C-finger (Kd  5.2 nM).22 Similar to the binding of palindromic GATA sites by full-length GATA factors observed before, the involvement of the N-finger in DNA binding here enhances the affinity of GATA3 DF for the OPP DNA and results in a fast mobility complex.16,25,28,29 When excess GATA3 DF is added, the entropic advantage of intramolecular DNA binding by the N-finger is balanced out by the high protein con-

can adopt different conformations (insert into the minor groove or cross over to the adjacent major groove) with distinct functional implications (DNA binding and protein­protein interaction) suggests that the C-terminal basic tail may play a key role in modulating the functions of GATA factors in different promoter contexts. Consistent with the structural features of the ADJ complex discussed above, the GATA3 C-finger binds double-GATA sites with the ADJ configuration cooperatively (Supplemental Fig. 5). In the ADJ complex, the C-terminus of one finger is far away from the N-terminus of the other (direct distances of 33 and 42 Å, respectively, for the minor and major conformations) and separated by the double-stranded DNA, suggesting that this arrangement of double-GATA sites may not allow simultaneous binding of the N-finger and the C-finger from the same GATA factor, but rather favor dimerization of two GATA factors through protein­protein interactions between their C-fingers. Binding of proximal GATA sites by full-length GATA/DNA binding domain Our structural analyses above suggest that the double-GATA sites in the OPP complex may favor simultaneous binding by the N-finger and the Cfinger of the same GATA factor, whereas that in the ADJ complex may favor cooperative DNA binding by the C-finger of two GATA factors. To test this idea, we conducted a series of electrophoresis mobility shift assays (EMSAs) using the full DNA binding domain of GATA3 that contains both the N-finger and the C-finger (amino acid residues 260­370, referred to as DF hereafter). Titration of the ADJ

Fig. 4. Binding of proximal GATA sites by GATA factors. EMSA of wild type (a) and the Arg275Glu mutant (b) of GATA3 DF on three different DNA probes designed based on the crystal structures. The sequences of the three probes ADJ, OPP, and OPP A­C are listed below the gel figure. The GATA site (preferred by the C-finger) and the GATC site (preferred by the N-finger) in the sequences are highlighted in boldface. Only one strand is highlighted to indicate the orientation of the double site. For each set of five titrations, the DNA is held at 100 nM as increasing amounts of protein are added (0, 50, 100, 200, and 400 nM) (see Materials and Methods for details). DNA denotes free probe; "1 protein" denotes complexes of one GATA3 DF bound to DNA; and "2 protein" denotes complexes of two GATA3 DF bound to DNA, either independently or cooperatively (see the text for detailed discussions).

1300 centration. As a result, the C-finger of a second GATA3 DF, which binds the GATA site about fivefold stronger than the N-finger, will compete off the N-finger of the first bound GATA3 DF (Fig. 4a, lanes 9 and 10).22 This will result in a slow mobility complex that contains two GATA3 DFs bound to the two GATA sites on the OPP DNA (Fig. 5c). Consistent with this interpretation, when one of

DNA Binding and Self-Association by GATA

the GATA sites is substituted with the binding site preferred by the N-finger (GATC), the GATA3 DF not only binds the modified OPP DNA with increased affinity (Fig. 4a, compare lanes 12 and 7) but also remains as the fast mobility complex even at higher protein concentrations (Fig. 4a, compare lanes 14 and 15 and lanes 9 and 10). To further test our interpretation of the different DNA binding modes displayed by GATA3 DF, we made a point mutation (Arg275Glu) in GATA3 DF that is predicted to disrupt the DNA binding by the N-finger. As expected, this mutation had no apparent effect on the binding of GATA3 DF to the ADJ DNA (Fig. 4b, lanes 1­5), consistent with our model indicating that binding to the ADJ DNA only involves the C-finger of two neighboring DNA-bound GATA factors. However, this mutation significantly reduced the formation of the fast mobility complex on the OPP DNA (compare lanes 7 and 8 in Fig. 4b with lanes 7 and 8 in Fig. 4a) and the modified OPP DNA (compare lanes 12 and 13 in Fig. 4b with lanes 12 and 13 in Fig. 4a). The fact that we still observe some fast mobility complexes (Fig. 4b, lanes 7 and 8, and lanes 12 and 13) could be simply attributed to the binding of the C-finger to one of the GATA sites. This mutation has also led to the formation of the slow mobility complex on the modified OPP DNA at high protein concentration (compare lanes 14 and 15 in Fig. 4b with lanes 14 and 15 in Fig. 4a), presumably due to the binding of the C-finger to the GATC site at high protein concentrations. These EMSA studies support the two distinct modes of DNA binding to different double-GATA sites by full-length GATA factors predicted by our structural analyses. Our structural and biochemical analyses suggest that the two zinc fingers of GATA can bind closely arranged GATA sites in distinct modes depending on the sequence and arrangement of the two sites and the protein concentration of the GATA factor. Such versatility of DNA binding by GATA may have important implications for its functional diversity in vivo.

Fig. 5. Diverse modes of DNA binding to different double-GATA sites by GATA factors. A model of GATA3 DF is built wherein the N-finger (green) is constructed by homology modeling based on the crystal structure of the C-finger (purple). The linker region is assumed to be flexible and may adopt different conformations depending on the arrangement of the double-GATA sites. (a) Model of GATA3 DF bound to double-GATA site resembling the ADJ DNA. (b) Model of GATA3 DF bound to the GATA/GATC composite site (OPP A­C) DNA or palindromic doubleGATA site at low protein concentrations. (c) Model of GATA3 DF bound to palindromic double-GATA site at high protein concentrations. The three models were constructed based on EMSA data of Fig. 4 and were meant to interpret the specific DNA binding interactions by the N-finger and the C-finger on different probes and under different conditions. The conformation of the linker region, and whether the N-finger interacts with the C-finger or DNA nonspecifically in (a) and (c), cannot be determined with current data and are therefore hypothetical in the figure.

DNA Binding and Self-Association by GATA

1301 where the C-terminal basic tail of the GATA3 C-finger binds DNA in the minor groove. Arg364, which contributes to sequence specificity for the fourth position of the binding site, is located right in the middle of this motif (QTRNRK; the italicized R corresponds to Arg364). Interestingly, replacing the QTRNRK motif in the C-finger of chicken GATA1 with LVSKRA did not convert its DNA binding specificity to that of the N-finger,46 suggesting that the DNA binding mechanism of the N-finger C-terminal basic tail may be different from that of the C-finger. The structural basis of the N-finger specificity (prefers GATC, GATG, and GATT to GATA) is not clear without direct structural analysis of its complex to DNA. It was thought that DNA recognition by GATA factors is dominated by hydrophobic residues (Leu327, Leu343, and Leu347 in the GATA3 Cfinger) that make numerous van der Waals contacts in the major groove.47,48 However, these van der Waals interactions are located at the periphery of the protein/DNA interface and do not seem to contribute directly to base-specific recognition of the GAT motif. It seems that the major role of the conserved hydrophobic residues is to enhance the stability of the protein/DNA complex.60 Nevertheless, these hydrophobic residues may modulate the DNA binding function of GATA factors through a number of mechanisms. First, they may mediate protein­protein interactions with a neighboring bound transcription factor partner. Second, they may impose sequence specificity in the flanking region where van der Waals contacts by the conserved hydrophobic residues may favor some sequences. Finally, since van der Waals interaction is sensitive to the shape complementarities of the binding interfaces, the conserved hydrophobic residues in the core zinc module may confer conformational specificity to DNA binding by GATA factors (i.e., favor binding to GATA sites embedded in DNA with certain conformations). Our crystal structures suggest that the van der Waals interactions between Leu327, Leu343, and Leu347 of GATA3 C-finger and DNA could be enhanced if the major groove bends toward the protein surface. Although this favorable bend is not observed in our crystal structures, in vivo GATA sites may be bent in certain genomic contexts, as suggested by biochemical analyses.61 This ability of shape recognition is reminiscent of that proposed for FOXP262 and may be particularly relevant when considering the mechanisms of selective binding of GATA sites in vivo. In this regard, it is interesting to note that GATA4 has been shown to bind in the linker region of a reconstituted nucleosomal array.41 Moreover, a mutation in GATA3 (Leu347Arg) linked to hypoparathyroidism­deafness­renal dysplasia showed no apparent effect on the binding of GATA3 to an isolated consensus GATA site.58 According to our structural analyses above, this mutation could potentially alter the binding preference of GATA3 for sites in specific DNA conformations and, hence, the in vivo transcription targets in a way similar to that proposed for the Leu22Val mutation found in AREA.63 Another GATA3 muta-

Discussion
Our studies here represent one of the most comprehensive analyses of the DNA binding mechanisms by GATA zinc fingers at the structural level. DNA binding by the core zinc module in the major groove centers on conserved arginine and asparagine (Arg329 and Asn339 in the GATA3 C-finger), which form base-specific hydrogen bonds with the first three nucleotides (GAT) in the GATA binding site. These hydrogen bonding residues are sandwiched by a number of conserved hydrophobic residues (Leu327, Leu343, and Leu347 in GATA3 C-finger) that make van der Waals contacts with bases at the GAT trinucleotide motif and in the flanking region. These hydrogen bonding and van der Waals interactions are highly conserved in the four independent GATA3 C-finger/DNA complexes and in the NMR structure of the chicken GATA1 C-finger/DNA complex and the fungal AREA/ DNA complex, suggesting their critical roles in DNA binding by GATA proteins.47,48 Consistent with the structural models presented here and published previously, a number of residues at the protein/DNA interface, such as Arg329, Leu343, and Leu347, have been shown to be functionally important in genetic and biochemical studies, as well as in analyses of disease-associated mutations. 15,48,58,59 It is noteworthy that the highly conserved Arg19 (corresponding to Arg329 in GATA3 C-finger) in chicken GATA1 was initially assigned to bind to DNA backbone but was later reassigned to bind the first guanine in the GATA site together with the homologous Arg24 in AREA.47,48 In our crystal structures, the corresponding arginine residue in the mouse GATA3 C-finger (Arg329) invariably makes bidentate hydrogen bonds with the first guanine (GATA; italicized) in all four independent complexes, establishing unambiguously the critical role of the conserved arginine in DNA binding by GATA factors. Our structural observations also suggest that DNA binding by GATA factors involves more hydrogen bonding interactions than initially realized, which is consistent with biochemical studies of DNA binding by GATA factors using base analogs.60 In the minor groove, the C-terminal basic tail of GATA3 C-finger interacts with DNA bases and backbone extensively, where hydrogen bonding by Arg364 allows preferable binding to GATA/GATT sites over GATC/GATG sites. As discussed earlier, the specificity for the fourth position may be further enhanced by Leu343 and Leu347 in the major groove, which make van der Waals contacts with the C5 methyl group of the fourth thymine in the complementary strand, thus favoring a GATA site slightly over a GATT site. A sequence motif (QTRNRK) conserved in the C-finger but absent in the N-finger has been shown to be a critical DNA binding determinant.46 Replacing the corresponding motif (LVSKRA) in the N-finger of GATA1 with QTRNRK converts its DNA binding specificity to that of the C-finger. In our crystal structures, the QTRNRK motif is exactly

1302 tion involving the conserved hydrophobic residues, Leu343Phe, has been linked to human breast cancer and may affect the in vivo function of GATA3 by similar mechanisms.59 Although the hypothesis of shape recognition by hydrophobic residues in GATA factors is consistent with our structural analyses here, further studies will be needed to test it directly in vitro and in vivo. Our structure-guided biochemical analyses reveal two distinct modes of DNA binding by GATA to proximal sites. These binding modes are likely to be used by the full-length protein, since the rest of the GATA sequence seems to be unstructured and may not play a significant role in DNA binding. Previous studies have shown that the N-finger is required together with the C-finger to bind palindromic GATA sites (TATCAGATA) with high affinity and kinetic stability, and that DNA binding by the N-finger is required for functions.12,13,16,25,27­29 The OPP complex presented here mimics the binding of the N-finger and the C-finger of the same GATA factor to two proximal GATA sites because the C-terminus of one finger is near the N-terminus of the other. Our EMSA analyses of the binding of the wild-type GATA3 DF and the Arg275Glu mutant to the OPP DNA suggest that the two fingers of the GATA3 DF indeed bind the two sites on the OPP DNA simultaneously at low protein concentration (Figs. 4a and 5b, lanes 7 and 8). The arrangement of the two GATA sites in the OPP complex (TATCAGAGATA) resembles that of the palindromic GATA sites (TATCAGATA), but with two additional bases in the spacer region (bold). Given the long flexible linker between the N-finger and the C-finger, it is possible that the two zinc fingers of a given GATA factor may bind palindromic GATA sites with even a larger spacer. Indeed, recent studies have shown that GATA3 can bind a larger palindromic site (TATCTCATTGATA) on the FOXP3 promoter to inhibit the expression of FOXP3 and the formation of regulatory T cells.64 Our preliminary EMSA studies indicate that GATA3 DF binds the FOXP3 palindromic site with high affinity and fast mobility, similar to its binding to the palindromic site from the GATA1 promoter (Supplemental Fig. 3). With the current data, we propose that the palindromic GATA sites be at least expanded to ATC(N)1­5GATA (N refers to any nucleotide), which favors the simultaneous binding of the two zinc fingers of GATA factors.25,27­29 The revised palindromic GATA motif defined here will guide future studies of such sites in genome and their functional relevance by combining ChIP-on-ChIP data and bioinformatics analysis. With the OPP configuration, it is interesting to note that the DNA binding mode of GATA3 DF changes at high protein concentration if the two sites are both GATA, but remains the same if one of the sites is GATC (Fig. 4a, compare lanes 9 and 10, and lanes 14 and 15) (Fig. 5b and c). This observation further demonstrates the remarkable adaptability of the DNA binding mechanism of GATA factors to subtle sequence variations, as well as change in protein concentration.

DNA Binding and Self-Association by GATA

The ADJ complex mimics the cooperative binding of GATA factors to a different arrangement of double-GATA sites (GATAAGACTTATC). In this configuration, the N-terminus of one finger is far away from the C-terminus of the other, thus disfavoring the simultaneous binding of the N-finger and the C-finger from the same GATA factor. Instead, this configuration of double-GATA sites supports direct protein­protein interactions between adjacently bound C-fingers of two GATA factors. GATA factors are known to self-associate and to dimerize on DNA.30,31 Recent studies also suggest that self-association of GATA factors may be functionally important.32 The protein elements of GATA self-association have previously been mapped to the C-terminal basic tail and the end of the recognition helix.30 In this study, our crystal structure of the GATA3 C-finger dimer/DNA complex not only confirms these biochemical data but also reveals the structural basis of GATA self-association at the atomic level. Our EMSA analyses show that GATA3 DF indeed binds the ADJ DNA as a cooperative dimer that depends on the Cfinger, but not on the N-finger. In this DNA binding mode, the N-finger may bind DNA nonspecifically or extend off DNA to interact with other proteins such as Friend of GATA (Fig. 5a). It is possible that GATA factors may bind other GATA clusters in modes yet to be identified. However, our structural and biochemical studies here reveal two distinct DNA binding modes by GATA factors to different double-GATA sites, demonstrating in principle the versatility of DNA binding by GATA factors. The different conformations of GATA complexes formed on different DNA elements may present distinct protein surfaces to interact with other factors in the assembly of the transcription complexes.

Materials and Methods
Protein expression, purification, and mutagenesis The C-finger of mouse GATA3 (amino acid residues 308­370) was subcloned into the expression vector pET28a (Novagen, San Diego, CA) as a histidine tag fusion protein. A TEV protease cleavage site was introduced immediately before the N-terminus of the GATA3 C-finger. The expression construct was confirmed by sequencing and transformed into Rosetta (DE3) pLysS cells (Novagen) for protein expression. The expression of the GATA3 C-finger was induced by IPTG for 4 h at 37 °C. The protein was first purified by Ni-NTA beads (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and then digested by TEV protease for 12 h at 4 °C to remove the histidine tag. The uncleaved protein was removed by incubating with Ni-NTA beads. The protein was further purified through a Mono S cation exchange column, followed by a Superdex 75 size exclusion column (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ). The protein sample was then concentrated to approximately 40 mg/ ml in storage buffer (10 mM Hepes pH 7.63, 5 mM -mercaptoethanol, 0.5 M zinc acetate, 100 mM NaCl, 200 mM NH4OAc, and 20% glycerol) and stored at -80 °C. The mouse GATA3 double zinc finger fragment (amino acids 260­370, GATA3 DF) was expressed and purified

DNA Binding and Self-Association by GATA

1303
lated annealing, and individual B-factor refinement. Temperature factors were first refined by groups (main and side chain for proteins; backbone and base for DNA), followed by restrained individual refinement at later and final stages. NCS restraints were applied to the entire protein at the initial simulated annealing, but relaxed to only include the core zinc module in the final round of refinement. The test set for the molecular replacement of the ADJ complex was selected randomly by CNS. Due to the limited resolution, we also applied B-DNA restraints throughout the refinement. The NCS and B-DNA restraints may account at least partly for the small separation of Rwork and Rfree. The diffraction spots of the OPP complex crystals show a banana shape, which may lead to the relatively high Rsym in the reduced data. An unbiased electron density map for a portion of the DNA, calculated by simulated omitting map in CNS, is shown in Supplemental Fig. 4. The map shows that the DNA has well-defined electron density. The refinement is monitored by a free R-factor of 10% in a randomly selected test set of structural factors. Regions of interest have been checked by simulated omit map. The quality of the final model has also been analyzed by standard programs in CNS and CCP4. Specifically, the ADJ complex contains 57.1% of residues in the most favored region, followed by 41.9% in the additionally allowed region and 1% in the generously allowed region. The OPP site complex separated into 80% in the most favored region and 20% in the additionally allowed region. Both structures satisfy the crystallographic standards for their resolutions. The statistics of crystallographic analysis are presented in Table 1. Figures of structure illustration were prepared using PyMOL (DeLano Scientific, San Francisco, CA). Model building and structural comparisons were carried out in O.67 Electrophoresis mobility shift assay DNA probes labeled with Cy3 were mixed with GATA3 double-finger fragment (GATA3 DF) in 20 l of binding buffer [5 mM Hepes (pH 7.63), 0.5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, 4 mM Mg(OAc)2, 50 mM KCl, 2 mg/ml bovine calf thymus DNA, 10% glycerol, and 1 mM DTT]. The concentration of DNA probe was held at 100 nM in each reaction, while the protein concentration was increased gradually in each set of titration (0, 50, 100, 200, and 400 nM). The binding reactions were incubated at room temperature for 25 min. The samples were run on a native 6% (wt/vol) polyacrylamide gel in 0.5×Tris/ Borate/EDTA buffer for 3 h at 4 °C. The gel was transferred to blotting paper and dried for 1 h in the gel drier. The gel was then exposed overnight onto a phosphoimage plate. The plate was scanned on a Typhoon Image Reader, resulting in a digital format that was analyzed in Image Quant software. EMSA analyses of GATA3 mutants (Arg364Ala and Arg275Glu) were carried out in GATA3 DF. The Arg275Glu mutant was used to analyze the role of the N-finger in binding to various double-GATA sites, whereas the Arg364Ala mutant was created to test the role of Arg364 in binding to the cognate GATA site. In the latter case, we used the ADJ DNA as the probe, since the binding of ADJ DNA by GATA3 DF only requires the C-finger. Accession numbers Coordinates and structure factors for the OPP and ADJ complexes have been deposited in the PDB with accession codes 3DFX and 3DFV, respectively.

similarly. All mutations (Arg364Ala and Arg275Glu) were made using the Quik-ChangeTM site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene) and were confirmed by DNA sequencing. The mutants were also expressed and purified by the same protocol described above. DNA preparation DNA was purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA) at 1 mol scale in the crude but desalted form. The crude DNA was dissolved in a buffer (100 mM NaCl and 10 mM NaOH, pH 12.0) and purified by a Mono Q cation exchange column on FPLC (Amersham Biosciences). The peak fractions were pooled and neutralized to pH 7.0 by Hepes prior to overnight dialysis against water. The desalted DNA sample was lyophilized to powder, resuspended in water, and quantified at 260 nm. Complementary DNA strands were annealed at 95 °C in the annealing buffer (100 mM NaCl and 5 mM Hepes, pH 7.6). The two double-stranded DNA that crystallized successfully with GATA3 C-finger in our study are: 5TTCTGATAAGACTTATCTGC-3 (top strand of the ADJ DNA) and 5-AAGCAGATAAGTCTTATCAG-3 (bottom strand of the ADJ DNA), and 5-TTGATAAATCAGAGATAACC-3 (top strand of the OPP DNA) and 5-AAGGTTATCTCTGATTTATC-3 (bottom strand of the OPP DNA). Note that, in the OPP DNA, a GATA site (italicized) was originally introduced to create a tandem of two GATA sites. But in the crystal structure of the OPP complex, while one of the two GATA3 C-fingers binds the consensus GATA site at the 3 half of the DNA, the other finger binds a fortuitous GATT site, resulting in two GATA fingers binding to DNA in a palindromic orientation. The unoccupied GATA site was removed in EMSA studies (see below). Crystallization, data collection, and structure determination The GATA3 C-finger/DNA complexes were prepared by mixing protein and DNA at a 2:1 molar ratio in storage buffer at a final concentration of 10 mg/ml. Crystals were grown by the hanging drop method at 18 °C using a reservoir buffer of 20 mM Mg(OAc)2, 20 mM cacodylic acid (pH 6.5), and 30% polyethylene glycol 4K. Typically, crystals of the OPP and ADJ complexes grew to approximately 400 m × 200 m × 20 m in 1­4 days. Crystals of the ADJ complex belong to the space group C2, with cell dimensions of a = 137.977 Å, b = 35.756 Å, c = 54.487 Å, and  = 113.25°. Crystals of the OPP complex also belong to the space group C2, but with cell dimensions of a = 128.882 Å, b = 30.370 Å, c = 75.648 Å, and  = 93.818°. Crystals were stabilized in the harvest/ cryoprotectant buffer [20 mM Mg(OAc)2, 20 mM cacodylic acid (pH 6.5), 30% polyethylene glycol 4K, and 25% (wt/ vol) glycerol] and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen for cryocrystallography. Data were collected at the ALS BL8.2.1 and BL8.2.2 beamlines at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Data were reduced using DENZO and SCALEPACK.65 Initial phases for the OPP complex were determined by SAD phasing using zinc anomalous signal. Phases for the ADJ complex were determined by molecular replacement using the GATA3 C-finger from the OPP structure as the search model. Molecular replacement, refinement, and final analysis were performed with CNS.66 The structure determination of both GATA3 C-finger/DNA complexes is relatively straightforward. The refinement is carried out using standard strategies of energy minimization, grouped B-factor refinement, simu-

1304

DNA Binding and Self-Association by GATA

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Robert Batey, James C. Stroud, Xiaojiang Chen, Reza Kalhor, and members of the Cech Laboratory for helpful discussions. This research was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (L.C.). D.L.B and L.G. were supported partly by National Institutes of Health training grants.

Supplementary Data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/ j.jmb.2008.06.072

References
1. Evans, T., Reitman, M. & Felsenfeld, G. (1988). An erythrocyte-specific DNA-binding factor recognizes a regulatory sequence common to all chicken globin genes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 85, 5976­5980. 2. Evans, T. & Felsenfeld, G. (1989). The erythroid-specific transcription factor Eryf1: a new finger protein. Cell, 58, 877­885. 3. Tsai, S. F., Martin, D. I., Zon, L. I., D'Andrea, A. D., Wong, G. G. & Orkin, S. H. (1989). Cloning of cDNA for the major DNA-binding protein of the erythroid lineage through expression in mammalian cells. Nature, 339, 446­451. 4. Bresnick, E. H., Martowicz, M. L., Pal, S. & Johnson, K. D. (2005). Developmental control via GATA factor interplay at chromatin domains. J. Cell. Physiol. 205, 1­9. 5. Weiss, M. J. & Orkin, S. H. (1995). GATA transcription factors: key regulators of hematopoiesis. Exp. Hematol. 23, 99­107. 6. Molkentin, J. D. (2000). The zinc finger-containing transcription factors GATA-4, -5, and -6. Ubiquitously expressed regulators of tissue-specific gene expression. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 38949­38952. 7. Kim, S. I. & Bresnick, E. H. (2007). Transcriptional control of erythropoiesis: emerging mechanisms and principles. Oncogene, 26, 6777­6794. 8. Ho, I. C., Vorhees, P., Marin, N., Oakley, B. K., Tsai, S. F., Orkin, S. H. & Leiden, J. M. (1991). Human GATA-3: a lineage-restricted transcription factor that regulates the expression of the T cell receptor alpha gene. EMBO J. 10, 1187­1192. 9. George, K. M., Leonard, M. W., Roth, M. E., Lieuw, K. H., Kioussis, D., Grosveld, F. & Engel, J. D. (1994). Embryonic expression and cloning of the murine GATA-3 gene. Development, 120, 2673­2686. 10. Zheng, W. & Flavell, R. A. (1997). The transcription factor GATA-3 is necessary and sufficient for Th2 cytokine gene expression in CD4 T cells. Cell, 89, 587­596. 11. Lowry, J. A. & Atchley, W. R. (2000). Molecular evolution of the GATA family of transcription factors: conservation within the DNA-binding domain. J. Mol. Evol. 50, 103­115. 12. Weiss, M. J., Yu, C. & Orkin, S. H. (1997). Erythroidcell-specific properties of transcription factor GATA-1 revealed by phenotypic rescue of a gene-targeted cell line. Mol. Cell. Biol. 17, 1642­1651.

13. Shimizu, R., Takahashi, S., Ohneda, K., Engel, J. D. & Yamamoto, M. (2001). In vivo requirements for GATA-1 functional domains during primitive and definitive erythropoiesis. EMBO J. 20, 5250­5260. 14. Nichols, K. E., Crispino, J. D., Poncz, M., White, J. G., Orkin, S. H., Maris, J. M. & Weiss, M. J. (2000). Familial dyserythropoietic anaemia and thrombocytopenia due to an inherited mutation in GATA1. Nat. Genet. 24, 266­270. 15. Nesbit, M. A., Bowl, M. R., Harding, B., Ali, A., Ayala, A., Crowe, C. et al. (2004). Characterization of GATA3 mutations in the hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia (HDR) syndrome. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 22624­22634. 16. Yu, C., Niakan, K. K., Matsushita, M., Stamatoyannopoulos, G., Orkin, S. H. & Raskind, W. H. (2002). X-linked thrombocytopenia with thalassemia from a mutation in the amino finger of GATA-1 affecting DNA binding rather than FOG-1 interaction. Blood, 100, 2040­2045. 17. Cantor, A. B. (2005). GATA transcription factors in hematologic disease. Int. J. Hematol. 81, 378­384. 18. Ko, L. J. & Engel, J. D. (1993). DNA-binding specificities of the GATA transcription factor family. Mol. Cell. Biol. 13, 4011­4022. 19. Merika, M. & Orkin, S. H. (1993). DNA-binding specificity of GATA family transcription factors. Mol. Cell. Biol. 13, 3999­4010. 20. Omichinski, J. G., Trainor, C., Evans, T., Gronenborn, A. M., Clore, G. M. & Felsenfeld, G. (1993). A small single-"finger" peptide from the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 binds specifically to DNA as a zinc or iron complex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 90, 1676­1680. 21. Visvader, J. E., Crossley, M., Hill, J., Orkin, S. H. & Adams, J. M. (1995). The C-terminal zinc finger of GATA-1 or GATA-2 is sufficient to induce megakaryocytic differentiation of an early myeloid cell line. Mol. Cell. Biol. 15, 634­641. 22. Pedone, P. V., Omichinski, J. G., Nony, P., Trainor, C., Gronenborn, A. M., Clore, G. M. & Felsenfeld, G. (1997). The N-terminal fingers of chicken GATA-2 and GATA-3 are independent sequence-specific DNA binding domains. EMBO J. 16, 2874­2882. 23. Newton, A., Mackay, J. & Crossley, M. (2001). The N-terminal zinc finger of the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 binds GATC motifs in DNA. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 35794­35801. 24. Martin, D. I. & Orkin, S. H. (1990). Transcriptional activation and DNA binding by the erythroid factor GF-1/NF-E1/Eryf 1. Genes Dev. 4, 1886­1898. 25. Schwartzbauer, G., Schlesinger, K. & Evans, T. (1992). Interaction of the erythroid transcription factor cGATA1 with a critical auto-regulatory element. Nucleic Acids Res. 20, 4429­4436. 26. Evans, T. & Felsenfeld, G. (1991). Trans-activation of a globin promoter in nonerythroid cells. Mol. Cell. Biol. 11, 843­853. 27. Tsai, S. F., Strauss, E. & Orkin, S. H. (1991). Functional analysis and in vivo footprinting implicate the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 as a positive regulator of its own promoter. Genes Dev. 5, 919­931. 28. Trainor, C. D., Omichinski, J. G., Vandergon, T. L., Gronenborn, A. M., Clore, G. M. & Felsenfeld, G. (1996). A palindromic regulatory site within vertebrate GATA-1 promoters requires both zinc fingers of the GATA-1 DNA-binding domain for high-affinity interaction. Mol. Cell. Biol. 16, 2238­2247. 29. Trainor, C. D., Ghirlando, R. & Simpson, M. A. (2000).

DNA Binding and Self-Association by GATA

1305
46. Ghirlando, R. & Trainor, C. D. (2003). Determinants of GATA-1 binding to DNA: the role of non-finger residues. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 45620­45628. 47. Omichinski, J. G., Clore, G. M., Schaad, O., Felsenfeld, G., Trainor, C., Appella, E. et al. (1993). NMR structure of a specific DNA complex of Zn-containing DNA binding domain of GATA-1. Science, 261, 438­446. 48. Starich, M. R., Wikstrom, M., Arst, H. N., Jr, Clore, G. M. & Gronenborn, A. M. (1998). The solution structure of a fungal AREA protein­DNA complex: an alternative binding mode for the basic carboxyl tail of GATA factors. J. Mol. Biol. 277, 605­620. 49. Tjandra, N., Omichinski, J. G., Gronenborn, A. M., Clore, G. M. & Bax, A. (1997). Use of dipolar 1H­15N and 1H­13C couplings in the structure determination of magnetically oriented macromolecules in solution. Nat. Struct. Biol. 4, 732­738. 50. Whyatt, D. J., deBoer, E. & Grosveld, F. (1993). The two zinc finger-like domains of GATA-1 have different DNA binding specificities. EMBO J. 12, 4993­5005. 51. Chen, M. L. & Kuo, C. L. (2001). A conserved sequence block in the murine and human T cell receptor Jalpha loci interacts with developmentally regulated nucleoprotein complexes in vitro and associates with GATA-3 and octamer-binding factors in vivo. Eur. J. Immunol. 31, 1696­1705. 52. Zhang, D. H., Yang, L. & Ray, A. (1998). Differential responsiveness of the IL-5 and IL-4 genes to transcription factor GATA-3. J. Immunol. 161, 3817­3821. 53. Takemoto, N., Arai, K. & Miyatake, S. (2002). Cutting edge: the differential involvement of the N-finger of GATA-3 in chromatin remodeling and transactivation during Th2 development. J. Immunol. 169, 4103­4107. 54. Chen, L., Glover, J. N., Hogan, P. G., Rao, A. & Harrison, S. C. (1998). Structure of the DNA-binding domains from NFAT, Fos and Jun bound specifically to DNA. Nature, 392, 42­48. 55. Stroud, J. C., Lopez-Rodriguez, C., Rao, A. & Chen, L. (2002). Structure of a TonEBP­DNA complex reveals DNA encircled by a transcription factor. Nat. Struct. Biol. 9, 90­94. 56. Giffin, M. J., Stroud, J. C., Bates, D. L., von Koenig, K. D., Hardin, J. & Chen, L. (2003). Structure of NFAT1 bound as a dimer to the HIV-1 LTR kappa B element. Nat. Struct. Biol. 10, 800­806. 57. Wu, Y., Borde, M., Heissmeyer, V., Feuerer, M., Lapan, A. D., Stroud, J. C. et al. (2006). FOXP3 controls regulatory T cell function through cooperation with NFAT. Cell, 126, 375­387. 58. Ali, A., Christie, P. T., Grigorieva, I. V., Harding, B., Van Esch, H., Ahmed, S. F. et al. (2007). Functional characterization of GATA3 mutations causing the hypoparathyroidism­deafness­renal (HDR) dysplasia syndrome: insight into mechanisms of DNA binding by the GATA3 transcription factor. Hum. Mol. Genet. 16, 265­275. 59. Usary, J., Llaca, V., Karaca, G., Presswala, S., Karaca, M., He, X. et al. (2004). Mutation of GATA3 in human breast tumors. Oncogene, 23, 7669­7678. 60. Mott, B. H., Bassman, J. & Pikaart, M. J. (2004). A molecular dissection of the interaction between the transcription factor GATA-1 zinc finger and DNA. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 316, 910­917. 61. Ghirlando, R. & Trainor, C. D. (2000). GATA-1 bends DNA in a site-independent fashion. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 28152­28156. 62. Stroud, J. C., Wu, Y., Bates, D. L., Han, A., Nowick, K., Paabo, S. et al. (2006). Structure of the forkhead domain of FOXP2 bound to DNA. Structure, 14, 159­166.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37. 38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

GATA zinc finger interactions modulate DNA binding and transactivation. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 28157­28166. Crossley, M., Merika, M. & Orkin, S. H. (1995). Selfassociation of the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 mediated by its zinc finger domains. Mol. Cell. Biol. 15, 2448­2456. Mackay, J. P., Kowalski, K., Fox, A. H., Czolij, R., King, G. F. & Crossley, M. (1998). Involvement of the N-finger in the self-association of GATA-1. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 30560­30567. Shimizu, R., Trainor, C. D., Nishikawa, K., Kobayashi, M., Ohneda, K. & Yamamoto, M. (2007). GATA-1 selfassociation controls erythroid development in vivo. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 15862­15871. Tsang, A. P., Visvader, J. E., Turner, C. A., Fujiwara, Y., Yu, C., Weiss, M. J. et al. (1997). FOG, a multitype zinc finger protein, acts as a cofactor for transcription factor GATA-1 in erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation. Cell, 90, 109­119. Svensson, E. C., Tufts, R. L., Polk, C. E. & Leiden, J. M. (1999). Molecular cloning of FOG-2: a modulator of transcription factor GATA-4 in cardiomyocytes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 96, 956­961. Liew, C. K., Simpson, R. J., Kwan, A. H., Crofts, L. A., Loughlin, F. E., Matthews, J. M. et al. (2005). Zinc fingers as protein recognition motifs: structural basis for the GATA-1/Friend of GATA interaction. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 102, 583­588. Cantor, A. B. & Orkin, S. H. (2005). Coregulation of GATA factors by the Friend of GATA (FOG) family of multitype zinc finger proteins. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 16, 117­128. Agarwal, S., Avni, O. & Rao, A. (2000). Cell-typerestricted binding of the transcription factor NFAT to a distal IL-4 enhancer in vivo. Immunity, 12, 643­652. Avni, O., Lee, D., Macian, F., Szabo, S. J., Glimcher, L. H. & Rao, A. (2002). T(H) cell differentiation is accompanied by dynamic changes in histone acetylation of cytokine genes. Nat. Immunol. 3, 643­651. Molkentin, J. D., Lu, J. R., Antos, C. L., Markham, B., Richardson, J., Robbins, J. et al. (1998). A calcineurindependent transcriptional pathway for cardiac hypertrophy. Cell, 93, 215­228. Boyes, J., Omichinski, J., Clark, D., Pikaart, M. & Felsenfeld, G. (1998). Perturbation of nucleosome structure by the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1. J. Mol. Biol. 279, 529­544. Cirillo, L. A., Lin, F. R., Cuesta, I., Friedman, D., Jarnik, M. & Zaret, K. S. (2002). Opening of compacted chromatin by early developmental transcription factors HNF3 (FoxA) and GATA-4. Mol. Cell, 9, 279­289. Johnson, K. D., Grass, J. A., Boyer, M. E., Kiekhaefer, C. M., Blobel, G. A., Weiss, M. J. & Bresnick, E. H. (2002). Cooperative activities of hematopoietic regulators recruit RNA polymerase II to a tissue-specific chromatin domain. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 99, 11760­11765. Martowicz, M. L., Grass, J. A., Boyer, M. E., Guend, H. & Bresnick, E. H. (2005). Dynamic GATA factor interplay at a multicomponent regulatory region of the GATA-2 locus. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 1724­1732. Im, H., Grass, J. A., Johnson, K. D., Kim, S. I., Boyer, M. E., Imbalzano, A. N. et al. (2005). Chromatin domain activation via GATA-1 utilization of a small subset of dispersed GATA motifs within a broad chromosomal region. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 102, 17065­17070. Yang, H. Y. & Evans, T. (1992). Distinct roles for the two cGATA-1 finger domains. Mol. Cell. Biol. 12, 4562­4570.

1306
63. Starich, M. R., Wikstrom, M., Schumacher, S., Arst, H. N., Jr, Gronenborn, A. M. & Clore, G. M. (1998). The solution structure of the Leu22  Val mutant AREA DNA binding domain complexed with a TGATAG core element defines a role for hydrophobic packing in the determination of specificity. J. Mol. Biol. 277, 621­634. 64. Mantel, P. Y., Kuipers, H., Boyman, O., Rhyner, C., Ouaked, N., Ruckert, B. et al. (2007). GATA3-driven Th2 responses inhibit TGF-beta1-induced FOXP3 expression and the formation of regulatory T cells. PLoS Biol. 5, e329.

DNA Binding and Self-Association by GATA

65. Otwinowski, Z. & Minor, W. (1997). Processing of X-ray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode. Methods Enzymol. 276, 307­326. 66. Brunger, A. T., Adams, P. D., Clore, G. M., DeLano, W. L., Gros, P., Grosse-Kunstleve, R. W. et al. (1998). Crystallography and NMR system: a new software suite for macromolecular structure determination. Acta Crystallogr. Sect. D, 54, 905­921. 67. Jones, T. A., Zou, J. Y., Cowan, S. W. & Kjeldgaard, M. (1991). Improved methods for building protein models in electron density maps and the location of errors in these models. Acta Crystallogr A, 47, 110­119.

