1060

child-welfare services has done much to improve standards of maternal care, and that this is " still of primary importance in the saving of infant life They urge that the existing services be retained, with some reorganisation, saying that the time is not yet ripe for their disbandment. But it must be noted that in the survey material the incidence of fatal illness was highest before treatment by family doctors became available to all without fee under the N.H.S.; that the incidence of infections (without regard to severity) in all but the highest social groups was no lower among the " careful " mothers; and that schoolchildren and chronically infected adults were important spreaders of family infections. Moreover, the infant-welfare clinics failed to attract the mothers most in need of their services. Other matters no less important are illuminated by the study. The possible ill effects of separation, family breakup, and the employment of mothers were investigated. Although the inquiry was necessarily superficial, no convincing evidence appeared that these had any adverse effect on the physical or emotional wellbeing of the There was some suggestion that when the children. separation involved admission to hospital neurotic symptoms increased. Victims of accidents tended to be superior children, indicating the inevitable risks incurred by those with a healthy body and adventurous spirit. The findings on toilet-training confirm the impression that girls more quickly acquire continence than boys. Enuresis is strongly associated with poor maternal care, and early pot training within a secure home is followed by the most ,rapid attainment of sphincter control. This is contrary to the often-expressed view that early potting is a manifestation of coercive training likely to be followed by failure and neurosis. The Institute of Child Health (University of London), the Society of Medical Officers of Health, and the Population Investigation Committee are to be congratulated on sponsoring this study. It is good news that the Nuffield Foundation have made a grant to enable the study to continue until the children reach the age of 15.
THE BONE CRYSTAL COMPLEX

of the circulating fluids of the body, and a reservoir of the calcium ion ".3 Around each crystal, and partly bound to its surface, is shell " of water. a layer of hydrated ions together with a Each gramme of crystal, it is claimed, can hold 08 g. of water in this way, and so there is a greater volume of water than crystal. Any ion from the surrounding fluid can diffuse into the water shell. The layer of hydrated ions-calcium, phosphate, and hydroxyl-is constantly exchanging with similar ions in the surface layer of the crystal lattice, and there is a much slower ionic interchange between the surface and the interior of the crystal. Of the ions circulating in the body-fluids K+ and Cl- can penetrate only as far as the hydration shell. Na+, UO2++, CO3--, and citrate--- can displace calcium phosphate or hydroxyl ions from the crystal lattice surface, while Ca++, Sr++, Ra++, PO4--, and F- can penetrate into the interior of the crystal structure. Such ionic movements take place wherever body-fluids are in contact with the crystal complex of reactive bone. As the crystals age and increase in number, they displace the water and so become dehydrated and inert like natural mineral deposits. Some quantitative data on interchange of ions between blood and bone have been obtained by means of radioactive isotopes such as 45Ca, 32P, and more recently 4'Ca. External counting gives approximations of the magnitude and rate of this exchange. For instance, it is known that in young animals the total calcium in the blood (10 mg. per 100 ml.) is replaced every minute. Equilibrium between the blood and the reactive bone of the mineralising osteon is maintained by constant
"

adjustment through ionic interchange between bone, extracellular fluid, and serum. This immediate control mechanism may, it is believed, also involve bone-cell activity, with the formation of citric acid, which acts as
carrier and conveys calcium from bone to blood-stream. The level of citric acid in bone is influenced by parathyroid and vitamin D4. In addition to the minute-by-minute regulation the parathyroid glands are essential for the maintenance of the plasma-calcium at the physiological level of 10 mg. per 100 ml. If the parathyroid glands are removed the calcium level falls to 7 mg. per 100 ml., and with parathyroid hyperactivity it may rise to 15 mg. per 100 ml. Parathyroid reaction to changes in calcium-ion concentration is effective in terms of hours, compared to the more immediate results of ionic transfers, and is brought about by the dissolution of mineral from the stable boneprobably by the activity of mobilised osteoclasts.5 More work on the electron microscopy of bone is required-particularly with regard to the disposition of the bone crystals, the fine structure of the ground substance, and the study of radio-isotopes at the level of
a

PROGRESS in work on the structure of bone has been 1 reviewed by McLean. The histological unit is the osteon-the Haversian system with canal, concentric bony lamellx, cells, and canaliculi-150 V. in diameter and several millimetres in length. Throughout adult life there is a constant process of Haversian remodelling " of compact bone; at any given time a certain amount of labile reactive bone-about 1 % of the total mass of boneis present, and it is this 1%, actively exchanging substance with the surrounding tissue-fluids, that makes bone a living and not a dead material. The organic unit of bone is the collagen fibril-800A made up of macromolecules secreted by the osteoblast. The inorganic unit is the rodshaped bone crystal&mdash;3Ca3(PO4)2.Ca(OH)2, hydroxyapatite-about 200A long and 75A in diameter. The crystals are oriented in the long axis of the collagen fibril and packed round the region of the periodic cross-banding, 2 leaving uncovered gaps along the fibril. Owing to their an enormous surface-area minute size the crystals have per unit of mass-of the order of 200-300 sq. m. per gramme. It is this expanse of crystal surface that gives bone its most important non-mechanical functionthe " homeostatic regulation of the ionic composition
"

ultrastructure.
Dr. DEREK STEVENSON has been appointed secretary of the British Medical Association in succession to Dr. ANGUS MACRAE, who reaches retiring age in November. Dr. Stevenson has been a deputy secretary since 1948. The next session of the General Medical Council will open on Tuesday, June 3, at 2.15 P.M., when Sir DAVID CAMPBELL, the president, will deliver an address. The Medical Disciplinary Committee will meet on Wednesday, June 4, at 11.30 A.M.
3. McLean, F. C., Urist, M. R. Bone. Chicago, 1955. 4. Dixon, T. F., Perkins, M. R., in The Biochemistry and Bone (edited by G. H. Bourne). New York, 1956. 5. Hancox, N. M. Biol. Rev. 1949, 24, 448.

Physiology of

1. 2.

McLean, F. C. Science, 1958, 127, 451. Robinson, R. A., Watson, M. L. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1955 ,60, 620.

