Imraunochemistry. Pergamon Press 1968. Vol. 5, pp. 67-74. Primed in Great Britain

RELEASE OF ANTI-L CHAIN ANTIBODY FROM ANTIGEN-ANTIBODY COMPLEXES BY Fd FRAGMENT
YASUO YAGI, URS S. RUTISHAUSER* and DAVID PRESSMAN Department of Biochemistry Research, Roswell Park Memorial Institute, Buffalo, New York

(Received 1 August 1967; in revisedform 18 September 1967)
Abstract--Significant amounts of free antibodies were liberated from the specific precipitate of rabbit L chain and goat anti-L chain antibody by incubation with rabbit Fd fragment at pH 8. The isolated antibodies were shown to be directed against those antigenic determinants on L chain molecules which disappear either by steric blocking or by conformational change when L chain associates with Fd fragment. INTRODUCTION THE )t-GLOBULIN (IgG) molecule is composed of two identical halves. Each half consists of two polypeptide chains differing in size, the heavy (H) chain and the light (L) chain [1]. These chains can be separated by gel filtration in propionic acid after reduction and alkylation of the I g G molecule. Digestion of I g G by papain gives a fragment (Fab) which, by reduction and alkylation, can be dissociated in acid to the L chain and the N-terminal portion of the H chain, the Fd fragment.[2] At neutral pH, isolated L chains reassociate firmly with added H chains or Fd fragments by non-covalent bonds to form respectively y-globulin-like or Fab-like molecules [3-5]. Such association seems to cause the disappearance of some antigenic determinants on the L chain since antisera prepared against isolated L chains frequently react with isolated L chains m u c h more strongly than with L chains when they are part of 7-globulin or Fab fragment [6-9]. The present p a p e r deals with our observation that the Fd fragment releases some free antibodies from the immune precipitate of L chain and anti-L chain antibodies. This is apparently due to the association of the Fd fragment to L chain even though the latter is involved in the framework of antigen-antibody complexes. T h e association causes the disappearance of some antigenic determinants on L chains resulting in the rupture of some antigen-antibody bonds. The antibodies which were combined with those affected determinants are thus liberated.

MATERIALS AND METHODS Fd fragment and L chain were prepared from a specifically purified rabbit I g G antibody against p-azobenzoate according to the method of Roholt et al. [5] Fab fragment (Fraction I I from a carboxymethyl cellulose column) was obtained by papain digestion from a specifically purified rabbit I g G antibody against p-azobenzenearsonate [ 10]. Antisera against rabbit L chain or Fab fragment were obtained from * Present address: Graduate School, Rockefeller University, New York, New York. 67

68

YASUOYAOI, URS S. RUTISHAUSERand DAVIDPRESSMAN

goats which received several injections (i.d. and i.m.) of L chain or Fab fragment from normal rabbit IgG, mixed with complete Freund's adjuvant (Difco). T h e globulin fraction of anti-L chain serum was obtained by precipitation at 45 per cent saturation of a m m o n i u m sulfate. U p o n immunoelectrophoresis with anti-L chain and anti-Fab antisera, the preparation of L chain gave a single intense arc in the a2-globulin region. T h e Fd preparation showed a single very faint arc which was in the yl-globulin region at the position corresponding to that of Fab fragments. This indicates that this Fd preparation contained a small amount of L chain which was present as Fab-like material in association with Fd fragment. The Fab-like arc is not due to Fd fragment itself since the addition of L chain to the Fd preparation greatly increased the intensity of this arc. T h e intensity of L chain arc was significantly less than the intensity of the arc produced by the same amount of L chain alone. This indicates that both anti-L chain and anti-Fab antisera contain essentially no antibody reacting with Fd fragment itself and the association of Fd fragment and L chain takes place even at neutral pH. Radioiodination of L chain and goat anti-L chain antiserum globulin h a s done using chloramine T [11]. Labelled proteins contained an average of 0 . 7 - 0 . 8 atoms of radioiodine per molecule. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION In the experiments, the behavior of the anti-L chain antibody was followed by labelling the globulin fraction of the antiserum with 125I. All the experiments were done in borate buffer, p H 8.0.* Precipitating antibodies in anti-L chain serum T h e content of antibodies precipitable with L chain or Fab fragment was determined by mixing mI-labelled globulin fraction of anti-L chain serum (47 m g protein/ml) with increasing amounts of antigen and measuring the radioactivity of the washed precipitates. I t was found that 1.0 ml of the globulin solution contained 1.2 mg~ of antibody preeipitable with L chain, but only 0-2 mg of antibody precipitable with Fab fragment. This indicates that a major part of antibodies produced against L chain did not precipitate with Fab fragment even though L chain is a part of the Fab molecule. T h e effect of Fd fragment on the precipitation of anti-L chain antibody by L chain was investigated by mixing Fd fragment with L chain at a molar ratio of I ·3 and then adding antiserum globulin to the mixture. No significant precipitate was found when Fd fragment alone was added to anti-L chain serum. T h e amounts of L chain (100 t~g) and antiserum globulin (1 ml) were chosen to produce m a x i m u m precipitation. In the presence of Fd fragment, there was a remarkable decrease in the amount of specific precipitate produced. T h e precipitate contained only 31 per cent of the antibody precipitable with the same amount of L chain alone. Presumably, Fd fragment · This was made by dissolving 12.4 g boric acid and 8-0 g NaC1 in water, adding 1 N N a O H to bring the pH to 8"0 and making the total volume to 1000 ml with water. The same value was obtained by measuring the optical density of dissolved precipitate at 280 m/z, subtracting that of L chain added, and then converting the optical density value to the amount of antibody.

Release of Anti-L Chain Antibody

69

associated with L chain to form Fab-like molecule, resulting in loss of some antigenic determinants originally present in free L chain.

Release of anti-L chain antibodyfrom antigen-antibodycomplex by Fd fragment
I m m u n e specific precipitates were formed between L chain and l~SI-labelled anti-L chain antibodies in the equivalence zone (100 t~g L chain per ml of antiserum globulin soution). T h e washed precipitates were suspended in borate buffer at p H 8 "0 containing various concentrations of Fd fragment and the mixture was shaken at 37°C for 2 hr and at 5 - 1 0 ° C overnight. T h e supernatant fluid was assayed for radioactivity to determine the amounts of anti-L chain antibodies released into the solution. T h e results are shown in T a b l e I. TABLE I.
RELEASE OF 125I-LABELLED ANTI-L CHAIN ANTIBODY FROM IMMUNE PRECIPITATE OF (L CHAIN)(ANTI-L ANTIBODY) COMPLEXES BY Fd FRAGMENT*

Molar ratio of Fd fragment to L chain t 0 (Control) 0.33 0.67 1.33 3"40

% of precipitated 1251-antibody eluted into solution 8 21 26 38 35

* L chain (100/xg in 0"5 ml) was mixed with 1 "0 ml of anti-L chain serum globulin (47 mg) containing 125I-labelled globulin (equivalence zone) and the mixture was incubated at 37°C for 1 hr and then at 5-10°C for 1-3 days. The precipitate was washed thoroughly with cold borate buffer pH 8" 0, suspended in 1 ·5 ml of buffer containing various concentrations of Fd fragment and shaken at 37°C for 2 hr and at 5-10°C overnight. The radioactivity in the supernatant liquid was assayed with a y-ray spectrometer (Packard) and compared with the radioactivity of the original precipitate suspension. I" The ratio was calculated assuming that all the L chain added was precipitated at the equivalence zone. In later experiments with mI-labelled L chain, it was found that 93 per cent of L chain was precipitated under the same conditions. It is clear that a significant portion of the anti-L chain antibodies (12hi) was released from the precipitated a n t i g e n - a n t i b o d y complexes into solution by incubation with Fd fragment. T h e m a x i m u m level ofelution, a b o u t 35 per cent of the a n t i b o d y in the precipitate, was achieved at a m o l a r ratio o f 1 · 3 for Fd to L chain indicating that Fd f r a g m e n t is highly effective in releasing the antibody. T h e elution was almost complete after 1 hr of incubation at 37°C. T h e elution of the antibodies b y Fd fragment is not due to small amounts of L chain c o n t a m i n a t i n g the Fd fragment preparation used. A l t h o u g h precipitated antibodies

70

YAsuo YAoI, URs S. RUTISHAUSER a n d DAVID PRESSMAN

(~=I) in the complexes could be solubilized by L chain and Fab fragment in the form of antigen-excess soluble complexes (Table 2), the amount of the antibody eluted by the Fd fragment preparation was greater than the amount eluted with even an equal weight of L chain or of Fab and therefore far exceeded the amount expected from trace contamination of the Fd fragment preparation by L chain.
TABLE 2. SOLUBILIZATION OF PRECIPITATED COMPLEXES OF L CHAIN AND 125I-LABELLED ANTI-L ANTIBODY BY L CHAIN AND Fab FRAGMENT*

Materials added None (Control) L chain Fab fragment

Molar ratio of added material to L chain1" 0 0" 20 0" 50 1.00 0" 20 0.50 1-00

% of precipitated x25I-antibody solubilized 8 13 20 25 12 19 20

* All the procedures were the same as described in the footnote of Table 1 except that L chain and Fab fragment were used instead of Fd fragment. I" See footnote I" in Table 1. W h e n the antigen-antibody precipitate was made in the antibody-excess zone (50 t~g L chain was used for 1 ml of antiserum globulin solution) and the Fd fragment was added to the washed precipitate to a molar ratio of 1-33 moles Fd per mole L chain, only 15 per cent of the antibody in the precipitate was released into solution. This finding suggests that Fd fragment associates with L chain less effectively when the L chain is more completely covered with antibody. It was noted that about 8 per cent of the antibodies was eluted into solution even when the precipitate was incubated only with buffer (Tables 1 and 2). T h e reason for this rather high value is not known. T h e final wash before suspending the precipitate in buffer contained less than 0.5 per cent of the radioactivity of the precipitate.

Isolation of free antibodyfrom the eluate
Further characterization of the state of the antibodies and antigens in the eluate obtained with the Fd fragment was carried out by gel filtration on Sephadex G-200 in the cold. Antiserum globulin labelled with "5I and L chain labelled with 131I were used to form the specific precipitate at equivalence. Only 7 per cent of xs~I-L chain was found in the supernatant liquid, indicating that most of the L chain was in the precipitate. T h e molar ratio of antibody to antigen in the precipitate (determined in another experiment under the same conditions) was approximately 2. T h e washed precipitate was incubated with Fd fragment at a ratio of 1 ·33 moles Fd per mole L chain in the precipitate. About 33 per cent ofmI-labelled antibody and 25 per cent of x31I-labelled antigen (L chain) were released into the eluate, while the control eluate obtained without Fd fragment contained 8 per cent of a~'I-labelled antibody and

Release of Anti-L Chain Antibody

71

1 per cent of lslI-labelled L chain. T h e eluate was passed through a column of Sephadex G-200 to determine the state of the antibodies and the antigen. Blue-dextran 200 ( M W = 2 × I0 e) and a mixture of rabbit serum albumin and bromophenol blue (BPB-RSA: M W = 70,000) had been added to the eluate as molecular size indicators. T h e distribution of the radioactivity in the eluted fractions is shown in Fig. 1A. T w o peaks of radioactivity were observed for both the asSI-labelled anti-L chain antibody and the mI-labelled L chain. T h e first peak o f m I and the first peak of ~8~I
B-D BPB-RSA

·.-,t

:";

e6

~ ~4
AJ~ 2

it, !'/~\ 131I-L chain i ~ it ~ ~ 2 5 I - A n t
,.%

A
i-L Ab ..... "............

·Complex"~.. I "~0

Ab

~x.

i

] 50

60

....... .. t
i

90

i00 ~ + Fab

ii0

~
76
~d

+ L chain

g
l-Anti-L Ab "-,

C

~4

"~ ~0
50

Complex
,

Ab
,

~-.
J

Complex
. ,

Ab
70 80

60

70

80 Elution

50

60

volume ( m l )

Fro. 1. Gel filtration patterns. (A) Eluate obtained by adding Fd fragments to the specific precipitate ofmI-L chains and ~I-anti-L chain antibody. (B) Mixture of the globulin fraction from A and L chains. (C) Mixture of the globulin fraction from A and Fab fragments. A column of Sephadex G-200 (1" 9 × 50 cm) was successively used for all the samples. Ordinate represents the percentage of applied radioactivity found in each tube (1" 0 ml) and abscissa represents the elution volume. The positions where Blue-dextran 200 (B-D) and BPB--RSA complex were eluted are marked on top of A. The fractions under the 7S y-globulin peak containing frec antibody were pooled as indicated in A. The pool contained 41 per cent oflUI and 8.8 per cent o f m I originally applied on the column. The pool was mixed with 2 ml of normal goat serum (carrier protein) and globulins were precipitated at 50 per cent saturation of ammonium sulfate. The precipitate was dissolved in 1 ml of borate buffer, pH 8-0, and dialyzed against the same buffer. A portion of the solution was mixed with L chain and another portion with Fab fragment and the mixtures were applied on the column successively (B and C).

72

YAsuo YAGI, URs S. RUTISHAUSERand DAVIDPRESSMAn

were at the same elution volume which was the void volume of the column used as determined by Blue-dextran 200. The second peak of 1"I was at the elution volume corresponding to that of 7S y-globulin. The second peak of 1~1I was at the elution volume larger than that of BPB-RSA complex. Thus, the three radioactive peaks observed appear to represent (1) soluble antigen-antibody complexes (1~5I and 131I), (2) free antibody globulin (1"05I), and (3) probably Fab-like fragments (131I)* which were formed by the eluted free L chain (181I) and the excess Fd fragment present.

Specificity of thefree antibody eluted by Fd fragment
The material under the second peak of 1"I, containing free antibody globulin, was examined for its reactivity toward L chain or Fab fragment. A pool was made of the fractions as indicated in Fig. 1A. One portion of the pool was mixed with excess L chain and the other portion with excess Fab fragment at a molar ratio of 10 moles antigen per mole antibody and each mixture was passed through a column of Sephadex G-200. The elution patterns for the two mixtures are shown in Fig. 1B and 1C. There was a clear difference between the two mixtures. When L chain was added, a major part of the l~I-antibody was eluted at the void volume indicating that the

~

~

Complex (Sup)

Complex (Ppt)
C~ex (~t Complex (Pp)

Fa~,i (Sup) ~

~

Free Ab (Sup)

~tibody against determinant affected by association (Reactive to L, but not to Fab)

O e m

~tibody against other determinants (Reactive to both L and Fab) L chain Fd fragment

FIo. 2. Scheme to show partial breakdown of the framework of L chain-anti-L chain antibody complexes by Fd fragment (see text). Although the scheme was drawn as if the association of Fd fragment causes conformational changes on L chain, resulting in the loss of some antigenic determinants, Fd fragment may associate with L chain in the region of those determinants which are then hindered sterically from interacting with the antibody. * When free 181I-labelled L chain was mixed with excess Fd fragment prior to application on the above G-200 column, the peak of radioactivity was found at the position of Fab fragment which was eluted earlier than free L chain but later than BPB-RSA complexes. The difference in the elution volume of Fab and free L chain was small (4,-~5 ml) and the peaks were broad, thus resulting in a considerable overlap between them. Therefore, it was not possible to determine with certainty the precise identity of the second peak of ls*I in the elution pattern shown in Fig. 1A. However, in view of the association of Fd fragment and L chain shown above by gel filtration and shown elsewhere (5) by immunoelectrophoresis and restoration of antibody activity, L chains released from the antigen-antibody complexes into the eluate probably exist in combination with Fd to form Fab-like fragment rather than in free form.

Release of Anti-L Chain Antibody

73

antibody had combined with L chain to form an antigen-antibody complex (Fig. 1B). O n the other hand, when Fab fragments were added, :26I-antibody was mostly eluted at the elution volume for 7S y-globulin (Fig. I C). Thus, it is clear that the free antibodies in the eluate are reactive with L chain, but not with Fab fragments. These results support the mechanism schematically shown in Fig. 2. There are at least two groups of antibodies in anti-L chain serum which are directed to different antigenic determinants in the L chain molecule; one group is directed to those antigenic determinants which remain intact upon association of Fd fragment to L chain and the other group is directed to those determinants which disappear upon association. Antibodies of the former group would react with both L chain and Fab fragment, while those of the latter group would react with L chain, but not with Fab fragment. When Fd fragment associates with L chain in the precipitate, the framework of antigen and antibody is partly broken by the rupture of some bonds between those affected determinants and the corresponding antibodies. As a result, free antibodies of this group are released from the precipitate along with some soluble complexes of smaller size and free antigen (L chain). This L chain forms Fab-like fragment in the presence of excess Fd fragment (Fig. 1A). T h e disappearance of some antigenic determinants upon association of L chain with Fd fragment m a y occur by blocking of the determinants by the associated Fd fragment.[9] The region of the L chain participating in the association m a y cover the determinant region or m a y be very close to the determinant region, thus causing steric interference. Alternatively, the disappearance of these determinants m a y be due to some conformational change in the determinant region by the Fd fragment attached elsewhere on the molecule. Such conformational change in a region distant from the point of attachment has been observed in the case of enzymes [12] and antibodies [13]. I t has been shown previously by Rutishauser et al. [14], that fi'ee antibodies against Keyhole limpet hemocyanin ( K L H ) can be liberated from the specific precipitate formed at p H 8.8 by shifting the p H to 6-9 [14]. Since free K L H was present in the form ofsubunits at p H 8" 8, but in polymerized form at p H 6.9, and K L H precipitated larger amounts of a n t i - K L H antibody at p H 8.8 than at p H 6.9, the author concluded that the released antibodies were directed toward those antigenic determinants which disappeared upon association of subunits.
Acknowledgements--We wish to thank Dr. Oliver Roholt, Jr. for supplying Fd fi-agments and L chain, Dr. Allan L. Grossberg for supplying Fab fragments, and Mr. Arthur Trott for technical assistance.

REFERENCES 1. FLEISCHMAN B., PAIN R. H. and PORTER R. R., Archs Biochem. Biophys. Suppl. 1, 17t J. (1962). 2. FLEISCHMA.~ B., PORTER R. R. and PRESS E. M., Biochem. J. 88, 220 (1963). J. 3. OLINSD. E. and EDELMANG. M., J. exp. Afed. 119, 789 (1964). 4. ROnOLT O. A., OYOUE K. and PRESSMAND., Proc. natn. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 51, 173 (1964). 5. ROHOLTO. A., RADZIMSKIG. and PRESSMAND., J. exp. :~4ed. 123, 921 (1966). 6. KORNC, OLD L., J. natn. Cancer Inst. 30, 553 (1963). 7. FRANKHNE., J. Immun. 91, 730 (1963). 8. NACH~aANR. L. and ENOLE R. L., JR., Science 145, 167 (1964). 9. EPsxzi,~ W. V., TAX-M. and GRoss D., Nature, Lond. 202, 1175 (1964).

74 I0. II. 12. 13. 14.

YASUO YAGI, URS S. RUTISHAUSF-,Rand DAvm PRESSMAN S~LOS P., ROHOLT O. and PRESSMAND., jr Immtol. 89, 113 (1962). GReENWOOVF. C., HUNTER W. M. and GLOVERJ. S., Biochem. ,]. 89, 114 (1963). ATKINSOND. E., A. Rev. Biochem. 34, 85 (1966). GROSSnEROA. L., MARKUSG. and PRESSMAND., Proc. hath. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 54, 942 (1965). RUTtSHAUSERU. S., RITTENBERO M. B. and CAMPBELL D. H., Immunochemistry 4, 113 (1967).

