Cell Host & Microbe

Previews
Ebola Images Emerge from the Cave
Michael S. Diamond1,2,3,* and Daved H. Fremont3,4,*
of Medicine of Molecular Microbiology 3Department of Pathology and Immunology 4Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA *Correspondence: diamond@borcim.wustl.edu (M.S.D.), fremont@wustl.edu (D.H.F.) DOI 10.1016/j.chom.2008.07.011
2Department 1Department

Ebola virus causes a lethal hemorrhagic disease for which no therapy or vaccine is currently approved. Recently, the crystal structure of the Ebola virus glycoprotein in complex with a human neutralizing antibody was illuminated, providing a path from the shadows toward understanding cellular attachment, viral fusion, and immune evasion.
Outbreaks of infection by Ebola virus (EBOV) occur sporadically in primates and humans in central Africa and cause a hemorrhagic disease with $40 to 90% lethality, usually within 1 to 2 weeks of exposure (Zampieri et al., 2007). At least four distinct strains of EBOV have been identified to date, which, along with the related Marburg virus, are enveloped negative polarity single-stranded RNA viruses that constitute the Filoviridae family, so named because of their long filamentous morphology. The enzootic reservoir of these viruses is now believed to be fruit bats, which do not appear to suffer significant pathology during infections. As EBOV infection can spread rapidly through a community by direct contact with an infected person or their body fluids, development of antiviral agents or vaccines that can be used in the postexposure setting is an important and urgent goal. The EBOV genome encodes seven unique proteins, with the type I transmembrane glycoprotein (GP) serving as the essential mediator of target cell attachment, entry, and fusion. GP is expressed in EBOV-infected cells as a highly glycosylated 676 residue protein that is processed by furin proteases after residue 501 into a 140 kDa N-terminal fragment (GP1) and a 26 kDa C-terminal fragment (GP2) that remain disulfide linked. Heterodimers of GP1 and GP2 are tethered to the viral membrane through the C-terminal tail of GP2, and oligomerize into trimers to form the $10 nm spikes that project from the outer viral envelope, which is 40­50 nm in diameter and can stretch to greater than 1000 nm in length. The GP1 fragment has been ascribed a primary role in target cell attachment and receptor-mediated endocytosis, with GP2 playing a critical role in viral membrane fusion in endosomes. Earlier structural studies of truncated EBOV GP2 fragments revealed a core region that forms a trimer in which a long three-stranded coiled coil created by helical region 1 (denoted as the four segments HR1A-D) is surrounded by shorter C-terminal helices that are packed in an antiparallel orientation (Malashkevich et al., 1999; Weissenhorn et al., 1998). While this presumed postfusion EBOV GP2 conformation loosely resembles several other viral membrane-fusion proteins, little was known about the assembly or regulation of the prefusion GP. In a recent issue of Nature, Lee and colleagues have shed significant light on this subject by determining the crystal structure of truncated fragments of the EBOV GP1 and GP2 ectodomains in complex with the KZ52 human monoclonal antibody (mAb) (Lee et al., 2008). The GP assembles as a trimer with a deep bowl or cup-like configuration in what is arguably the mature or pre-fusion configuration found on the extracellular virus (Lee et al., 2008) (Figure 1). EBOV GP1 (residues 33­310) adopts an approximately cylindrical shape that can be architecturally divided into three subdomains: (1) the N-terminal and membrane-proximal base, which intimately engages with GP2 segments including an interchain disulfide bond; (2) the head, created in part by base subdomain insertions that project away from GP2 and the viral membrane; and (3) a glycan-rich cap that adorns the head subdomain distal from the base. The EBOV-Zaire GP1 expression construct used to facilitate structural analysis lacks the C-terminal mucin-like domain, and several other regions could not be built in the low-resolution structure. The assembly of the GP trimer is mediated predominantly via GP2, which forms the inner core of the trimer utilizing HR1D, while HR1C adopts a turn that projects the helical HR1A and HR1B segments to the outer surface of the trimer, where they engage primarily the GP1 base domain. In the postfusion conformation, HR1 forms a single a helix that acts as the core of the trimeric coiled coil, with HR2 forming the outer bundle in an antiparallel fashion. Here, the two-segmented configuration of HR1 in the prefusion trimer is held in a trigger-prone conformation by elaborate interactions with GP1, whereas the C-terminal regions including HR2 that link GP2 to the viral membrane are apparently disordered. The hydrophobic fusion loop and flanking b hairpin of GP2 unexpectedly resemble those of flaviviruses, and play an important role in trimer assembly by reaching out and embedding into a niche in the adjacent GP1 subunit. GP1 residues previously implicated in EBOV entry are localized to the base and head subdomains, but surprisingly only a limited number of these amino acids have appreciable solvent accessibility in the newly available structural model. Indeed, many of these are deeply buried hydrophobic residues that appear to be important in the structural assembly of the GP itself. Lee et al. (2008) suggest that EBOV cellular attachment may be facilitated by six highly conserved head subdomain residues that cluster in

Cell Host & Microbe 4, August 14, 2008 ª2008 Elsevier Inc. 87

Cell Host & Microbe

Previews
control (Mohamadzadeh et al., 2007; Zampieri et al., 2007). EBOV mechanisms of humoral immune evasion include extensive carbohydrate masking, primarily in the membrane-distal glycan cap and mucin domains of GP1 that the KZ52 antibody capably avoids. Transcriptional editing also produces an alternate, secreted form of GP that appears to adopt a unique assembly that is immunodominant as assessed by antibody reactivity from human EBOV survivors. Because the antibody response to EBOV is poor during the early phases of natural infection, passive administration of high-titer neutralizing anti-EBOV antibodies has been proposed as a strategy to mitigate disease. Antibody therapy in experimental animals, unfortunately, has not provided clear answers: protection by neutralizing mAbs against lethal EBOV infection in the guinea pig and mouse has been convincingly demonstrated; however, administration of KZ52 to nonhuman primates failed to alter the course of EBOV infection (Wilson et al., 2000; Oswald et al., 2007). The disparity in antibody protection observed in the different animal models could reflect distinct cellular tropisms, receptor affinities, or differences in GP glycosylation or other posttranslational modifications. Moreover, potentially species-unique immune evasive roles of secreted EBOV GP to decoy or misdirect the humoral immune response are alternative possibilities. Although antibodies against virion glycoproteins can protect against infection through multiple mechanisms, including the blockade of cellular attachment, complement opsonization and/or lysis, Fc-g receptor-mediated clearance, or antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity, potently neutralizing antibodies against other enveloped viruses apparently also have the capacity to inhibit post entry membrane fusion events (Nybakken et al., 2005). As endosomal fusion is a common step downstream of multiple attachment and entry pathways a given virus may employ, the rare antibodies that disrupt structural rearrangements associated with fusion might comprise a particularly potent class of inhibitors. However, the requirement for endosomal processing of EBOV provides an additional theoretical target for antibody neutralization--the disruption of critical enzymatic activities required for fusion,

Figure 1. Structure of the EBOV GP Trimer in Complex with the KZ52 Fab
CPK models of the three GP1 subunits of the assembly are displayed in shades of blue, while GP2 subunits are shown in shades of magenta. The KZ52 Fab is depicted as a ribbon diagram with the light (VL) and heavy chains (VH) colored light and dark gray, respectively. The six solvent exposed residues located in each GP1 head subdomain within the bowl of the trimer that Lee et al. suggest may be a binding site for the putative EBOV receptor are colored yellow (K114, K115, K140, G143, P146, and C147). In addition to creating the core of the trimeric GP assembly (via HR1D), GP2 also forms a belt that wraps around its entire circumference, with the internal fusion loop grasping onto adjacent subunits (GP2 residues 529­ 535, shown in red).

a recession under the glycan cap within the bowl-shaped trimer and further that that proteolytic removal of the glycan cap and mucin domains could enhance accessibility and augment cellular entry. The structure of the GP trimer provides new insight into the possible mechanisms of EBOV fusion. Recent studies have indicated that the low pH environment of the endosome is necessary but not sufficient for productive EBOV infection (Chandran et al., 2005; White et al., 2008). Indeed, examination of the GP trimer does not reveal any apparent regions that are poised to undergo pH-dependent structural transitions, for instance clusters of histidine or acidic residues thought to regulate other viral membrane glycoprotein conformational changes (Harrison, 2008). An alternate function of pH in triggering EBOV fusion may be through the activation of endosomal proteases and/or reductases capable of modifying GP. Lee et al. (2008) suggest that these covalent modifications could promote rearrangement of GP2 and membrane insertion of the fusion peptide, which is otherwise packed into a niche formed in the adjacent GP1 subunit of the trimer. The GP structure was determined in complex with the antigen-binding fragment (Fab) of the KZ52 monoclonal antibody that was isolated from a human

survivor of the 1995 Kikwit Zaire EBOV outbreak. Three Fabs decorate the membrane-proximal exterior of the trimer through extensive GP2 contacts (N-terminal residues 505­514 and 549­556) and minor contacts with the base subdomain of GP1 (residues 42­43). Of the 15 GP residues contacted by KZ52, ten are unique to EBOV Zaire, and not surprisingly the antibody has limited efficacy against other EBOV isolates. Because KZ52 recognition requires both GP1 and GP2, Lee et al. (2008) suggest that the antibody may uniquely bind the prefusion conformation. While the mechanism of EBOV neutralization is currently unknown, the authors speculate that KZ52 could prevent the GP2 rearrangements required for fusion, or alternatively, sterically hinder undefined attachment and/or entry processes. For many viruses, the induction of a robust neutralizing antibody response against surface envelope or spike proteins is associated with clearance from circulation and improvement in clinical outcome. However, for EBOV, because of its rapid course of infection and evolution of specific mechanisms to delay, attenuate, or prevent expedient humoral responses, production of neutralizing antibodies against GP during primary infection may not correlate with clearance or

88 Cell Host & Microbe 4, August 14, 2008 ª2008 Elsevier Inc.

Cell Host & Microbe

Previews
such as GP1 cleavage by cathepsins B and L or perhaps the enzymatic reduction of a critical disulfide bond. Plato warned us in the Republic that upon emerging from the cave of projected shadows we might become overly dazzled by images in the luminous world. While the elegant structural studies of Lee et al. provide a spectacular glimpse of the EBOV glycoprotein, the hard work of exploiting this foundation for the development of safe and effective vaccines and therapeutics to one of the most pathogenic viruses known to humans is still ahead.
REFERENCES Chandran, K., Sullivan, N.J., Felbor, U., Whelan, S.P., and Cunningham, J.M. (2005). Science 308, 1643­1645. Harrison, S.C. (2008). Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 15, 690­698. Lee, J.E., Fusco, M.L., Hessell, A.J., Oswald, W.B., Burton, D.R., and Saphire, E.O. (2008). Nature 454, 177­182. Malashkevich, V.N., Schneider, B.J., McNally, M.L., Milhollen, M.A., Pang, J.X., and Kim, P.S. (1999). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 2662­2667. Mohamadzadeh, M., Chen, L., and Schmaljohn, A.L. (2007). Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7, 556­567. Nybakken, G., Oliphant, T., Johnson, S., Burke, S., Diamond, M.S., and Fremont, D.H. (2005). Nature 437, 764­769. Oswald, W.B., Geisbert, T.W., Davis, K.J., Geisbert, J.B., Sullivan, N.J., Jahrling, P.B., Parren, P.W., and Burton, D.R. (2007). PLoS Pathog. 3, e9. Weissenhorn, W., Carfi, A., Lee, K.H., Skehel, J.J., and Wiley, D.C. (1998). Mol. Cell 2, 605­616. White, J.M., Delos, S.E., Brecher, M., and Schornberg, K. (2008). Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 43, 189­219. Wilson, J.A., Hevey, M., Bakken, R., Guest, S., Bray, M., Schmaljohn, A.L., and Hart, M.K. (2000). Science 287, 1664­1666. Zampieri, C.A., Sullivan, N.J., and Nabel, G.J. (2007). Nat. Immunol. 8, 1159­1164.

An Ungracious Host for an Unwelcome Guest
Kelly J. Perkins1,* and Nicholas J. Proudfoot1
1Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, South Parks Road, University of Oxford OX1 3RE, UK *Correspondence: kelly.perkins@path.ox.ac.uk DOI 10.1016/j.chom.2008.07.010

Persistence of latently infected CD4+ T cell ``reservoirs'' presents a major obstacle for current HIV-1 antiretroviral therapies. In Cell Host & Microbe, two separate studies use model systems of latent infection to dissect the influence of host genes on HIV-1 transcription, yielding intriguing, though partially contradictory, conclusions.
HIV-1 latency is established when a small subset of CD4+ lymphoblasts exit the cell cycle after proviral integration into the genome (Finzi et al., 1999). This long-lived cell population harbours a HIV-1 reservoir, where replication-competent provirus retains the ability to reactivate into productive infection while remaining shielded from the immune system by effective and reversible silencing. Latently infected cells are inadvertently maintained by a suboptimal cellular environment for HIV-1 expression, including several mechanisms (Marcello, 2006) operating at posttranscriptional (i.e, inefficient viral mRNA transport, inhibitory miRNAs) and transcriptional levels (i.e., absence of cellular [Sp1, NF-kB] and viral [Tat] activators; repressive chromatin environment). These processes are of interest given their potential to be manipulated to render latent HIV-1 susceptible to antiretroviral therapy. An alternative transcriptional basis for latency arose from studies indicating that HIV-1 preferentially integrates into active transcription units (Han et al., 2004; Lewinski et al., 2005; Schroder et al., 2002). This finding opened up the possibility that host genes mediate proviral gene silencing by transcriptional interference (TI). Although TI can be technically applied to describe any process that interferes with transcriptional machinery or its product, it usually refers to the direct negative impact of one gene on another in cis. In latently infected cells, viral integrates residing in introns of actively transcribed genes may be subjected to TI by host gene ``readthrough,'' preventing preinitiation complex (PIC) formation on the 50 long terminal repeat (LTR) viral promoter. Although TI acts in a uniformly inhibitory manner when genes are convergently transcribed, it is possible that host gene transcription may confer positive effects on HIV-1 expression when the provirus is integrated in the same orientation as the host gene. In this issue of Cell Host & Microbe, studies by Lenasi and colleagues (Lenasi et al., 2008) and Han and colleagues (Han et al., 2008) utilize model systems to determine if host genes play a contributing role in maintaining proviral latency. Lenasi and colleagues investigated whether host gene TI mediates HIV-1 silencing by using two clonal cell lines isolated from an established Jurkat CD4+ T cell model of postintegration latency (Jordan et al., 2003). Both clones contain GFP-labeled HIV-1 integrated in a single allele of a constitutively expressed host gene (protein phosphatase 5 gene [PP5] and SUMO-activating enzyme subunit-2 [UBA2]; Figure 1A). In unstimulated cells, the authors demonstrate through quantitative RT-PCR and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis that elongating RNA polymerase (RNAPII-Ser2) resided over the 50 LTR and was accompanied by a concurrent depletion of Sp1 (a transcription factor indicating PIC

Cell Host & Microbe 4, August 14, 2008 ª2008 Elsevier Inc. 89

